
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03333/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons  promulgated    |
|On 21 November 2017                  |On 15 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     DAH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sachdev of the Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Following a hearing at Manchester on 11 July 2017 the Upper  Tribunal
       found the First-tier Tribunal had made an error of  law  material  to
       the decision to dismiss the appeal. The operative part of  the  Error
       of Law finding reads as follows:

            21. I find no arguable legal error in the findings of the  Judge
                save the question of  whether  the  analysis  undertaken  in
                relation to the internal relocation argument to Baghdad  has
                been properly undertaken. The Judge would have been  unaware
                of the recent findings of the  Court  of  Appeal  concluding
                that the country guidance case of AA was incorrectly decided
                in relation to one important aspect of the  case  but,  even
                without this, it is arguable the analysis is inadequate.

            22. I  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
                Tribunal. The adverse credibility findings made by the Judge
                shall stand as they have not been shown to  be  infected  by
                arguable legal error material to the decision.  It  has  not
                been shown despite the errors made by the  Judge  that  such
                findings  are  unsafe.  The  findings  in  relation  to  the
                appellant's home area being in a contested region  shall  be
                preserved. It shall be also preserved that, in  the  absence
                of evidence to the contrary,  the  appellant  is  unable  to
                relocate directly to the IKR. If the respondent secures  the
                approval of the Kurdish authorities between now and the next
                hearing to  direct  entry  no  doubt  all  parties  will  be
                informed accordingly.

            23. The issue the Upper Tribunal  shall  consider  on  the  next
                occasion is that relating to the internal relocation of  the
                appellant to Baghdad  or  any  other  area  of  Iraq  it  is
                suggested he is able to return to and, if  appropriate,  the
                appellant's ability to travel to the IKR  and  secure  entry
                from Baghdad and  the  feasibility  of  his  being  able  to
                relocate to that region.

Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in April 1990. The First-tier
       Tribunal set out its findings  from  [12]  -  [52]  of  its  decision
       summarised in the Error of Finding.

    3. It is not disputed that the appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish
       ethnicity who comes from Hawija in Kirkuk  Province.  The  First-tier
       noted a number of discrepancies in the appellant's  evidence  leading
       to a conclusion the appellant is not a credible witness  in  relation
       to his alleged claim to entitlement to international protection,  but
       an economic migrant.

    4. The Judge found the appellant speaks Kurdish Sorani and does not face
       a risk of serious harm in the IKR. It was also  found  the  appellant
       has access to the documentation required  to  obtain  a  passport  or
       travel document.

    5. The country guidance relating to return to Iraq is that currently  in
       force following the decision of the Court of Appeal in  AA  (Iraq)  v
       SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944. The Court found that the  existing  country
       guidance should be revised by consent so as to read:  (i)  Return  of
       former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be to the IKR
       and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The Iraqi  authorities  will
       allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to enter Iraq  only
       if P is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating
       to P, or a laissez passer; (ii) No Iraqi national will be  returnable
       to Baghdad if not in possession of one of these documents;  (iii)  In
       the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and Others v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1276,  an
       international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by  reference
       to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of a  current  or
       expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer,  if  the  Tribunal  finds
       that P's return is not currently feasible on account of a lack of any
       of those documents; (iv)Where P is returned  to  Iraq  on  a  laissez
       passer or expired passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at
       the point of return by reason  of  not  having  a  current  passport.
       However (v), regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will  be
       necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able  to  obtain
       one, reasonably soon after arrival  in  Iraq.  A  CSID  is  generally
       required in order for an Iraqi to access  financial  assistance  from
       the  authorities;  employment;  education;   housing;   and   medical
       treatment. If P shows there are no family or other members likely  to
       be able to provide means of support, P is in general likely to face a
       real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the  time
       any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or  her  agents  to
       assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P
       will still have no CSID.

    6. No issues arise in relation to documentation. It is not disputed that
       the appellant will  not  be  able  to  automatically  enter  the  IKR
       initially but will have to return to Baghdad.  The  appellant  is  in
       possession of his CSID which is required in order for him  to  access
       financial assistance from  the  authorities;  employment;  education;
       housing; and medical treatment.

    7. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) (unchanged by the
       Court of Appeal) it was held that (i)  As a general matter,  it  will
       not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a  person  from  a  contested
       area to relocate to Baghdad City or (subject to comments in this case
       on humanitarian protection and areas of the country where there is an
       internal armed conflict) the Baghdad Belts; (ii) In assessing whether
       it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for an Iraqi  national  (P)  to
       relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however, likely to be
       relevant:(a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (b)
       whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely to  find
       employment); (c) whether P has family members or friends  in  Baghdad
       able to accommodate him; (d) whether P is a lone female  (women  face
       greater difficulties than men in finding employment); (e)  whether  P
       can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or rent accommodation;  (f)
       whether P is from a minority community; (g) whether there is  support
       available for P bearing in mind there is some evidence that  returned
       failed asylum seekers are provided with the support  generally  given
       to IDPs. (iii) there is not a  real  risk  of  an  ordinary  civilian
       travelling  from  Baghdad  airport  to  the  southern   governorates,
       suffering serious harm en route to such  governorates  so  as  engage
       Article 15(c).

Evidence and submissions


    8. The appellant seeks to rely upon  a  country  report  written  by  Dr
       Rebwar Fatah Associates dated 10 November 2017.

    9. Dr Fatah's instructions are set  out  at  [42]  of  the  report.  One
       question specifically asked was whether the appellant can pre-book  a
       flight to the IKR while in the UK so he can fly there via Baghdad. Dr
       Fatah  notes  that  Baghdad,  Sulaymaniyah  and  Erbil  International
       Airports are  generally  considered  secure.  Two  airline  companies
       operate from Baghdad to Erbil; Iraq Airways and Fly Baghdad.  Flights
       operate four to eight times per day and there are flights  every  day
       of the week. Two airline companies operate flights  from  Baghdad  to
       Sulaymaniyah: Iraq Airways and Fly Baghdad. Iraq Airways  runs  three
       to five flights daily, while Fly Baghdad runs one fight  every  three
       to four days.

   10. Dr Fatah noted that as of 7 November 2017 it did  not  appear  to  be
       possible to book flights from Baghdad to either Erbil or Sulaymaniyah
       on the Iraq Airways website as a consequence of the decision  of  the
       Federal Government to  ban  international  flights  to  the  IKR  and
       instead  allow  only   domestic   flights   following   the   Kurdish
       independence referendum in late September 2017. It is reported that a
       search showed that the flights are either not available on a  certain
       day or are sold out. It is not made out  this  is  a  situation  that
       still prevails, with flights being permitted as before as at the date
       of the promulgation of this decision.

   11. Dr Fatah states that flights from  Baghdad  to  Erbil  are  available
       through Fly Baghdad for between 60 to 78 US dollars on most days  and
       from Baghdad to Sulaymaniyah through Fly Baghdad for  60  US  dollars
       flying two to three days a week. It is reported that the total number
       of passengers travelling to Kurdish airports had fallen to less  than
       300 from more than 2000 as a result of the flight ban by the  Federal
       Government.

   12. At [73] Dr Fatah concludes:

           "Flights are generally a safe means of transport within Iraq but
           following the referendum, international flights have been banned
           to Kurdish airports. Flights to  Kurdish  airports  depart  from
           Baghdad fairly regularly, but it would appear that they are less
           available than previously. It is possible to book  flights  from
           Baghdad to Erbil and Sulamanyia but not  possible  to  book  the
           same on Iraq Airways."

   13. The appellant will be returned from the United Kingdom to Iraq on  an
       international flight by the UK government and will only be seeking  a
       domestic flight from Baghdad to the IKR.

   14. In relation to relocation to Baghdad, Dr Fatah states  the  appellant
       will face a huge disadvantage in finding employment and accommodation
       and communicating and integrating with other people in Baghdad as  he
       only speaks a little Arabic. The appellant claims to have  experience
       as a village shopkeeper but lacks education and is  illiterate  which
       it is stated would make it more  difficult  to  find  employment.  Dr
       Fatah also speaks of  obstacles  in  relocating  to  Baghdad  due  to
       sponsorship requirements for IDP's as the Baghdad Government does not
       allow entry for any IDP's unless  they  have  a  sponsor  within  the
       Baghdad Governorate. It is  said  the  sponsorship  policy  has  been
       strictly enforced and that if an IDP's home  area  is  previously  or
       currently held by ISIS, or areas  affected  by  conflict,  they  face
       three additional requirements which are (a) security  clearance  from
       five   security   agencies:   National   Security,   Federal   Police
       Intelligence, Local Police Intelligence, Baghdad Operations, and  ISF
       Intelligence. It is said they require a sponsor in the  neighbourhood
       of Baghdad in which they wish to settle who is  required  to  provide
       documentation and may be asked to gain  a  support  letter  from  the
       local mukhtar confirming their residency in  the  neighbourhood.  The
       individual relocating requires a  support  letter  from  the  mukhtar
       confirming their status as an IDP wishing to relocate.

   15. Dr Fatah notes these requirements must be held by people  upon  their
       arrival in the neighbourhood to which they wish to relocate  although
       even those with appropriate documentation may be refused residency at
       the discretion of the authorities in Baghdad.  It  is  also  reported
       IDP's who are able to relocate to Baghdad may also face  restrictions
       on their freedom of movement although it is also noted elsewhere that
       IDP's did not face  restrictions  on  freedom  of  movement  if  they
       possess valid documents.

   16. As a Kurd in Baghdad; Dr Fatah states that as a person  removed  from
       his kinship network the appellant  would  have  great  difficulty  in
       finding employment, accommodation and generally  in  integrating.  Dr
       Fatah states that the Kurdish community in Baghdad is  not  organised
       in any way so as to be able  to  offer  the  appellant  any  sort  of
       assistance with  employment,  accommodation  or  integration  but  is
       rather comprised of individuals who have their own interests.

   17. In relation to relocation to the IKR; Dr Fatah notes the appellant is
       from the Kirkuk Governorate, a disputed territory, which may lead him
       to face some issues in relocating to the IKR. Dr Fatah states  as  an
       ethnic Kurd the appellant may be able to relocate if he  is  able  to
       obtain documentation, for while the Kurdish authorities  would  allow
       Kurds from disputed territories to enter the IKR they  cannot  obtain
       any identity cards relating to this area. They  can  rent  properties
       and stay in the region and if they stay they need  to  provide  their
       details to the local Asayish. If they do not they can  face  security
       issues. If they are able to find employment a Kurd  may  be  able  to
       stay in the Kurdish controlled IKR.

   18. Dr Fatah states  that  the  appellant  requires  documentation,  most
       importantly his CSID which is also required to leave the airport  and
       pass through land security checkpoints. Dr Fatah states the appellant
       would have to return to his original  civil  registry  in  Kirkuk  to
       obtain documentation and to also register civil occurrences and  that
       it is not possible for the Public Distribution System rations  to  be
       moved from outside the KRG to within it; meaning the appellant  would
       not be able to rely on the food ration registered in Kirkuk.

   19. Dr Fatah notes that arrival  at  Erbil  airport  does  not  generally
       require  sponsorship  for  individuals  from  Kirkuk   although   the
       appellant may still face scrutiny at the airport due to  ISIS  having
       formerly been in control of his home area. Dr  Fatah  also  notes  an
       account of individuals from Kirkuk wishing to enter the IKR  by  land
       being refused at checkpoints. It is stated an individual from  Hawija
       in Kirkuk is likely face some suspicion due to ISIS  control  of  the
       area and the appellant may be subject to close scrutiny to  determine
       whether he can enter and remain in the IKR.

   20. Dr Fatah confirms the appellant speaks the main language in  the  IKR
       and would  not  face  linguistic  obstacles  to  integration  in  the
       Sulamaniyah and Erbil governorates.  Dr  Fatah  repeats  his  earlier
       comment regarding experience as a  village  shopkeeper  and  lack  of
       education making it difficult to find employment. Dr Fatah refers  in
       the report to lone individuals, both men and  women,  but  especially
       women, who relocate to a new place in the absence of  family  support
       possibly facing suspicion and hostility, not by virtue of any written
       rules but societal codes. If a person has family members  or  friends
       in the area of relocation integration  will  be  facilitated  as  the
       family members or friends can introduce the relocated to other people
       in the community.

   21. On behalf of the appellant, it was submitted that the initial  hurdle
       in relation to relocation to Baghdad is the need for  a  sponsor  and
       security clearance and accommodation which  the  appellant  does  not
       have.

   22. It was submitted that even if  the  appellant  is  able  to  pre-book
       flights to the IKR he would need a debit or credit card to do so  but
       he does not have a bank  account.  It  was  also  questioned  whether
       flights could be arranged within the proper timescale.

   23. The appellant could not go to areas reserved for foreign nationals in
       the IKR as he is not a foreign national. Road  traffic  is  dangerous
       and problematic which would put him at risk.  It  was  submitted  the
       appellant may face additional scrutiny and problems as his home  area
       was held by ISIS and there is ongoing conflict. It was  submitted  is
       not clear what is happening following the  referendum  and  resultant
       political instability. The appellant would need to return  to  Kirkuk
       to transfer to the IKR which is problematic.

   24. It was submitted there is no guarantee the appellant will be able  to
       get into Baghdad or the IKR and maybe sent back to Kirkuk.

   25. The appellant will find it difficult to find accommodation or jobs in
       Baghdad due to language issues.

   26. Mr Bates submitted it is important to  note  the  appellant  has  his
       CSID. The appellant could obtain the nationality  certificate  as  he
       will obtain a temporary travel document from the  United  Kingdom  if
       his nationality is established.

   27. Mr Bates submitted it is reasonable for the appellant  to  return  to
       Baghdad. It was accepted that it has not been argued  that  what  was
       being proposed was that the appellant could settle in Baghdad  as  he
       has no family and  limited  language  skills  that  will  create  the
       problems identified by Dr Fatah and in the case law. It was submitted
       it is realistic for the appellant to travel from Baghdad to the IKR.

   28. Mr Bates submitted it is feasible  that  the  appellant  can  book  a
       flight on one of the available  operators  to  ensure  his  means  of
       transport. It was submitted the lack of a credit card is not an issue
       for if the appellant is removed he will receive a return package from
       the UK government which provides cash for travel from  the  place  of
       return to his home area. It was submitted this would include the cost
       of the flight ticket. The appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that  he
       could not book a flight that tied in  with  his  date  of  return  to
       Baghdad.

   29. In relation to return to the IKR, Mr  Bates  submitted  some  of  the
       conclusions of the expert are not  supported  by  the  evidence.  The
       country guidance case says the appellant will be able  to  enter  the
       IKR without a sponsor and it was not made  out  that  recent  changes
       would make the matter any different. The appellant is from Kirkuk  an
       area that is now in the control of  the  Iraqi  government  and  Shia
       militia and it is not made out the appellant will be  prevented  from
       returning to his home area, if required.

   30. The information in UNHCR documented on  20  October  2017  refers  to
       small areas of armed conflict. It is submitted there is  no  evidence
       that a Kurd will be forced from the IKR  and  UNHCR  refers  to  some
       having returned to Kirkuk indicating the situation is not a severe as
       it was thought it would have been  in  Kirkuk  for  Kurds  who  lived
       there.

   31. Mr Bates submitted it is also relevant appellant  left  Iraq  at  the
       first opportunity and has therefore not lived in his home area whilst
       it has been under the control of ISIS. An examination will not reveal
       security concerns based on association with this group as he will  be
       able to establish to the authorities or anybody who  checks  that  he
       has been in the United Kingdom.

   32. Mr Bates challenged one of the sources relied upon  by  Dr  Fatah  at
       [112 - 116] of the report on  the  basis  nothing  is  known  of  the
       sources used by Dr Fatah meaning that one could not be satisfied that
       source is reliable. Mr Bates questioned why Dr Fatah would rely  upon
       one unnamed individual source as evidence as to risk to Kurds. It was
       submitted that if this evidence was credible or reliable it would  be
       known to the UNHCR but inadequate  evidence  was  provided  from  any
       other source to corroborate the claim.  It  was  submitted  that  the
       report of Dr Fatah doers not demonstrates that the appellant will  be
       unable to gain entry to Baghdad and relocate from there to the IKR.

   33. In relation to the appellants claim  to  have  no  family;  Mr  Bates
       referred to the fact that the core account of  his  protection  claim
       had been rejected as not being credible which raises the question  of
       whether his claim not to have any family members  to  return  to  was
       credible.  In  any  event,  the  appellant  was   not   entitled   to
       international protection. It was  submitted  the  appellant  will  be
       entitled and able to obtain documents issued by the Iraq  authorities
       and there was no evidence that he will face any risk from  the  Iraqi
       regime in Kirkuk.

   34. In reply  Ms  Sachdev  accepted  Dr  Fatah  did  not  say  travel  is
       impossible but did indicate that difficulties arose. It was submitted
       it is questionable what the appellant would do in  the  interim  from
       landing in Baghdad to  boarding  his  flight  to  the  IKR.   It  was
       submitted the support the respondent said will be available will  not
       be sufficient as the appellant will not be able to find  a  place  to
       stay. It is argued the  appellant  has  limited  work  experience  to
       provide support.

   35. Ms Sachdev submitted there was  evidence  of  the  Peshmerga  holding
       people at the land checkpoints who  tried  to  secure  entry  from  a
       number of places and that following the initial onslaught by ISIS the
       IKR if full and not taking internally displaced persons.  IDP's  face
       problems in Kurdistan.

   36. It was submitted the respondent's country information dated September
       2017 confirmed that a person would be sent back to Kirkuk unless they
       had a sponsor and if he has no sponsor the appellant will be  treated
       as an Iraqi citizen not a  Kurd  indicating  the  difference  between
       ethnic Kurds and persons from Kirkuk.

   37. It was submitted the respondent's conclusion the appellant can return
       is not the case and that the appellant has no network in the  Kurdish
       region to assist him and faces a huge amount of difficulty  in  Iraq.
       Return would not be as easy as suggested by the respondent  on  which
       basis the appeal should be allowed.

Discussion


   38. It is not disputed that the  appellant  will  find  it  difficult  to
       settle in Baghdad as a result of his  lack  of  a  sponsor,  language
       issues, and employment opportunities. The term 'settle' refers  to  a
       more permanent status than that  of  a  person  visiting  or  passing
       through.

   39. The appellant will be able  to  return  with  relevant  documentation
       including  a  passport  or  temporary  travel  document  and  is   in
       possession of his CSID. It is not disputed the  appellant  will  also
       have the benefit of a relocation package to assist with the costs  of
       travel to his home area.

   40. It is not made out that the appellant will not be able  to  obtain  a
       domestic flight within Iraq  to  the  IKR.  The  point  made  on  the
       appellant's behalf regarding the timing of the  flight  is  a  matter
       that can form part of the arrangements for his return. It is not made
       out that once a flight is booked, on which the  appellant  is  to  be
       returned to  Baghdad,  arrangements  cannot  be  made  for  either  a
       connecting flight to the IKR or one shortly after arrival.  If  delay
       is minimal the appellant will be in the same position  as  any  other
       passenger in transit in an international airport.   If  there  was  a
       delay of a few days it is not made out the appellant  will  not  have
       the resources or ability to arrange and fund temporary accommodation.
       The evidence does not show that Kurds cannot enter Baghdad  or  visit
       and speaks of difficulties in settlement. The statistics relating  to
       the number who  previously  flew  between  Baghdad  and  the  Kurdish
       region, some 2000 a day reduced to 300, indicates that many Kurds fly
       between the named cities. It is not made out that the appellant  will
       not be able to enter and remain in Baghdad on a temporary basis.

   41. The issue of a lack of a credit card is a reference  to  how  flights
       will be  booked  online  ordinarily  by  individuals  in  the  United
       Kingdom. There was no  evidence  from  the  appellant  to  show  that
       flights could not be booked, with the respondent's assistance as part
       of the relocation package if feasible, or by the appellant using  the
       cash resources available to him on return.

   42. It is not made out the appellant has any adverse profile  that  would
       give rise to suspicion  based  upon  his  having  lived  in  an  area
       previously under the occupation of ISIS. The appellant  has  been  in
       the United Kingdom and his  presence  here  can  be  vouched  for  if
       required.

   43. It is not made out the appellant will not be able to enter  the  IKR.
       In relation to family support the appellant, in his asylum interview,
       gave details of his mother, father, two brothers, a sister, and other
       family in Iraq. The appellant claimed not to be in contact  with  his
       family members at the date of that interview  which  was  6  February
       2016. The appellant has adduced no credible evidence to  support  his
       claim that one of his brothers, [Z], was killed.

   44. The appellant claims to have left Iraq on 1 October 2015.

   45.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted   inconsistencies   in   the
       appellant's account including his claim that ISIS  had  attacked  his
       area and that his father had been killed in or around March  2013  as
       the country information indicated that ISIS did not attack  his  home
       area until June 2014 some fifteen months after the appellant  claimed
       that his father was killed by ISIS. The  Judge  did  not  accept  the
       appellant's explanation for  this  contradiction  was  plausible  and
       found the appellant was fabricating  the  story  so  to  enhance  his
       asylum claim.

   46. The appellant also claimed before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he
       learned his father was killed in March 2013 and that he was in prison
       at the time whereas he had regularly changed  his  story  from  March
       2013 to March 2014 and claimed he was not put  in  prison  until  May
       2013. The Judge did not accept the appellant's  explanation  for  the
       clear discrepancy in the chronology  was  plausible.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge at [28] of the decision of  that  Tribunal  found  the
       appellant's evidence in relation to how he learned  of  his  father's
       death could not be accepted as it was riddled with inconsistencies to
       such a degree that it was to be entirely dismissed. At [39] the First-
       tier Tribunal Judge found the appellant's evidence may not be  relied
       upon and that he had not provided any credible basis to  support  his
       claim. These are preserved findings. There  is,  therefore,  arguable
       merit in Mr Bates submission that little weight should be placed upon
       the appellants claim to have no family support in Iraq.

   47. I find it not made out that the appellant will be returned to the IKR
       as a person without family support from either his parents, siblings,
       or other family members. The appellant has not made out that  he  has
       not been able to trace family members  as  the  evidence  appears  to
       suggest he has made very little effort to do so. It is not  made  out
       that family support will not be available to assist the appellant  in
       reintegrating  into  Iraq  or  to  assist  with  the   provision   of
       accommodation and/or employment. The family previously owned  a  shop
       at which the appellant worked and there is no credible evidence  this
       or other resources have been lost to the family.

   48. The appellant is no more than a failed asylum  seeker  identified  by
       the First-tier Tribunal as a person who is an  economic  migrant.  No
       real risk has  been  made  out  on  return.  The  appellant  has  not
       established he has any adverse profile that will make him of interest
       to any of the authorities. It is not made out the appellant cannot be
       returned to Baghdad or that he will be unable to fly from Baghdad  to
       the IKR and secure entry. It is not made out the appellant  will  not
       have family support or  assistance  to  enable  him  to  re-establish
       himself either in the IKR or his home area if he is returned there by
       the Kurdish authorities.

   49. The burden of establishing an entitlement to international protection
       falls upon the person so alleging. I do not find  the  appellant  has
       discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required  standard  to
       establish such an entitlement. It is accepted that with the  upheaval
       that has occurred in Iraq the appellant may  find  matters  difficult
       but this does not entitle  a  person  to  a  grant  of  international
       protection.

Decision

   50. The Immigration Judge materially  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
       decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake the decision  as
       follows. This appeal is dismissed.

  Anonymity.

   51. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 14 March 2018
