
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/03737/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 October 2018                              |On 20 November 2018           |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                    [E R]
                      (Anonymity has not been directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Easty, Counsel for Slade & Fletcher Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [~]  1988.   He  appealed
    the Home Office's  decision  of  3  March  2016  refusing  him  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and refusing his claim on human rights grounds.
     His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Howard on  28
    March 2018 and dismissed on all grounds in a decision promulgated on 18
    May 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  on  11  September  2018.   The
    permission states that it is arguable that  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Howard erred in not adjourning the matter, being unaware,  it  appears,
    of all the attempts made to obtain Counsel.  The permission states that
    it is also arguable that the Judge erred in  not  taking  into  account
    expert evidence.  The permission goes on to state  that  the  appellant
    will be expected to explain his own absence in a witness  statement  to
    be served 14 days before the next hearing.

The Hearing

 3. Counsel submitted that the appellant's representative had sent a letter
    to the First-Tier Tribunal on 26 March 2018 requesting an  adjournment.
    In this letter it is stated that Counsel, Miss Helen  of  Garden  Court
    Chambers, was not available for the hearing on  28  March  as  she  was
    already engaged in court on another matter.   The  letter  goes  on  to
    state that the representative had asked for  alternative  Counsel  from
    Garden Court and had  also  looked  to  other  chambers  but  had  been
    unsuccessful.  The letter finishes by saying that: "In the interests of
    justice we are requesting an adjournment for about four weeks to enable
    us to get a Counsel and prepare our client for the hearing."

 4. She submitted that that letter  of  26  March  2018  is  not  mentioned
    anywhere in the Judge's decision.  She submitted that at paragraph 5 of
    the decision the Judge  states  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  his
    representative attended the hearing and that the solicitors had written
    to the Tribunal on 27 March 2018 seeking an adjournment because of  the
    unavailability of Counsel.  The decision goes on to state that there is
    no suggestion that the solicitors  had  enquired  from  other  chambers
    whether  there  was  a  Counsel  available  and  because  of  this  the
    adjournment was not granted and the hearing went ahead.  She  submitted
    that it is clear from the representatives' letter of 26 March 2018 that
    they had been trying to engage alternate Counsel in  the  Garden  Court
    and in other chambers but had  been  unsuccessful.   Counsel  submitted
    that the appellant did not have a fair hearing and permission should be
    granted as this is a material error of law and the  hearing  should  be
    remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that the  appellant  appears  to  have
    been disadvantaged in this case as he expected Counsel to appear on his
    behalf.  He submitted that none of this was the appellant's  fault  and
    as he has been disadvantaged the Home Office is prepared  to  agree  to
    the appeal being reheard before the First-Tier Tribunal because  of  an
    error of law.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The appellant has submitted a letter as requested  in  the  permission.
    It is dated 10 October 2018.  I am satisfied with this.

 7. It is not clear whether the letter from the appellant's representatives
    dated 26 March 2018 was before the Judge. I have no reason  to  suppose
    that it was not but I find that had the  Judge  been  aware  of  it  an
    adjournment was likely to have  been  granted  and  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case an adjournment should have been granted. The
    fact that it was not means that the appellant  has  been  disadvantaged
    through no fault of his own and this is a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

As I find that there is a material error of law in the  Judge's  decision  I
direct that the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside.   None  of
its findings are to stand other than as a record of what was  said  on  that
occasion.  It is appropriate in terms of Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007
Act and of Practice Statement 7.2  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-Tier
Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not
to include Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Howard.

Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed                                  Date 19 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

