
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03442/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th October 2019                 |On 23rd October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     TK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel instructed by AASK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. It appears that an anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT"), and as this a protection  claim,  it  is  appropriate
    that a direction is made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs
    otherwise, TK is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.
    This direction applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. He arrived in the UK  on  7th
    September 2010 as a student with leave valid until 3rd  February  2012.
    On 12th January 2012 he made a claim for asylum. The claim was  refused
    by the respondent for the reasons set  out  in  a  decision  dated  3rd
    February 2012 and an appeal against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judges Blandy and Fox, for the reasons set out in a
    decision promulgated on 8th May 2012. Adverse credibility findings were
    made by the First-tier Tribunal judge's and  they  concluded  that  the
    appellant is not at any real risk of  serious  ill-treatment  upon  his
    return to Sri Lanka. The appellant was granted permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, and the appeal was heard by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Spencer and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Pickup.   Although  expressing
    some concerns about some of  the  findings  made,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    judges took the view that the First-tier Tribunal judges did not make a
    material error of law in their decision, and the appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal  was  dismissed  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 3rd October 2012.


 3. In February  2019,  the  appellant  made  further  submissions  to  the
    respondent. The appellant maintained that he fears return to Sri  Lanka
    on account of his previous connections to the LTTE,  and  claimed  that
    the authorities in Sri Lanka have  an  on-going  interest  in  him.  He
    claimed that he has been involved in sur place political activities  in
    the UK, attending demonstrations on behalf of the TGTE and the BTF, and
    his sur place activities  will  heighten  the  risk  on  return.  In  a
    decision dated 26th  March  2019,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant is now a member of the TGTE and the BTF and accepted that the
    appellant  actively  participates   in   various   Tamil   events   and
    demonstrations in the UK. However, the respondent concluded that  there
    is no evidence that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  aware  of  the
    appellant's sur place activities, and that he would not be at risk upon
    return.


 4. The respondent's decision of 26th March 2019 gave  rise  to  an  appeal
    that was heard by FtT Judge Geraint-Jones QC ("the judge") on 7th  June
    2019. The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 19th June 2019. It is that decision that is the  subject
    of the appeal before me.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 19th August 2019.


 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Walker accepted that the judge found  that
    the appellant has been involved with and carries a card as a member  of
    the TGTE.  He accepts that in addressing  the  risk  upon  return,  the
    judge failed to have any regard to the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in UB (Sri Lanka) -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 85.  He accepts, rightly  in
    my  judgment,  that  the  failure  to  have  regard  to  material  that
    demonstrates that the TGTE and BTF are proscribed organizations in  the
    assessment of the risk upon return, amounts to a material error of  law
    capable of affecting the outcome of the decision.


 6. It is material because the evidence referred to by the Court of  Appeal
    in UB (Sri Lanka) included letters to the British  High  Commission  in
    Sri Lanka that are intended to be read  with  the  Home  Office  Policy
    Guidance dated 28th  August  2014  entitled  "Tamil  Separatism".   The
    letters  indicate  that  individuals  belonging  to  these   proscribed
    organisations would face arrest under anti-terrorism laws.  In GJ,  the
    guidance points to a risk of mistreatment, if detained.


 7. That is sufficient to establish a material error of law in the decision
    of the FtT judge such that the decision should be  set  aside,  without
    any detailed consideration of the other  grounds  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.  It simply say that there is also merit in  the  claim  that
    the judge failed to properly  apply  the  Devaseelan  guidelines.   The
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  previously
    in 2012, were the starting point, but appear to have  been  treated  by
    the judge as determinative of the appellant's credibility.   A  careful
    consideration of the findings made by the FtT in 2012 was necessary  in
    light of the observations made by the Upper Tribunal regarding some  of
    the findings, albeit the Upper Tribunal in the end concluded that there
    was no material error of law in the decision of the FtT.


 8. As to disposal of the appeal, both Mr Hawkin and Mr Walker submit  that
    in view of the nature of the errors, and the need for the appeal to  be
    reconsidered afresh, the appropriate course is for  the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh.  I  have  decided  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit this  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    having considered paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement of 25th September 2012.   In  my  view,  in  determining  the
    appeal, the nature and extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  necessary
    will be extensive.


 9. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint-Jones QC  promulgated
    on 19th June 2019 is therefore set aside, and the  appeal  is  remitted
    for rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal afresh, with  no  findings
    preserved.  The parties will be notified  of  a  hearing  date  in  due
    course.


Notice of Decision


10. The appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Geraint-Jones QC is
    allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Geraint-Jones QC is set aside.


11. The appeal is remitted for rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal,
    with no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date          17th October 2019


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award

Signed                                  Date          17th October 2019


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
