
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03638/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21 September 2016                     |On 2 December 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                  Obied [E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Pickering, instructed by Ison Harrison
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Obied [E], born on 1 July 1975 and is a male citizen  of
    Iraq.  The appellant appealed against  a  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 5 December 2014 to deport the appellant from the United  Kingdom.
    The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis), in a decision promulgated on  1
    August 2016, dismissed the asylum and  human  rights  (Articles  2/3/8)
    appeals but allowed the appeal "against the deportation  order."   Both
    parties have appealed against that decision although  it  appears  that
    only the appellant had been granted permission (by Judge Dineen) on  17
    August 2016.  However, I was assisted by both Miss Pickering of Counsel
    and Mr Diwnycz (for the respondent) at the Upper Tribunal hearing on 21
    September 2016.  Both advocates told me that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal was, in their respective opinions, flawed  and  that  the
    decision needed to be set aside.  In particular, both parties  consider
    that the judge erred in law at [49].  Judge Hillis was of  the  opinion
    that, pursuant  to  the  Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act  1974,  the
    appellant's "nine months' sentence of imprisonment is spent after  four
    years from the end of his sentence."  As the respondent's grounds point
    out, Section  140  of  the  Legal  Aid  Sentencing  and  Punishment  of
    Offenders  Act  2012  specifically  excludes,   for   immigration   and
    nationality purposes, the operation of the Rehabilitation of  Offenders
    Act 1974.

 2. In addition, I find that the appellant's grounds are well-founded.  The
    judge has not considered paragraph 398 or 399 of HC 395  (as  amended).
    Likewise, the judge incorrectly took account of the possibility of  the
    appellant  making  an  out  of  country  application   from   Iraq   in
    circumstances where he would have been removed from the United  Kingdom
    by deportation and thereby banned from applying  for  re-entry  in  the
    short term.

 3. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Because  the
    entire analysis appears to be faulty, I preserve none of  the  findings
    of fact.  A new fact finding exercise will need to be  undertaken.  The
    appropriate forum for that procedure is the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal as promulgated on 1 August  2016  is
set aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The  appeal  is
returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Hillis) for that Tribunal  to
re-make the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



