
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03297/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2016                  |On 28 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     LK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Benitez, of Counsel instructed by Schneider
                    Goldstein, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2002.   Following  a
    failed application  to  remain  in  2008  he  was  encountered  working
    illegally.   He  made  a  further  immigration  application  which  was
    refused. He clamed asylum on 22 June 2015, claiming to fear persecution
    on rerun to Bangladesh as a Bihari Muslim.

2.   The respondent refused  to  grant  asylum  or  other  protection  in  a
    decision of 18 November 2015.  The appellant sought to  appeal  against
    that decision, which  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Oliver on 18 May 2016.  His appeal was dismissed.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against  that  decision  and  permission
    was granted to do so by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein  on  3  August
    2016.  Thus it is that the matter comes before me to determine  whether
    or not that decision is to be upheld or not.

4.   Fundamentally it is a reasons challenge made to  the  decision  on  the
    basis that the reasoning of the Judge was  wholly  inadequate.   It  is
    said that the Judge failed to consider the situation of  the  appellant
    as against the  background  conditions  informed  by  country  reports.
    Given that challenge it is important to consider what reports  were  in
    fact placed before the Judge at  the  hearing.   There  is  an  Amnesty
    International published statement dated 12 August 2014.It contends that
    the Bangladesh government should do more to protect the minority Bihari
    community from attacks and to ensure that those responsible are brought
    to justice.  Reference is made in that statement to an attack upon  the
    Bihari community living in the Kurmitola refugee camp in Dhaka.  On  14
    June 2014 nine members of one family were left dead and some ten  homes
    were damaged.  It is said that those who  committed  the  offence  were
    Bengalis living in the adjacent community. The  police  have  indicated
    that they are investigating the matter.

5.   By way of background it is said that  since  Bangladesh's  independence
    minority groups, such as the Bihari's, have been discriminated  against
    and attacked.  In  the  past  decade,  arsonists,  allegedly  from  the
    majority Bengali community have set fire to  the  homes  and  shops  of
    Hindus, Buddhists and the indigenous  people  of  the  Chittagong  Hill
    Tracks.  In 2014 the Biharis have borne the brunt of such attacks.   It
    is said that the attack upon the camp  followed  days  of  tension  and
    clashes  between  the  camp  inhabitants  and  the  Bengalis  from  the
    neighbouring slums.

6.   The Kurmitola, camp which is home to some 412 families,  benefits  from
    free water and electricity provided by the government.  It  seems  that
    there may have been  some  disagreement  as  to  the  sharing  of  such
    electricity with the slum residents.

7.   There is also the Bangladesh 2014 Human Rights Report which  speaks  of
    instances of societal violence against religious and ethnic monitories,
    although the government and civil society leaders claim that  the  acts
    had political or  economic  motivations  rather  than  religious  ones.
    There was a passage dealing with internally displaced persons  and  how
    low level armed conflict had displaced tens of thousands of  indigenous
    persons internally.  The government relocated  landless  Bengalis  from
    the plains.  It is said that IDPs lack sufficient access to courts  and
    legal aid.  The commission reported settlers  expropriating  indigenous
    land, using false  titles,  intimidation,  fraud  and  manipulation  in
    domain claims.  The numbers of IDPs remained disputed.  In 2000 it  was
    estimated at 500,000 to include non-indigenous  persons.   There  is  a
    passage dealing with national, racial and  ethnic  minorities.  It  was
    said that  violent  attacks  against  religious  minorities  continued,
    although the motivations for such attacks often appeared to be economic
    or political.  Violence against Hindus was specified  as  were  attacks
    against the Mandi Roman Catholic farmers.

8.   Brief reference is then made to the June 2014 attack upon  the  Bihari.
     Thereafter the reports speaks of the  indigenous  people,  usually  in
    land dispute confrontations.

9.   Such would seem to be the extent of the background  material  that  was
    placed  before  the  Judge  and  Miss  Benitez,  who  represented   the
    appellant, was not able to present to me any  further  details,  having
    considered the bundles for herself.

10.  It is against that background that challenge is made to the  remark  by
    the Judge at paragraph 29 of the determination:

         "His claim to fear persecution is based  solely  on  his  assertion
         that he is a Bihari. There is certainly evidence of  discrimination
         against Biharis, but serious abuse is not widespread. What I firmly
         conclude is that when he came to the United Kingdom he had no  such
         fear. Not only did he not raise such a fear on arrival but  he  did
         not  mention  it  when  found  working  illegally  and  even   more
         relevantly when making his application to remain. If that were  not
         conclusive his  claim  to  have  any  fear  on  return  is  further
         undermined by his application for a travel document  to  return  to
         Bangladesh in 2011."


11.  Although the reports summarised  clearly  indicate  that  there  was  a
    significant degree of discrimination and violence  towards  certain  of
    the minorities, the only clear example which is given of  the  violence
    towards Biharis in particular, is that  of  14  July.   What  seems  to
    emerge from the background reports is that the Hindus would seem to  be
    receiving a great deal of difficulty.

12.  The background material which  was  presented  before  the  Judge  also
    includes that to be found in the detailed reasons for refusal. There is
    a detailed consideration of the matter by reference to the Home  Office
    Country of Origin Report on Bangladesh 2013 which makes reference to  a
    High Court action brought by ten residents of the Geneva  camp  seeking
    voting rights.   The  Court  ruled  that  the  Election  Commission  be
    directed enrol the petitioners and another Urdu  speaking  people,  who
    want to be enrolled in the electoral roles and accordingly give them  a
    national identity card without further delay.

13.  According to the UNHCR report of December 2009  80%  of  eligible  Urdu
    speaking voters obtain  national  identity  cards.  A  number  of  Urdu
    speakers have allegedly chosen not to register as voters, fearing  that
    it would undermine their long standing  call  to  be  repatriated.   In
    addition to enable them voting nationally, the  identity  card  enables
    the holders to claim a range  of  rights  which  are  set  out  in  the
    decision letter.

14.  The conclusion, therefore, based upon that evidence, is that even as  a
    claimed Bihari Muslim who has lived in Bangladesh, the appellant  would
    be recognised now as a Bangladeshi national entitled  to  the  national
    identity card and entitled to  the  rights  set  out.  So  far  as  the
    specific matters relating to Bihari are concerned, it was noted that he
    had lived in a Bihar camp in Dhaka with no difficulty, although he  had
    provided no documentary proof of that matter.   It  is  suggested  that
    there was a distinction between the Urdu speaking Bihari  minority  and
    other Bangladeshi Muslims  in  that  the  Urdu  speaking  community  in
    Bangladesh could be considered a "linguistic  diaspora".    The  label"
    Bihari" been used in reference the descendants of over  1,000,000  Urdu
    speaking Muslims who had migrated from India to East  Bengal  following
    the country's creation in 1947. It was recognised that,  following  the
    country's liberation, the Urdu speaking community were  ostracised  but
    that that situation has now significantly  changed,  the  UNHCR  having
    reported that many of the Urdu speaking communities, including these in
    the open camps, living alongside the Bengali commit and speak Bengali.

15.   That  is  of  significance  because,  in  terms  of  the   appellant's
    integration or reintegration into Bangladesh, it is noted that although
    it is said that the Biharis speak Urdu "all  the  time"  the  appellant
    claims that he speaks no Urdu but rather speaks Bengali.  Thus he would
    be speaking the language of most of those in Bangladesh.

16.  It was the view of the respondent in the decision  that  the  appellant
    is not at risk in any way and on return he would be able to participate
    as a citizen in Bangladesh as well as speaking the language.  The issue
    of risk was considered very carefully at paragraphs 37  to  47  in  the
    respondent's decision letter.

17.  It is clear from paragraph 31 that the Judge has borne  in  mind  those
    passages in that he says as follows:

         "Whatever may have been the problems with his nationality status in
         the past, the position had changed radically by 2008.  Before  then
         three would have been a good chance  of  him  being  accepted  into
         Bangladesh nationality but after then he had a right to  apply  for
         citizenship.  As a Bengali speaker he would fit  in  and  not  draw
         attention to  himself.  He  has  not  given  an  evidence  of  ever
         supporting a campaign for the protection of Bihari people.


         Accordingly I reject his claim to have a valid asylum claim and  to
         fear any ill-treatment on return."


18.  I find, contrary to what is set out in the grounds of appeal, that  the
    Judge,  albeit  briefly,  has  clearly  given  consideration   to   the
    background material submitted on behalf of the appellant and  that  set
    out in  detail in the decision letter.  It is  not  necessary  for  the
    Judge to repeat everything that is set out and I find that it is  clear
    that he has borne all relevant matters in mind.

19.  The appellant claimed  that  he  would  face  persecution  upon  return
    because he had  a  particular  profile,  namely  that  he  supported  a
    campaign for the protection of  Bihari  people.   The  Judge  found  no
    evidence of that and none has been  presented  in  the  course  of  the
    grounds.

20.  Whether he is Bihari who can return to the camps, there is  nothing  to
    indicate that apart from the one incident that has been highlighted  in
    2014, that there is any real danger in the  camps.  His  parents  lived
    there all their lives without difficulty as  did  he  before  he  left.
    There is clear evidence that the Bihari can live in harmony with  their
    Bengali neighbours.  As he speaks Bengali that  process  will  be  even
    greater advanced.

21.  He can return and claim a national identity  card  and  can  enjoy  the
    benefits of citizenship.

22.  It would seem entirely correct on  that  basis  that  there  is  really
    little substance to his claim for asylum or any real basis to  consider
    that he would, upon return, suffer any harm such as to engage Article 3
    of the ECHR.

23.  As the judge noted at paragraph 28 of the determination, the  appellant
    had lived for 28 years in  Bangladesh  seemingly  without  any  adverse
    attention coming to him.

24.  For sound reasons the judge also indicated, both in paragraphs  29  and
    30, that credibility was in any event  undermined.   Consideration  was
    also given to private and family life.

25.  Whilst recognising that it is an extremely brief determination, I  find
    that the  Judge  has  adequately  dealt  with  the  evidence  that  was
    presented.

26.  Criticism is made that the Judge did not make a positive finding as  to
    whether he was Bihari.  Perhaps that is less relevant  given  that  the
    Judge approached the matter at its highest  that  he  was.   The  Judge
    found for sustainable reasons that the appellant had no profile such as
    to bring him to the attention of the authorities and considered in  all
    the circumstances that he could safely return. I find that the decision
    was one that is not impugned by error of law or  lack  of  scrutiny  or
    lack of reasons.

27.  In the circumstances therefore the  appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of Judge Oliver shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]    Date 28 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

