
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03264/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th January 2017                 |On 1st February 2017                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                Mr Faozi [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Libya  born  on  23rd  July  1981.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history dating  back  to  having
    first been granted  a  student  visa  on  13th  March  2005  which  was
    subsequently extended on several occasions until 30th January 2010.  On
    1st November 2009 however the  Appellant  returned  to  Libya  but  re-
    applied in April 2014 for a further student visa which was refused.   A
    renewed application was granted from 7th July 2014 until 7th June 2015.
     The Appellant does not appear to have taken the benefit of  that  visa
    insofar as he only arrived in the UK on 2nd June 2015  i.e.  some  five
    days before his visa  was  due  to  expire.   He  claimed  asylum  upon
    arrival.

 2. The Appellant claimed asylum based on a fear that if returned to  Libya
    he would face mistreatment due to his  imputed  political  opinion  and
    race as perceived as a Gaddafi supporter and belonging to  the  Amazigh
    Tribe.  That application was refused by Notice  of  Refusal  dated  2nd
    November 2015.  The Appellant appeals and the appeal came before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Paul sitting at Manchester  on  12th  August
    2016.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 25th  August  2016  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds and
    the Appellant was found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3. On 8th September 2016 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 21st  September  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Astle
    granted permission to appeal.   Judge  Astle  noted  that  the  grounds
    argued  that  in  assessing  the  risk  under  Article  15(c)  of   the
    Qualification Directive the judge relied solely on a report prepared by
    the Respondent and failed to engage with other significant evidence and
    applied an incorrect test.  Judge Astle noted that although  the  judge
    says at paragraph 52 that she had had regard to the evidence submitted,
    it was arguable that she failed to give adequate reasons for preferring
    the report  submitted  by  the  Respondent  over  the  various  reports
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant.

 4. On 29th September 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  That  Rule  24  response  is  important.   It
    states

         "The Respondent does not oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal on the basis of FA (Libya:  Art  15(c))  Libya
         (CG) [2016] UKUT 413, as it is accepted that the  previous  country
         guidance has been replaced which was  followed  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  at  paragraph  52.   The  Respondent  invites  the
         Tribunal to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
         re-determined solely on the  ground  relating  to  Article  15(c)."



 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor Mr Hussain.  The Secretary  of  State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.

Submission/Discussions

 6. It is the agreed position of both Mr Hussain and Mr  McVeety  that  the
    judge was  guided  by  out  of  date  country  guidance  authority  and
    therefore the decision  cannot  stand.   Mr  Hussain  agrees  that  the
    credibility findings made by the judge should be preserved and that the
    issue should solely relate to consideration of the failure  to  address
    the appeal in the light of country guidance pursuant to Article 15(c).

 7. I raised with the legal representatives that  as  there  was  agreement
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings on credibility were to be
    preserved the question as to whether or not it would be better for  the
    matter to be retained by me within the Upper Tribunal.   There  was  in
    this instant consent and argument put to me which persuades me that  it
    is appropriate in slightly unusual circumstances whilst preserving  the
    credibility findings  to  remit  the  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be reconsidered on  the  outstanding  issue.   The  parties
    further agreed that it could not be dealt with  by  way  of  submission
    only on the basis that it would be almost certainly  necessary  for  an
    additional witness statement to be prepared by the  Appellant  and  for
    oral testimony and cross-examination to take place.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. I am persuaded by the joint submissions of the legal representatives in
    this matter and by the concession made by the Secretary of State in the
    Rule 24 response that for reasons given in the Rule 24  response  there
    is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and I consequently  remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing in  accordance  with  the  directions  set  out
    below.

Decision and Directions

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law and is set aside.  Directions are given below for the re-hearing
    of this matter:-

    (1)  It being found that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  insofar  as  the  judge
         failed to give due consideration to the  current  country  guidance
         authority of FA (Libya: Art 15(c)) Libya (CG) [2016] UKUT  413  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and is remitted to
         the First-tier for re-hearing.

    (2)  That the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings on  credibility  are
         preserved.

    (3)  That the only issue outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal  on
         the re-hearing of this  matter  is  the  extent  to  which  current
         country guidance when  applied  to  the  Appellant's  circumstances
         would or would not lead to the Appellant being able to sustain  his
         claim.

    (4)  It is further agreed that the appeal be limited to the Appellant's
         claim pursuant to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

    (5)  That the appeal be relisted before the First-tier Tribunal on  the
         first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

    (6)  That the appeal be before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than
         Immigration Judge Paul.

    (7)  That there be leave  to  either  party  to  file  and  serve  both
         subjective and objective evidence upon  which  they  seek  to  rely
         including additional witness statements and any skeleton  arguments
         at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

    (8)  That an Arabic interpreter (with North African dialect) do  attend
         the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

