
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03634/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2019                 |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  She appealed to a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of  1
    April 2016 refusing her claim for international protection.

2.   The appellant originally arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  3  March
    2011, having been granted leave to enter as a student.   Her  visa  was
    renewed until 10 October 2015 but curtailed on 30 April  of  that  year
    following expulsion as a student  for  failing  to  register.   In  the
    meantime the appellant had returned to Sri Lanka in June 2014 and  came
    back to the United Kingdom on 16 July 2014.  She claimed  asylum  on  6
    October 2015.

3.   She claimed to have been arrested on 25  November  2008  and  had  been
    held for three days on the basis that it was thought that she had given
    support to the LTTE.  This was not the case.  She had given a  document
    to a Tamil lady, this being a court order that had been  given  to  the
    lady in order to take her to hospital because her husband's arrest  had
    caused her to become mentally  upset.   The  lady's  husband  had  been
    arrested for supporting the LTTE.

4.   The appellant said that she was taken on that occasion  to  the  police
    station and forced to admit to supporting the LTTE and detained for two
    days.  She was released on condition that she  might  be  recalled  and
    placed her signature in a book.

5.   On her return to Sri Lanka on 18 June 2014 she was arrested on  arrival
    at the airport and told she was  being  investigated  for  leaving  the
    country whilst under suspicion for supporting the LTTE.  She  was  held
    at a CID office and beaten  on  one  occasion.   She  was  subsequently
    released when her parents gave 3 lakh rupees as bail.  She was required
    to report weekly but instead  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    authorities had since been to her home to look for her.  In  answer  to
    questions she said that she was not on a stop list and that  there  was
    no court order or warrant out for her arrest.

6.   In evidence the appellant adopted her witness  statement  and  referred
    to the police attending  her  home  in  Sri  Lanka,  most  recently  in
    November 2018.  She had not had any difficulties in leaving  Sri  Lanka
    in 2011 on her own passport, nor any problem when  she  left  in  2014.
    After her release in 2008 she had continued to work for the  Government
    as a court clerk until 2011 when she came to the United  Kingdom.   She
    had encountered no further problems from the authorities at that  time.



7.   The appellant had produced an arrest warrant which she  said  had  been
    sent to her solicitor and must have been obtained through  the  courts.
    She said that the warrant she produced was not a forgery.

8.   The judge noted that the parties  were  at  odds  with  regard  to  the
    validity  of  the  warrant.   The  respondent  relied  on  a   document
    verification report dated  21  March  2017  which  concluded  that  the
    warrant was not genuine.  Confirmation in this respect  came  from  the
    Criminal Investigations Department, having been submitted, redacted, to
    the Deputy Inspector-General of the CID  in  Colombo.   The  respondent
    also relied on a Country of Origin Information Report of  4  July  2011
    reporting that forgery of official documents was commonplace.

9.   The judge noted what had been said by the Upper Tribunal in  VT  [2017]
    UKUT 00368, but placed particular emphasis on PA [2018] UKUT 337 (IAC).
     There was no indication that the personal details of the appellant  in
    that case had been given to the police in Sylhet, and  in  the  instant
    case the appellant's name and address had been redacted  and  therefore
    her identity was not revealed to her alleged  persecutors.   The  judge
    recognised  that  the  authority   the   appellant   signed   permitted
    examination of records  at  the  Magistrates'  Court  rather  than  the
    police, but nevertheless the result  of  the  enquiry  did  carry  some
    weight.

10.  The judge considered also the medical evidence produced  on  behalf  of
    the appellant in the form of letters from two attorneys, Mr Jayawardena
    and Ms Nirosha.  The judge noted that Mr Jayawardena's name  was  spelt
    in various ways at various times and considered that since the  request
    for the documents came from the appellant the result of the enquiry was
    no more independent than the result of the respondent's enquiry leading
    to the DVR.  The judge also  considered  there  were  elements  of  the
    appellant's evidence which lacked credibility.  In particular the judge
    attached weight to the fact that, as he put  it,  the  appellant  would
    most certainly not have continued to be employed by the  Government  of
    Sri Lanka in the very role she was suspected of abusing if it were  the
    case that she was believed to have used her professional  influence  to
    fulfil the missions of an LTTE member.  He also noted that at interview
    on 29 March 2016 she said no warrant for her arrest  had  been  issued,
    but the warrant produced subsequently was issued on 2  September  2014.
    He also noted that there was no evidence of any proceedings against the
    appellant's parents in respect of the 3 lakh rupees they had  deposited
    as bail security.  There was no  documentary  evidence  to  verify  her
    father's claim in a letter of 18 February 2019 that  his  3  lakh  were
    forfeited or confiscated.

11.  In light of his findings the judge did not accept  that  the  appellant
    was of adverse interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka, did not accept
    that she was suspected  of  terrorism  or  believed  to  have  assisted
    terrorists and did not believe there was any warrant for her arrest  in
    existence.  He applied the Tanveer Ahmed test to his  consideration  of
    the documents.   He  did  not  find  that  evidence  or  the  documents
    credible.

12.  The appellant sought and was granted  permission  to  appeal  on  three
    grounds.  The first was that the judge had failed to engage  adequately
    with the challenge to the method of  verification.   Secondly,  it  was
    said that his reasoning in regard  to  the  arrest  warrant  and  other
    documents was insufficient in that he had made no findings in  relation
    to Ms Nirosha's evidence, and thirdly, he indulged  in  speculation  in
    concluding that it was impossible to believe  that  the  appellant  had
    been permitted to return to work as an administrator at the High Court.



13.  At the hearing Ms Anzani,  who  had  appeared  below  and  drafted  the
    grounds, adopted and expanded the points made in the grounds of appeal.



14.  With regard to the first ground, it was clear from  VT  that  a  simple
    redaction would not protect a person if  a  genuine  warrant  had  been
    issued.  Also there was background evidence, referred to for example in
    the country guidance in GJ, as to CID practices.  The CID could not  be
    relied on, as an interested party in proceedings against the appellant.
     They were not unbiased and they were looking for her to be returned to
    Sri Lanka.  There had been harassment  of  her  family,  including  her
    father, so their assurances were not reliable evidence.

15.  As regards PA, a different method of identification had  been  employed
    there.  The British High Commission representative had  looked  at  the
    records rather than it being done by the CID, as in this  case.   Also,
    the judge had failed to consider what was said in  VT  about  redaction
    and protection of individuals.  This was a material error of law.

16.  The second  ground  concerned  the  failure  to  make  findings  on  Ms
    Nirosha's evidence.  The judge had only considered that the evidence of
    Mr Jayawardena.  Though it was the case that the judge did not have  to
    provide reasons for every bit of evidence considered, it was  necessary
    with regard to the more significant evidence and this went  to  a  core
    issue, being rebuttal evidence of the document verification report  and
    the genuineness of the warrant.

17.  The third ground concerned the  findings  at  paragraph  44  where  the
    judge did not accept that if the appellant's account was true she would
    have continued to be employed by the Government  after  the  arrest  in
    2008.  In light of her evidence about return to work it was speculation
    to say that her evidence was incapable of belief.

18.  In his submissions Mr Walker relied on the Rule 24  response.   It  was
    maintained that the judge had made findings open to him with regard  to
    the evidence submitted.  Credibility had been considered in depth.  The
    findings were open to the judge with regard to the documents.   He  had
    recorded various inaccuracies at paragraph 43 of  his  decision.   This
    was the second time the appeal had been heard and there was no merit to
    the challenge.

19.  By way of reply Ms Anzani made the point that the fact there  had  been
    a previous remittal was irrelevant to whether or not there was an error
    of law in this decision.  She considered that if the Tribunal were with
    her then it would probably be necessary to remit to the  First-tier  in
    that credibility would have to be reassessed.

20.  I reserved my decision.

21.  I start with ground 3.  I do not consider there is  any  merit  in  the
    point made here.  It does seem to me  inherently  implausible,  as  the
    judge concluded, that a person who had been arrested  on  suspicion  of
    assisting an LTTE member would be allowed to return to  her  employment
    with the Government for several years.

22.  That might superficially be seen to be dispositive of the  appeal,  but
    it has to be seen in the context of the more weighty grounds 1  and  2.
    Inherent apparent implausibility of allowing the appellant to  continue
    working for a period of time after the earlier detention would, if  the
    appellant is credible with regard to the arrest  warrant,  have  to  be
    seen in the light of that, and the evidence would have to  be  assessed
    in the round in that regard.

23.  In this respect I consider that the challenge in the  grounds  is  made
    out.  It does seem to me, with regard to ground 1, that the  judge  did
    not pay sufficient attention to the concerns expressed in VT about  the
    risks of even a redacted warrant when the document is considered by the
    potential author of persecution.  It might perhaps not be seen at least
    as objective a process as that where a BHC official was  examining  the
    records as was done in PA.  A more careful evaluation of  the  guidance
    in those two cases to the facts of this case is necessary, but it  does
    seem to me that the points made in the grounds and as amplified  by  Ms
    Anzani, particularly at paragraph 9 of the grounds, are made out.

24.  This also has to be seen in light of ground 2 which  again  I  consider
    has merit.  Though the judge had concerns with regard to  the  evidence
    of Mr Jayawardena, he did not come to any conclusions on  Ms  Nirosha's
    evidence, and that is, as Ms Anzani argued, pivotal potentially in that
    she verified the existence of the court file and the genuineness of the
    arrest warrant.  The credibility of the claim overall has to be seen in
    the light of proper findings on the evidence and a proper consideration
    of the two guidance cases.  It is unfortunate that the matter has to be
    considered fully again, but I consider in the circumstances that  there
    will have to be a full re-evaluation of  the  appellant's  credibility,
    and that will most properly be done in the First-tier Tribunal,  so  on
    that basis the appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  for
    a full rehearing at Hatton Cross.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 8th October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

