
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03101/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 September 2018                          |On 30 October 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                    [P D]
                      (Anonymity has not been Directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Malhotra, Counsel for Shan & Co Solicitors,
                    Harrow, Middlesex
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on [ ~ ] 1977.  She appealed
    the respondent's decision of 20 February 2018 refusing  her  claim  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights issues.  Her appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Devittie on 6 April  2018
    and was dismissed on all grounds in a decision  promulgated  on  8  May
    2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Hollingworth  on  25  July
    2018.  The permission states that it is arguable that the Judge has not
    dealt sufficiently with the question of whether he was able to consider
    if there is a breach of Article 8 outside the Rules or the question  of
    proportionality.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that the grounds  are  brief  and  the
    Judge omitted to mention Article 8 of ECHR in any of his findings.  The
    Presenting Officer  suggested  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
    decision should be set aside and the appeal remitted to the  First-Tier
    Tribunal.

 5. Counsel agreed with this, asking for the case to be remitted.

 6. At question 140 of the asylum interview the  appellant  refers  to  her
    private and family life and her relationship with her step-children.

 7. I asked if Article 8 was pleaded before the First-Tier Judge  but  this
    was not answered.

 8. This is an asylum claim and human rights and Article 8 of  ECHR  should
    be  considered  along  with  the  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.  The Judge makes reference to  the  previous  human  rights
    appeal which was dismissed and in his decision, he states the appeal is
    dismissed on human rights grounds,  however  Article  8  has  not  been
    considered by him in his decision and this is a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

 9. As I find that there is a material error of law in the Judge's decision
    I direct that the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.
    None of its findings are to stand other than as a record  of  what  was
    said  on  that  occasion.   It  is  appropriate  in  terms  of  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit  the
    case to the First-Tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

10. The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are
    not to include Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Devittie.

11. Anonymity has not been granted.

Signed                                  Date 22 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge IAM Murray
