

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/03156/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23rd June 2017                         |On 28th June 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     NK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe,  instructed by Goshen solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as NK. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal a decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal,  on  international  protection
      grounds, against a decision of  the  respondent  refusing  her  asylum
      claim.


   2. The SSHD did not file  a  Rule  24  response  and  Ms  Petterson  very
      properly conceded that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to
      have adequate regard to material matters namely the medical  evidence,
      had failed to have adequate regard to the country guidance case of  TD
      and AD (trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) in the context of
      the appellant's account, failed to make findings  on  the  appellant's
      evidence that family members  lived  in  Tirana  and  failed  to  make
      adequate reasoned findings on the appellant's evidence of  the  threat
      she received in 2010  and  the  impact  that  had  on  her  claim  for
      international protection.

   3. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge  erred  in  law  and  set
      aside the decision to be remade.

   4. Although there was some suggestion from Ms Petterson that  the  appeal
      be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal I saw no reason why I could not
      remake it today.

   5. The appellant had, through her  solicitors  made  an  application  for
      further evidence to be admitted, which I granted. The further evidence
      included copies of her medical records, a report from Dr Faisal  Shafi
      Shaikh dated 15th June 2017 and a witness statement from a friend.  Ms
      Petterson did not challenge this evidence. She sought to rely upon the
      reasons for refusal of  asylum  decision  letter  but  made  no  other
      submissions.

        Findings

   6. The respondent accepts this  young  woman  has  been  trafficked  from
      Albania, that her father tried to force her into an arranged  marriage
      and that she had received threats from her father. The respondent  did
      not accept she had received threats in 2010  from  an  unknown  source
      when she intended to publish an article about miners being  killed  in
      an accident.

   7.  The  appellant  has  a  Masters  in  journalism  from   Tirana.   Her
      unchallenged evidence is that she has family members living  all  over
      Albania including an uncle. The  medical  evidence,  unchallenged,  is
      that she is not only suicidal but has also made a serious  attempt  at
      committing suicide,  her  attempt  being  thwarted  because  a  friend
      grabbed her legs and prevented her from succeeding in throwing herself
      out of the window of a 10th  floor  flat.  The  psychiatrist's  report
      relied on before me is an amplification of the report that was  before
      the First-tier Tribunal but also provides  detailed  consideration  of
      her current mental health and prognosis. It includes

             "5.1 Her current diagnosis is post-traumatic  stress  disorder
             associated with major depressive disorder. The basis  of  this
             diagnosis is the horrific abuse that she had to endure in 2014
             and 2015 following which she is not able to come to terms with
             the loss of dignity and honour that has happened to her since.
             5.2 In terms of treatment that she is currently receiving,  as
             highlighted above she is in receipt of a combination of strong
             antidepressant medication and a small  dose  of  antipsychotic
             medication  to  help  with  her  sleep  from  which  she   has
             benefitted  partly;  however  she   has   not   received   any
             counselling or psychotherapeutic support which in my  view  is
             the other important aspect of her treatment.
             5.3 In terms of the length of treatment required for  her  and
             the prognosis, my view would be  that  the  prognosis  of  her
             condition appears to be poor in the short term although it may
             improve in the medium to long term if she  is  in  receipt  of
             regular psychiatric support  as  she  is  receiving  which  is
             combined with psychotherapy for at least 3-5 years.
             ....
             5.5 Clearly as observed by  myself  in  terms  of  her  mental
             state, [NK] is in no fit state of mind to be able to return to
             Albania currently given the fact that  she  is  still  acutely
             unwell with 2 major diagnoses as mentioned above and for which
             she has not received proper treatment  and  whatever  benefits
             she may have acquired are still in the early stages....
             5.6 ....If she is returned to  Albania...her  prognosis  would
             become even poorer than what it is currently and  there  is  a
             real risk  that  she  may  not  even  return  because  she  is
             contemplating ending her life if this were to  happen....I  am
             unable to comment about the mental health services in Albania;
             however even if we suppose  the  mental  health  services  are
             reasonable  and  adequate,  the   atmosphere   of   fear   and
             uncertainty  would  not  be  conducive  for  [NK]  to  be   in
             especially as she is the  victim  of  not  just  her  family's
             threats to be killed for not obeying their orders for a forced
             marriage but also as a victim of sex trafficking ring....

   8. TD and AD considers in detail the evidence with regard to shelters.  A
      woman with particular 'heavy' issues  may  be  able  to  remain  in  a
      shelter for up to two  years.  The  option  of  the  shelters  is  not
      unreasonable unless the individual has particular vulnerabilities. The
      stay in the shelters enables support and  education  to  be  provided,
      enabling the woman to live on her own and to assist in enabling her to
      negotiate the difficulties that will ensue as a  result  of  what  has
      happened to her.


   9. In this case, the very strong medical evidence is that she will need a
      period of at least 3 years to start to come to  terms  with  what  has
      happened to her. This is longer than the maximum stay in the  shelter.
      On departure from  the  shelter,  despite  being  well  educated,  the
      possibility of employment  as  a  journalist  is  unlikely  not  least
      because she would be able to be traced through anything she published.
      Although the threats against her  in  2010  are  untraceable  and  are
      unlikely to be repeated unless she  undertakes  similar  investigative
      journalism, that in itself will also  prevent  her  returning  to  the
      employment she once had. Of course  there  may  be  other  sources  of
      employment to be had but that has to be seen in  the  context  of  her
      very serious mental health problems which would not, on departure from
      the shelter, be resolved. Furthermore, she  has  relatives  throughout
      Albania including an uncle  in  Tirana  and  their  discovery  of  her
      presence  would  immediately  put  her  at  risk  of   being   further
      persecuted. It is simply  inconceivable  that  there  is  an  area  of
      Albania where she could live without real objectively  supported  fear
      of discovery, even if she had no mental health problems to overcome to
      enable her to survive. There is no evidence at all that  she  has  any
      support networks available to her in Albania.


  10.  In  summary  this  young  woman  is  highly  vulnerable,  will   face
      significant and serious challenges to surviving in Albania  and  there
      is a real risk of her being further persecuted.

  11. For these reasons I allow  this  appeal  on  international  protection
      grounds.
          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.



    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




[pic]

                                    Date 23rd June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
