
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03969/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 22 January 2018                   |On 30 January 2018                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|And                                                                         |
|           |N.S.                                              |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the claimant No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the applicant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings. The  parties  at
liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Panagiotopoulou, of Counsel.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I Burnett who, following a
    hearing on 22 June 2017, allowed the  appeal  of  N.S.  (hereafter  the
    "claimant") on protection grounds (asylum and Article 3  of  the  ECHR)
    against a decision of the Secretary of State of 15 April 2016  refusing
    his asylum claim of 26 October  2015.  Reasons  for  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision were given in a letter dated 15 April 2016  (hereafter
    the "refusal letter").

 2. The claimant is a Turkish national, born in Bingol on [ ] 1994.  He  is
    Kurdish and last lived in Karliova in Turkey. He claims to have arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 4 October 2015.

Basis of asylum claim

 3. The claimant said that he was a supporter of  the  People's  Democratic
    Party ("HDP") in Turkey. He is not a member of  the  Kurdistan  Workers
    Party ("PKK") but was a supporter. Members of his family  and  extended
    family were members of the HDP. His brother was arrested  on  21  March
    2014 and is awaiting trial. Other members of his  family  and  extended
    family had court cases and had been imprisoned.

 4. The claimant used to canvass and join demonstrations. He  was  arrested
    and detained in Turkey on three occasions as follows: On 30 March 2012,
    he was detained for 2 days. On 8 October 2014, he was  detained  for  3
    days. On 16 August 2015, he was detained  for  2  days.  On  all  three
    occasions, he was released without conditions. On the  first  occasion,
    he was arrested and detained for protesting at his halls of  residence.
    On the second occasion, he was arrested at  a  protest.  On  the  third
    occasion, he was arrested and detained after soldiers had  been  killed
    on the Turkish border. The authorities came to his  house  and  he  was
    taken to the terror branch in Bingol. He was asked to give  information
    about the PKK and HDP. He was not charged  but  released  and  told  to
    report every week. He did not report but went to his uncle in Istanbul.
    He remained there and then left Turkey on 27th September 2015.

The judge's decision

 5. The relevant country guidance case was IK (Returnees - Records  -  IFA)
    Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312, as the judge stated at  para  23  of  his
    decision.

 6. The judge accepted the entirety of the claimant's  claim.  He  accepted
    his evidence that he was wanted by the  Turkish  authorities  and  then
    stated, at para 55: "I consider that in such circumstances there was  a
    real risk to the claimant of ill-treatment and torture in  Turkey."  He
    therefore allowed the appeal on asylum grounds and under Article  3  of
    the ECHR.

 7. The judge's assessment is set out  at  paras  44-55.  In  view  of  the
    submissions and my assessment, it is necessary to quote paras 44-54  of
    the judge's decision. They read:

         "FINDINGS

         44.      I should state at the  start  that  I  have  in  mind  the
             standard of proof in asylum claims. I have taken into  account
             the judgment of the Court of Appeal in KV. I have applied  the
             holistic  approach  or  overall  evaluative  approach  to   my
             assessment  as  set  out  in  the  well-known   authority   of
             Karanakaran v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2000] 3 All ER 449, CA.

         45.       I  remind  myself  that  given  the  challenge   to   the
             [claimant's] credibility, I need to make findings of fact  and
             I do so on the lower standard and assess therefore whether the
             account the [claimant] relies on is reasonably likely to  have
             occurred or (putting it another way), whether there is a  real
             possibility that the events claimed happened. My findings  are
             based on all the evidence, taken  in  the  round  and  without
             compartmentalising one or the other.

         46.      The [claimant] has provided some documentation relating to
             his family. There has been no challenge to those documents  by
             the respondent. The [claimant] was consistent as to his family
             background and he was not challenged  about  that  history  in
             cross examination. I am prepared to accept  the  [[claimant's]
             account regarding  his  family  and  their  circumstances  and
             political involvement. I will  return  to  this  later  in  my
             decision.

         47.      The question is whether the [claimant's] family background
             puts him at risk when taken together with  the  other  factual
             aspects.

         48.      I turn to the [claimant's] personal circumstances and  the
             events he described. The [claimant] has produced letters  from
             HDP. There are two letters provided. I note the comments which
             Mr Eaton made in submissions. The letter in  the  respondent's
             bundle is very short and gives little information. The  second
             letter which appears in the [claimant's] bundle  of  documents
             is equally short and simply states  that  the  [claimant]  has
             been active for the party since August 2014 until August 2015.
             However  there  is  no  suggestion  that  the  documents   are
             fraudulent. I give the letters some weight in my assessment.

         49.      The [claimant] has participated in political activities in
             the  UK.  The  [claimant]  has  provided  photographs  of  his
             participation. I accept  he  has  been  actively  involved  in
             politics in the UK:

         50.      The [claimant] describes three detentions in Turkey  as  a
             result  of  his  involvement  in  politics  in   Turkey.   The
             respondent raised a number of issues regarding the credibility
             of  the  account  given  by  the  [claimant].  The  respondent
             questioned why the [claimant] was taken when his brother was a
             more prominent member. In response, the [claimant] stated that
             the respondent had  misunderstood  his  evidence.  I  note  in
             corrections  made  by  his  representatives   the   [claimant]
             explained that his brother was not at  the  [claimant's]  home
             but at his own home, which was why the [claimant] was taken. I
             have carefully read over the interview again. I am prepared to
             give the benefit of doubt to the [claimant].

         51.      The respondent noted that  the  court  papers  showed  the
             [claimant's] brother was born in 1988 and is therefore 27  (at
             the date of the interview). The [claimant] stated he  was  20.
             The date of birth of his brother was a mistranslation and  was
             corrected and so the approximate age given by  the  [claimant]
             was correct.

         52.      I have considered the  issues  raised  by  the  respondent
             regarding  the  [claimant's]   credibility.   The   background
             evidence shows that there is  increasing  intolerance  towards
             the Kurdish cause. There has been an increase in  arrests  and
             some for no apparent reason: In one case it is reported that a
             family member was arrested going to visit someone  in  prison.
             It is perhaps not surprising  that  the  [claimant]  has  been
             arrested and detained. His family seem to  have  a  number  of
             family members who have court cases on going or who have  been
             arrested and imprisoned. In a climate of increasing  suspicion
             and a greater number of arrests, it is not at all  implausible
             that the [claimant] has been arrested and detained.

         53.      I have taken into consideration section 8 (A ITCA 04)  and
             the [claimant's] behaviour. Although I am required to take  it
             into  account  as  damaging  the  [claimant's]  credibility  I
             conclude that it does not detract from the  [claimant's]  core
             account.

         54.      I have looked at all the evidence in  the  round.  I  have
             applied the lower standard of proof. I accept the [claimant's]
             account that he is wanted by the authorities and that  he  has
             been arrested and detained on a number of occasions. I  accept
             his involvement with HDP and his family profile.

         55.      I consider that in such circumstances there is a real risk
             to the [claimant] of ill treatment and torture in Turkey.

         56.      I allow his appeal."

The grounds

 8. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

    (i)    Ground 1:  Material  misdirection  in  law:  On  the  claimant's
         history, it was unlikely that  there  would  be  a  record  of  his
         detentions on the GBTS and therefore there would be no real risk to
         the claimant at the airport, pursuant to para 133 of  IK  (Turkey).
         Ground 1 relies upon para 133 of IK (Turkey).

    (ii)   Ground 2: Lack of adequate reasons: Ground 2 is that,  absent  a
         risk at the airport, there was no  adequate  consideration  of  the
         possibility of relocation within Turkey away  from  the  South-East
         were the interest in pro-Kurdish activities  is  reduced.  In  this
         regard, the grounds rely upon paras 116-120 of IK (Turkey).

    (iii)  Ground 3: Lack of adequate reasons: Ground 3 is that, in stating
         at  para  52  of  his  decision  that  there  was  "an   increasing
         intolerance towards the Kurdish cause", the  judge  had  failed  to
         adequately explain what this increase relates to  nor  explain  the
         period from which he considered there was an increase. The  grounds
         contend that the increase was not an increase  from  2002  when  IK
         (Turkey) was promulgated but an increase in recent years "following
         a preceding steep decline  in  interest  after  a  long  period  of
         inactivity by the PKK."

Submissions

 9. As will be seen from my assessment below, I have concluded that  ground
    3  is  determinative.  I  will  nevertheless  summarise  the   parties'
    submissions on grounds 1 and 2 in addition to ground 3.

10. At the commencement of the hearing before me,  I  raised  the  question
    whether  ground  3  was  a  challenge  to  the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility. Ms Ahmed submitted that it was because (in her submission)
    the judge was considering credibility at para  52.  Ms  Panagiotopoulou
    submitted that it was not a challenge to credibility  because  (in  her
    submission) the judge assessed credibility at paras 46-51 and he  began
    to assess future risk at para 52 onwards. The parties  developed  their
    submissions on this point subsequently, as summarised below.

11. If the  judge  was  assessing  credibility  at  para  52,  I  made  the
    preliminary observation that it appeared  to  be  unclear  whether,  in
    referring to "increasing intolerance towards  the  Kurdish  cause"  the
    judge was referring to the situation in Turkey since  the  failed  coup
    which took place on 15 July 2016 and, if so, whether he had taken  into
    account an irrelevant consideration given that the  claimant's  arrests
    and  detentions  pre-dated  the  coup  attempt.  I   record   that   Ms
    Panagiotopoulou did not take issue with my suggestion that it is  known
    that there have been increased difficulties in Turkey since the  failed
    coup, nor did she ask me for sources.

12. In relation to ground 3, Ms Ahmed submitted that the  judge  failed  to
    consider the credibility points raised in the refusal letter  of  which
    (she submitted) there  were  a  number.  Paras  33-37  of  the  judge's
    decision show that the Presenting Officer made a number  of  points  in
    relation to credibility. Ms Ahmed accepted that  the  grounds  had  not
    challenged the judge's assessment at paras 46-50.

13. In relation to ground 1, Ms Ahmed submitted that it was not  reasonably
    likely that the claimant's arrests and detentions would be on the  GBTS
    given that he had been released without conditions.  At  para  54,  the
    judge had  simply  concluded  that  the  claimant  was  wanted  without
    assessing the evidence or  facts  in  line  with  the  guidance  in  IK
    (Turkey).

14. In relation to ground 2, Ms Ahmed submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered whether the claimant could relocate internally and failed to
    consider paras 116-120 of IK (Turkey).

15. In response, Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that ground 3 did not  relate
    to credibility and it made no sense. When the two  sentences  are  read
    together, she  submitted  that  it  was  simply  "a  rambling  ground".
    Importantly, she submitted  that  the  second  sentence,  referring  to
    "preceding steep decline" in the phrase "following  a  preceding  steep
    decline in interest after a long period of inactivity by the PKK",  was
    not sourced. It did not make sense because there were  clashes  between
    the PKK and the authorities even before the ceasefire in July 2015.

16. Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that the judge's assessment of credibility
    began  at  para  45.  The  claimant  gave  evidence  of  the  political
    involvement of members of his family and that his brothers and  cousins
    had been detained. This  evidence  was  relied  upon  in  the  skeleton
    argument before the judge.  There  were  documents  relating  to  their
    arrests at Annex E of the Secretary of State's bundle. Page E10 relates
    to the claimant's brother, page E13 his uncle, page E16 his cousin  and
    page E23 another cousin.

17. The skeleton argument and the documents were referred to at para 31  of
    the judge's decision. Para 2 of the  skeleton  argument  sets  out  the
    numerous relatives who had been imprisoned or killed because  of  their
    involvement with the PKK. At para 46 of his decision,  the  judge  said
    that he accepted the account concerning the family, their circumstances
    and political involvement.

18. Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that the judge commenced  considering  the
    credibility of the claimant's evidence about  his  own  experiences  in
    Turkey at para 48 onwards. He stated that it was not suggested that the
    HDP letters were fraudulent. He therefore gave some weight to  the  HDP
    letters.

19. At para 49, the judge considered the claimant's political activities in
    the United Kingdom and the photographs evidencing his participation. At
    paras 50 and 51, the judge considered issues raised by the Secretary of
    State concerning the applicant's three detentions. The  judge  accepted
    the claimant's explanations. The second issue, considered at  para  52,
    was about  an  inconsistency  concerning  the  date  of  birth  of  the
    claimant's brother as stated in the translated  document  at  E10.  The
    Turkish version, on page E11,  shows  that  the  inconsistency  in  the
    brother's date of birth was due to a translation error. This point  had
    not been taken by the Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing  before  the
    judge.

20. Ms Panagiotopoulou reminded me that the findings at  paras  46-51  have
    not been challenged by the Secretary of State.

21. Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that the core of  the  claimant's  account
    had been accepted  by  the  judge  in  a  well-reasoned  decision.  She
    submitted that para 52 did not relate solely to  credibility.  At  para
    52, the judge had begun to assess the future risk. The  reason  why  he
    referred to the increasing intolerance was because he  was  considering
    the future risk at para 52. Ms Panagiotopoulou therefore submitted that
    ground 3 does not challenge credibility and, in any event, it does  not
    relate to the core of the claimant's case.

22. Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that there was no merit in ground 1. It is
    clear from the guidance in IK (Turkey) that the starting  point  is  to
    consider the risk in the home area. On the findings of the  judge,  the
    claimant is at risk in his home area. Internal relocation  only  arises
    if the individual has not been made the subject of  specific  interest.
    Pursuant to para 119 of IK (Turkey), a person can relocate if he/she is
    of general interest.  However, if there  has  been  specific  attention
    given to a person, as in  the  case  of  the  claimant,  then  internal
    relocation is not possible, pursuant to para 118  of  IK  (Turkey).  In
    such cases, the individual's history will become known at  the  airport
    or on relocation either upon registration with a 'Mukhtar'  or  if  one
    comes to the attention of the police for whatever reason.

23.  Ms  Panagiotopoulou  submitted  that  the   grounds   were   therefore
    misdirected on the guidance in IK (Turkey). Although the judge had  not
    referred to IK (Turkey) in his concluding paragraph, he referred to  it
    earlier in his decision, at para 23.  He  was  aware  of  IK  (Turkey).
    Furthermore, the skeleton argument referred to IK (Turkey).

24. Ms Panagiotopoulou drew my attention to the fact that  the  judge  said
    more than once, at paras 45 and 54, that his findings had been made  on
    the evidence as a whole.

25. In response, Ms Ahmed submitted  that  ground  3  does  relate  to  the
    judge's credibility assessment and that the judge had been  considering
    credibility at para 52, as indicated by the phrases "perhaps not at all
    surprising" and "not at all implausible" at para 52. She submitted that
    the judge had failed to consider the Presenting  Officer's  submissions
    summarised at paras 33-37 of the decision. Whilst she acknowledged that
    the grounds had not challenged the assessment at  paras  46-51  of  the
    judge's decision, this was relied upon  on  the  claimant's  behalf  in
    order to resist ground 3.

26. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

27. The first question is whether ground 3 relates to credibility.  As  can
    be seen, ground 3 concerns the sentence  in  para  52  of  the  judge's
    decision which reads:

         "The background evidence shows that there is increasing intolerance
         towards the Kurdish cause".

28. The question whether ground  3  relates  to  credibility  depends  upon
    whether the judge  was  considering  credibility  when  he  said:  "The
    background evidence shows that there is increasing intolerance  towards
    the Kurdish cause".

29. I am in no doubt that the answer is that he was. In  my  judgement,  he
    considered credibility not only at paras 45-51 but also at paras 52-53.
    The first  sentence  of  para  54  also  concerned  his  assessment  of
    credibility. My reasons are as follows:

    (i)    The sentence: "The  background  evidence  shows  that  there  is
         increasing intolerance towards the Kurdish cause" was  followed  by
         the following in para 52:

             "... There has been an increase in arrests  and  some  for  no
             apparent reason: In one case it  is  reported  that  a  family
             member was arrested going to visit someone in  prison.  It  is
             perhaps not surprising that the [claimant] has  been  arrested
             and detained. His family seem  to  have  a  number  of  family
             members who have  court  cases  on  going  or  who  have  been
             arrested and imprisoned. In a climate of increasing  suspicion
             and a greater number of arrests, it is not at all  implausible
             that the [claimant] has been arrested and detained.

             (my emphasis)

    (ii)   This was then followed by para 53, where  the  judge  considered
         s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)
         Act 2004 (the "2004 Act"). He said that s.8 did  not  detract  from
         the claimant's core account. This was then  followed  by  para  54,
         where he said that he had looked at all  of  the  evidence  in  the
         round and concluded:

             "I accept the [claimant's] account that he is  wanted  by  the
             authorities and that he has been arrested and  detained  on  a
             number of occasions. I accept his involvement with HDP and his
             family profile."

    (iii)  When paras 46-55 of the judge's decision are read as a whole, it
         is clear that he considered credibility at paras 46-54.   The  only
         paragraph that concerns the future risk is para 55.

30. I have therefore concluded that the entirety of para 52, including  the
    sentence referring to increasing intolerance towards the Kurdish cause,
    was part of the judge's assessment of credibility.

31. The next question  is  whether  the  judge  erred  when  he  said  "The
    background evidence shows that there is increasing intolerance  towards
    the Kurdish cause" by failing to explain what  background  material  he
    was relying upon.

32. As stated at my para 11 above, I made the preliminary observation that,
    if the judge was referring to the situation  in  Turkey  following  the
    failed coup on 15 July 2016, then the question arises as to whether  he
    took into account irrelevant evidence given that this would  mean  that
    the background evidence he was relying upon (which he did not describe)
    in assessing the credibility of the claimant's  evidence  that  he  was
    arrested and detained three times was post-15  July  2016  whereas  the
    claimant's claimed detentions took place in February 2012, October 2014
    and August 2015. Ms Panagiotopoulou did not object on the basis that  I
    had not provided any sources in referring to the  failed  coup  or  the
    situation in Turkey since then.  In  any  event,  I  am  able  to  take
    judicial notice of the fact that there was a failed coup in  Turkey  on
    15 July 2016 and that there have been  news  reports  since  then  that
    would be consistent with the judge's view (para 52) that:

         "There has been an increase in arrests and  some  for  no  apparent
         reason: In one case  it  is  reported  that  a  family  member  was
         arrested going to visit someone in prison."

33. I am satisfied that, by failing  to  be  specific  in  explaining  what
    background evidence he was relying upon, the judge erred by failing  to
    give adequate reasons for saying (para 52) that:  "It  is  perhaps  not
    surprising that the [claimant] has been arrested and detained."

34. Since this goes directly to  the  claimant's  core  account  about  his
    claimed arrests  and  detentions,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the
    remainder of the judge's credibility assessment at paras 46-54 in order
    to decide whether the error I have identified is material.  It  is  for
    this reason, and this reason only, that it is necessary to consider the
    remainder  of  the  judge's  credibility  assessment  even  though  the
    Secretary of State has not challenged that remaining assessment.

35. I have concluded that the judge erred in his assessment at paras  46-54
    of the decision, as follows:

    (i)    At para 46, the judge referred to the fact that the claimant had
         produced documentation relating to his family. He said  that  there
         was no challenge by the Secretary of State  to  the  documents.  At
         para 47, he said that  the  question  was  whether  the  claimant's
         family background placed him at risk when taken together  with  the
         other factual aspects. At para 52, he said:  "His  family  seem  to
         have a number of family members who have court cases  on  going  or
         who have been arrested and imprisoned." At para  54,  he  said:  "I
         have looked at all the evidence in the  round.  ...  I  accept  the
         [claimant's] account that he is wanted by the authorities and  that
         he has been arrested and detained on a number of occasions." It  is
         therefore clear that  the  judge  accepted  the  claimant's  family
         background and, importantly, took this into  account  in  assessing
         the credibility of the claimant's claim that he  was  arrested  and
         detained as claimed. In doing so, the judge failed to consider  the
         Secretary of State's case at para 32 of the  refusal  letter  where
         she said that, given the claimant's family background, it  was  not
         credible that he was released without charge and without conditions
         on three occasions.  This goes directly to the credibility  of  the
         claimant's claimed arrests and detentions. Para 33 of  the  judge's
         decision's decision shows that the Presenting Officer  relied  upon
         the refusal letter.

    (ii)   At para 48, the judge said that the Secretary of State  had  not
         suggested that the  two  letters  from  the  HDP  were  fraudulent.
         However, the fact is that para 26 of the refusal letter took  issue
         with these letters. The decision-maker raised  the  fact  that  the
         letter  dated  15  October  2015  was  dated  10  days  before  the
         claimant's asylum claim and that the claimant had not provided  any
         evidence as to  where  the  letters  had  come  from.  In  essence,
         therefore, the decision-maker was saying that the contents  of  the
         documents were not reliable. As I have said, para 33 of the judge's
         decision shows that the Presenting Officer relied upon the  refusal
         letter. Paras 36 and 37 of  the  judge's  decision  show  that  the
         Presenting Officer took specific issues about the HDP  letters  and
         he also drew attention to  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had  not
         mentioned his HDP involvement  at  his  screening  interview,  thus
         raising as an issue that the contents of the two HDP  letters  were
         not reliable.

         The Presenting Officer's submissions were in line with para  23  of
         the refusal letter which took issue with the claimant's evidence of
         his involvement with the HDP. Para 23 of the  refusal  letter  took
         issue with the fact that the claimant had failed to mention his HDP
         involvement at his screening interview when he  said  that  he  was
         accused of being involved with the PKK  whereas  the  core  of  his
         claim was that he was arrested and detained due to his  involvement
         in demonstrations with the HDP.

         The judge was therefore incorrect  to  take  into  account  in  the
         claimant's favour the fact that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
         contended that the two HDL letters were fraudulent  when  the  fact
         was that the reliability of the letters was in issue. He  therefore
         erred in his approach.

36. The above are errors in approach which led  the  judge  erroneously  to
    take into account in the claimant's favour his  family  background  and
    the HDP letters on the  basis that this evidence was  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of  State,  in  reaching  his  overall  positive  credibility
    assessment and the credibility of his evidence that he was arrested and
    detained three times.

37. In addition, as I have said above, the judge said at para 46  that  the
    Secretary of State had not challenged the documentation provided by the
    claimant. He said that  the  claimant  was  not  challenged  about  his
    family's history in cross-examination. Para 36 of the judge's  decision
    shows that the Presenting Officer drew attention to the fact  that  the
    claimant had not mentioned  his  family's  links  to  the  PKK  at  his
    screening interview. Whilst it is correct that asylum seekers cannot be
    expected to mention every fact upon which  they  rely  at  a  screening
    interview, the claimant's case included his claim that several  members
    of his immediate and extended family "have court cases on going or  who
    have been arrested and imprisoned" (para 52 of the  judge's  decision).
    Ms Panagiotopoulou  took  me  through  translations  of  several  court
    documents.  With  this  claimed  family  background,   the   Presenting
    Officer's submission, that the claimant had not mentioned his  family's
    links with the  PKK  at  his  screening  interview,  should  have  been
    considered by the judge. The  submission  raised  the  issue  that  the
    Secretary of State did not accept the claimed family background.

    Whilst the judge dealt with two other matters arising  from  the  court
    documents, at paras 50 and 51 of his decision, he did not consider  the
    fact that the claimant had failed to mention his family's PKK links  at
    his screening interview, a point which is capable of  going  materially
    against the claimant's credibility given the  number  of  relatives  he
    claimed to have had court documents issued against them on  account  of
    their PKK links.

38. The errors described  at  my  paras  35  and  37  are  important.  They
    concerned important matters. It was not enough for the judge to say, at
    para 45 of his decision, that:  "My  findings  are  based  on  all  the
    evidence, taken in the round and without compartmentalising one or  the
    other" and at para 54 that: I have looked at all the  evidence  in  the
    round."

39. The result of these errors is that the error raised  in  ground  3,  as
    explained at my  paras  28-33,  is  material  to  the  judge's  overall
    positive credibility assessment,  his  finding  that  the  claimant  is
    wanted by the Turkish authorities and that he  had  been  arrested  and
    detained as claimed.

40. Ground  3  is  therefore  established.  This  means  that  the  judge's
    credibility assessment cannot stand.

41. It is therefore unnecessary for me to deal with grounds 1 and 2.

42. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of the judge  to
    allow the appeal on asylum grounds and with respect to Article 3. I set
    aside his decision in its entirety. For the avoidance  of  doubt,  this
    means that  I  set  aside  the  entirety  of  the  judge's  credibility
    assessment and findings of fact.

43. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

44. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2 (b). In addition,  given
    that the claimant won his appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal is the right course of action.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set  aside  in  its  entirety.  This
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing  on  all
issues by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I Burnett.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill    Date: 26 January 2018
