

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03647/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 March 2019                    |On 8 April 2019                       |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      T

                          (Anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)










                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) in  which  it  dismissed  the  claimant's
appeal to it from a decision of the Secretary of State, which  he  had  made
on 22 February 2018, to refuse to grant leave to remain on the basis of  his
asserted family and private life. The tribunal's decision  was  made  on  15
November 2018 following a hearing of 14 November  2018  which  the  claimant
attended and at which he gave oral evidence. Both parties  were  represented
before the tribunal.

2.       I have decided to make an anonymity direction in this case  because
it involves young  children  whose  privacy,  it  seems  to  me,  should  be
protected.

3.    By way of background, the claimant, who was born on  1  January  1992,
is a national of Afghanistan. He entered the  UK  illegally  on  28  October
2011 and claimed asylum which was refused on 20 January  2012.  He  appealed
but his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal and  then,  after  a
grant of permission to appeal, by the Upper Tribunal. The  Upper  Tribunal's
decision to dismiss his appeal was made on 11  November  2012.  Essentially,
the First-tier Tribunal found him not to be credible and the Upper  Tribunal
concluded it had been open to it to do so. The claimant did  not  leave  the
UK despite his appeal having failed and, on 3 October 2014, he  applied  for
limited leave to remain on the basis of family and private life in  the  UK.
Leave was granted until 29 June 2017. The claimant has a child whom I  shall
call M, who was born in the UK  and  who  is  British,  and  he  has  had  a
relationship with the child's mother, also a British Citizen, whom  I  shall
call R. The child was born  on  6  December  2013  and  it  must  have  been
primarily because of the child and the relationship  with  his  mother  that
limited leave was granted. There is evidence to suggest, though,  that  that
relationship ran into difficulties. In  any  event,  it  appears  that  that
leave expired but that subsequently, on October 2017, the  claimant  made  a
further application to the Secretary of State for further leave  to  remain,
predominantly, on the basis of his being (which is accepted) the  father  of
M. It was that application which led to the Secretary of State  deciding  to
refuse the application and to the appeal to the tribunal.

4.    The tribunal noted the  evidence  given  to  it  that,  in  fact,  the
claimant and R had entered into an Islamic marriage on  7  August  2014.  It
was further noted that R has two children from a previous  relationship  who
had been born on 25 August 2011 and 4 September 2012  respectively.  On  the
claimant's case there had come a time  when  the  relationship  with  R  had
broken down and, indeed, there was  evidence  before  the  tribunal  that  a
restraining order had been made in respect of the claimant and that  he  had
subsequently been arrested on 10 October 2017 when he  had  sought  to  make
contact with R. But it was also contended on behalf  of  the  claimant  that
the parties wished to reconcile and that, in any  event,  the  claimant  was
having regular contact with his child. The claimant  produced  some  letters
from R and from some of her friends suggesting that he  is  a  good  father.
The respondent's position at the appeal, though, was that the  evidence  did
not demonstrate that the claimant played  an  active  role  in  the  child's
upbringing. The contact he had with  the  child  was  not,  it  was  argued,
meaningful or regular and was not sufficient to demonstrate that  he  has  a
genuine or subsisting parental relationship with that child.







5.    The tribunal resolved the issues before it in this way:

                 "Determination of issues

           20. In the absence of the children, this appeal would have  been
           utterly hopeless as, given the fact that the Appellant spent his
           formative  years  in  Afghanistan,  speaks  the  language,   was
           educated there, has the  ability  to  work  there,  is  in  good
           health, and would not need family support, he could  easily  re-
           integrate into life there. I bear in mind  in  that  regard  the
           lack of any evidence to suggest that the findings from his  2012
           hearing are in any way unsafe. There is no cogent evidence  that
           he would be easily identified due to having westernised  manners
           and customs. I do not have to accept what he says  just  because
           he says it, and bear in mind the conflicting  evidence  he  gave
           surrounding his date of birth and age. He was not clarifying his
           position when I pointed out the discrepant evidence  but  trying
           to explain away the gaping lacuna.

           21.   I do not accept he meets the suitability  requirements  of
           the Immigration Rules. The restraining order was imposed due  to
           his unacceptable behaviour. He broke the order. It is a  pattern
           of behaviour. He still has to use an intermediary to  facilitate
           contact such is the risk he poses to [R]. If it  was  felt  that
           the restraining order was in force and no  longer  required,  he
           could have applied to discharge it.

           22. The private life he  had,  was  developed  while  leave  had
           always been precarious, and was unlawful from 6 December 2012 to
           29 December 2014 and after 29 June 2017.

           23. I accept he is the father of a British child and sees him on
           a regular basis as I have no reason to  doubt  his  evidence  on
           this or on the  letters  (on  this  point)  and  pictures.  That
           contact is 2 or 3 times a week for up to 1 hour. He plainly does
           not have sole responsibility for [S] or live with him.

           24. I place little  weight  on  the  letters  from  [R  and  her
           friends] regarding the strength of the relationship between  the
           Appellant and the children as none  of  them  attended  to  have
           their evidence tested.

           25. I do not accept that there is any intention for  the  nature
           of his relationship to [R] to change, as she did not  attend  to
           have this tested in evidence, and he could not cogently  explain
           why if he thought the restraining order had ended they  had  not
           taken the opportunity to rekindle their relationship.  Nor  does
           it sit easily with the evidence  that  she  is  still  sometimes
           awkward over contact.

           26. I do not accept that the contact he has indicates  he  plays
           an active role in [S's] upbringing. It amounts to a  very  small
           amount of play time 2 or 3  times  a  week.  He  has  failed  to
           establish what role he plays in the life of [S's] siblings other
           than providing a bit of play  time.  His  contact  with  [S]  is
           irregular and only lasts about 1 hour when  it  happens.  It  is
           less with the siblings as they do not attend them at all. He has
           therefore failed to establish he has  a  genuine  or  subsisting
           parental relationship with him. He has also failed to  establish
           that [R] would not be able to cope with any short-term  distress
           or confusion [S] may have at not seeing the Appellant.

           27. He has therefore failed to establish he has a family life of
           meaning or value with anyone, or that the Respondent's  decision
           would interfere with that. He has produced no cogent evidence as
           to what private life he has here, that being of limited  utility
           in any event.

           28. Removal would interfere with his limited private and  family
           life. Consequences of gravity may flow from  the  decision  give
           the low threshold to establish that. It is lawful to remove  him
           as he does not meet the Immigration Rules. It would be  pursuing
           the lefitimate aim of retaining  the  integrity  of  immigration
           control and preserving the economic well-being of  the  country.
           In  relation  to  proportionality,  the  best  interest  of  the
           children is a primary consideration and is met by  them  staying
           here with Rebekah. She is well able to meet all their  needs  as
           she does now. His ability to speak English is a neutral  factor.
           There is no evidence he works or would not be an economic burden
           on the state. His very limited family and private life  is  such
           that when balanced against the need to retain the  integrity  of
           immigration control and the economic well-being of the  country,
           the balancing exercise falls on the side of the Respondent.  His
           contact will change as I do not accept that for  young  children
           modern means of communication make up for short periods of play,
           but given his limited role in their lives, a  break  until  they
           are old enough to use modern means of  communication  would  not
           unduly affect them.

           29. For all these reasons I am satisfied it  is  reasonable  and
           proportionate to require  the  Appellant  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom".




6.    The claimant, through his then representatives, sought  permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Part of what was said in those  grounds  seems
to me to be appropriately characterised as attempted  re-argument  with  the
tribunal's findings and conclusions. But there  is  a  contention  that  the
tribunal failed to have regard to the content  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (its  being  suggested  the
tribunal had "failed to even mention" that provision) and it is possible  to
read the rest of the grounds as amounting to a suggestion that the  tribunal
reached findings and an ultimate conclusion which was against the weight  of
the evidence. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  and  the  granting  judge
relevantly said this:

           "3. The judge arguably made no clear finding upon what is in the
           best interests of  the  appellant's  son.  He  appears  to  make
           contradictory findings in terms of whether the  appellant  does,
           or does not, have regular contact with his child (see  [23]  and
           [26] of  the  decision).  The  judge  appears  to  conflate  the
           question of the appellant having an "active role" in  his  son's
           life with  the  question  of  whether  he  has  a  "genuine  and
           subsisting parental  relationship"  with  that  child,  the  two
           issues being different (see R  (on  the  application  of  RK)  v
           Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (s).  117B  (6);
           "parental relationship") IJR [2016]  UKUT  00031  (IAC)  and  SR
           (subsisting parental relationship - s 117B (6)) Pakistan  [2018]
           UKUT  334  (IAC)).  It  is  correct  that  the  judge  does  not
           specifically refer to s  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  although  he
           appears to have had it in mind as part  of  his  reasoning.  The
           grounds disclose  arguable  errors  of  law  and  permission  is
           granted on the grounds as pleaded".

7.    Permission having been granted for the reasons set out in the  grounds
and what appear to be additional reasons set out in the  grant,  the  matter
was listed for an oral hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  (before  me)  so
that it could be decided whether the tribunal had erred in law  and,  if  it
had,  what  should  flow  from  that.  The  claimant,  despite  having  been
represented before the tribunal and at the time when  permission  to  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal was sought, attended before me unrepresented.  Indeed,
there was on file a letter from his now former representatives of  13  March
2019,  indicating  that  they  were  "no  longer   acting   as   his   legal
representatives". The claimant told me that problems had  stemmed  from  his
inability to pay for further legal assistance  and  representation.  He  did
not ask me to adjourn the proceedings and, in any event, it appeared  to  me
that if there was such a funding difficulty now it was  unlikely  that  such
would be resolved during the period of any short adjournment which might  be
granted. Further, I already had the benefit of  the  written  grounds  which
had been provided by his former representatives along with the actual  grant
of permission.

8.    In the circumstances, I heard from Mr McVeety first of all. He  argued
that the grounds of appeal lacked any merit. He  said  he  could  understand
why permission had been granted for the reasons it had but thought that  the
tribunal had "just about done enough" to justify its decision. The  claimant
said that the tribunal had been wrong in thinking he  did  not  have  enough
contact with his child. R, he told me, is supportive of his appeal  and  had
attended today's hearing with him. He does  his  best  for  his  child.  His
partner would have come to the hearing before the tribunal but  it  had  not
been suggested to him that she should attend.

9.    I have concluded that the tribunal did not err in law  in  making  its
decision. It follows that that decision shall stand. I set out my  reasoning
below.

10.   As I have already indicated, I take the view  that  much  of  what  is
said in the written  grounds  amounts  to  attempted  re-argument  with  the
tribunal's findings. The grounds contain  a  number  of  factual  assertions
such as one to the effect that he is "actively involved in his  son's  life"
and one to the effect that "it is only due  to  the  current  issues  he  is
experiencing with his son's mother" that  contact  with  the  child  is  not
greater. That sort of  material  cannot,  of  itself,  demonstrate  arguable
error. As to the suggestion that the  tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to
section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  it  is
not an error of law to specifically refer to a statutory provision  so  long
as the correct legal approach has been taken and  the  correct  legal  tests
have been applied. But in any event, there is a brief reference to that  and
other statutory provisions at paragraph 3 of the written reasons.  But  much
more importantly, what the tribunal  has  to  say  in  the  portion  of  its
written reasons which I  have  set  out  above,  demonstrates  that  it  had
section 117B (6) in mind.  It  did  consider  and  decide  the  question  of
whether  or  not  the  claimant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
relationship with a qualifying child which is the issue  raised  in  section
117B(6)(a). It expressly found at paragraph 26 of its written  reasons  that
the claimant had "failed  to  establish  he  has  a  genuine  or  subsisting
parental relationship" with the child whom he had fathered. It was not  part
of the claimant's case before the tribunal that even  if  he  did  not  have
such a relationship with his own child he did with R's other  children  whom
he had not fathered.  Given  the  conclusion  it  had  reached  relating  to
section 117B(6)(a) it was not  necessary  for  the  tribunal  to  go  on  to
consider  the  second  limb  of  that   section   which   relates   to   the
reasonableness or otherwise of expecting a qualifying  child  to  leave  the
UK.  I  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  tribunal  did  not  overlook  that
legislative provision and that, in fact, it  consciously  asked  itself  the
key question in the context of this appeal raised by it  and  resolved  that
question.


11.   Turning then to what was said by the granting judge, it  is  right  to
say that the tribunal did not, in terms, say what it  thought  would  be  in
the best interests of the claimant's child with respect  to  the  claimant's
future geographic location. But it  had  found  he  had  failed  to  show  a
genuine or subsisting parental relationship. It surely followed  from  that,
that it was effectively deciding that either it would not be in the  child's
best interests for the claimant to remain in the UK  or,  that  it  was  but
only  marginally  so.  Either  way,  the  claimant  would  not  derive   any
significant support for his case from that. On the face of it  the  tribunal
does appear to have reached an inconsistent finding in that at paragraph  23
of its written reasons it accepted that the claimant sees the  child  "on  a
regular basis", whereas at paragraph 26 of its written reasons it  described
the contact he has with his child as being  "irregular".  But  it  does  not
seem to me that it is helpful to  focus  overly  on  that  relatively  minor
matter. The tribunal's written reasons do have to be read  as  a  whole  and
when that is done, it is apparent that it was reaching  an  overall  finding
that the contact the claimant had with his son was not meaningful or of  any
real substance. Whilst differently constituted tribunals might have  reached
a different view on the same evidence, it was open to this tribunal to  take
that view on the material before it.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  the
tribunal did conflate the question of the claimant having "an  active  role"
in his child's life with the question of whether there was  a  "genuine  and
subsisting parental relationship". On a true reading of what it had  to  say
it seems to me that the tribunal was simply finding  that  neither  was  the
case. Additionally, and in any event, while I am  sure  it  is  possible  to
conclude that a person who does not play an  active  role  in  that  child's
life can nevertheless have a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  that
child, the former is not necessarily irrelevant to a  consideration  of  the
latter. The tribunal found what it did regarding  the  parental  aspect  and
was entitled to so find.

12.   The claimant seemed to  suggest,  before  me,  that  any  difficulties
there had been with R had been resolved. It is not for me to  decide,  in  a
decision concerned with error of law, whether that is true or  not.  But  if
the claimant and any representative he may find in  the  future  think  that
there has been a meaningful change in circumstances such  as  to  justify  a
fresh application for leave on human rights grounds then,  I  suppose,  such
an application can be made. I am not, however, suggesting  that  one  should
be made as that is simply not a matter for me.

13.      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails for the above reasons

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law. Accordingly, the claimant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

I grant the claimant anonymity pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Accordingly, no report of these
proceedings shall identify the claimant or any member of his family. The
grant applies to all parties to the proceedings. Any breach may lead to
contempt of court proceedings.




Signed:                      Dated: 3 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

