
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/03681/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 4 May 2017                     |On 15 May 2017                       |
|                                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                          HEDAYAT HAAGHANI NOROULEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Devlin (counsel) instructed by Latta & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Clapham promulgated on 2 February 2017, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 21 April 1981 and is a national of Iran. On  30
March 2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection  claim.



The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Clapham ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 April 2017  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Coker granted permission to appeal stating

      "It is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  make
      findings on firstly whether the appellant had converted  and  secondly
      what that conversion, if it occurred, would mean on return to Iran, in
      particular, on entry. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  casts
      doubt on the credibility of the appellant's account of his  attendance
      and evangelising, it is not clear what the outcome of  those  findings
      are in terms of the appellant's claim to conversion."

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Devlin moved the grounds of appeal. He took  me
straight to [58] to [68] of the decision, which, he  told  me  contains  the
Judge's reasons. Mr Devlin focused on [67] and  told  me  that  despite  the
preceding 66 paragraphs of the decision, it is impossible to  see  what  the
Judge means by the first sentence of [67] nor how  the  Judge  reached  that
conclusion. He told me that  [67]  creates  an  ambiguity  in  the  decision
because, on the one hand, the Judge decides that  the  appellant  is  not  a
convert from Islam, on the other, the Judge considers  whether  or  not  the
appellant would evangelise.

(b) Mr Devlin told me that the principal problem is that,  after  discussing
conversion, the Judge briefly moves on to  consideration  of  evangelisation
and, as a result, it is impossible for the  informed  reader  to  understand
what the Judge's actual conclusion is. He relied on the grant of  permission
to appeal which, he says, proceeds on the  same  logic.  In  any  event,  Mr
Devlin told me that there are no clear findings in relation  to  conversion,
and inadequate consideration has been given to  the  risk  created  for  the
appellant on return.

(c) Mr Devlin told me that even  if  the  appellant  has  not  converted  to
Christianity, even if the appellant has  not  renounced  Islam,  it  is  the
perception of the Iranians authorities which is relevant to the question  of
risk on return. He told me that the  decision  lacks  consideration  of  the
perception of the Iranian authorities. He relied  on  R  (SA  Iran)  v  SSHD
[2012] EWHC 2725; SSH & HR (illegal exit;  failed  asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
[2016] UKUT 00308; and MSM (Somalia) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 715.

(d)  Mr  Devlin  next  took  me  to  the  respondent's  Country  Policy  and
Information Note,  Iran:  Christians  and  Christian  converts,  version  3,
February 2017 (in particular 8.1.1). He told me that the decision  does  not
make it clear whether or not the Judge is satisfied that the  appellant  has
converted from Islam and that, in any event,  the  Judge  has  not  properly
considered risk on return. He told me that those are material errors of  law
and urged me to set the decision aside.

6. (a) For the respondent, Ms O'Brien told me that  the  grounds  of  appeal
and submissions from counsel for  the  appellant  make  it  clear  that  the
Judges credibility findings go without challenge. At [68]  the  Judge  found
that the appellant is not a convert. She told me that finding is  absolutely
clear and beyond challenge. She told me that what is argued  in  support  of
the appeal is an argument which had not been placed  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal. Ms O'Brien took me to  the  skeleton  argument  prepared  for  the
First-tier tribunal. That skeleton argument is 17 Pages  Long.  The  caselaw
Mr Devlin referred me to was not drawn to the First-tier Judge's  attention.
Arguments in relation to risk on return centred on illegal  exit  only.  She
told me that the question of the authorities' perception is not  a  Robinson
obvious point.

(b) Ms O'Brien told me that the decision does not contain  errors,  material
or otherwise. She told me that the decision is carefully reasoned  decision,
containing clear findings  of  fact  leading  the  judge  to  evidence-based
conclusions, which are well within the range  of  conclusions  available  to
the Judge. She urged me  to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision
promulgated on 2 February 2017 to stand.

Analysis

7. Between [1] and [7] of the decision the Judge sets out the background  to
this appeal and summarises both parties' positions.  Between  [8]  and  [10]
the Judge correctly sets out the relevant law and the grounds of appeal.  At
[11] the Judge records the documentary evidence that was placed before  her,
and then between [12] and [40]  the  Judge  summarises  the  oral  evidence.
Between [41] and [54] the Judge records  submissions  which  were  made  for
both parties and at [55] the Judge declares that she would  take  a  rounded
assessment of each strand of evidence when considering credibility.

8. The Judge's findings and reasons are set out between [56]  and  [68].  Ms
O'Brien is correct to say that  there  is  no  realistic  challenge  to  the
Judge's credibility findings.  What  is  argued  is  that  [67]  creates  an
ambiguity. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  is
arguable that the Judge  has  not  made  findings  on  whether  or  not  the
appellant has converted, and what  impact  such  conversion  would  have  on
return to Iran. The second sentence of the grant  of  permission  to  appeal
asks whether or not the Judge's findings in  relation  to  evangelising  are
properly brought to a conclusion.

9. Between [57] and [61] the Judge considers the appellant's account of  his
reasons for fleeing Iran and finds each aspect of that part of  his  account
to be incredible. No challenge is take to those findings. By  the  time  the
informed reader has read to the end of [61] of the decision, he will  be  in
no doubt that the appellant's account of an attraction to  Christianity  and
attending worship in Christian house churches in Iran is  rejected.  By  the
end of [61]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  has  made  it  clear  that  the
appellant's account of  fleeing  Iran  to  avoid  religious  persecution  is
rejected.

10.  Between  [63]  and  [66]  the  Judge  considers  the  account  of   the
appellant's practice as either a Christian or a  Jehovah's  Witness  in  the
UK. The Judge is critical of the appellant's account and sets  out  adequate
reasons for those criticisms. Those criticisms are drawn  into  sharp  focus
by the second sentence of [68] where the Judge says

      "As I have stated and as it is clear I do not  believe  the  appellant
      has converted, therefore this aspect of his claim falls."

11. The Judge makes a clear and reasoned finding that the appellant has  not
converted from Islam.

12. The first sentence of [67] says

      "It also appears to me that the appellant has overstated the fact that
      he will evangelise."

13. If the first sentence of [67] was  viewed  in  isolation,  the  informed
reader might wonder why the Judge has turned her attention  from  conversion
to evangelisation, but it is wrong to take  one  sentence  in  isolation.  A
fair reading of the entirety of [67]  makes  it  clear  that  the  Judge  is
commenting on something  that  the  appellant  said.  It  was  part  of  the
appellant's evidence that he is driven to evangelise. It is correct for  the
Judge to analyse the evidence. When [67] is read in its entirety, it can  be
seen that the Judge is considering a drive to  evangelise  as  part  of  the
evidence of conversion.  The  Judge  rejects  the  evidence  of  conversion,
having considered each adminicle of evidence offered  by  the  appellant  to
support his account.

14. It is also wrong to read [67] in isolation. There are 68  paragraphs  to
this decision. The decision must be read as a whole. When read  as  a  whole
it is clear that the Judge carefully analyses the evidence.  Ms  O'Brien  is
correct that there are no criticisms of the  Judge's  credibility  findings.
The Judge finds  that  the  appellant  lacks  credibility  and  rejects  his
account.  The  Judge  unambiguously  rejects  the  appellant's  account   of
conversion. As part of that exercise,  the  Judge  rejects  the  appellant's
account of the drive to evangelise. It is clear that the  Judge  finds  that
the appellant's account is a fabrication.

15. What the Judge makes abundantly  clear  is  that  the  appellant's  case
turned on the  questions  of  credibility.  The  Judge  sets  out  carefully
balanced for reasons finding that she does not believe the appellant.

16.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

17. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

CONCLUSION

18. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

19. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 8 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



