
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03238/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2016                   |On 3 January 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    MSAMS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Shilliday, Counsel instructed by DJ Webb & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Egypt born  on  30  November
    1992 and appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of  the
    respondent  dated  23  March  2016  to  refuse  to  grant  him   asylum
    /humanitarian protection.  In a decision promulgated on 12 October 2016
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  O'Garro  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed and permission was granted on the  grounds  that
    the judge at [48] of the decision and reasons stated that she  had  not
    been provided with a "copy  of  the  judgment  of  the  court  itself".
    However, as identified by  the  permission  judge,  this  document  was
    provided by the appellant to  the  respondent  and  is  at  L1  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  The permission to appeal identified that this  was
    a central issue in the assessment  of  the  appellant's  case  and  his
    credibility and therefore it is arguable that the judge's assessment of
    the case was flawed.

Error of Law

 3. Mr Whitwell did not concede this ground although  he  did  accept  that
    there was indeed a document at L1 and L2 of the appellant's bundle,  L1
    being the translation and L2 being a copy of the original document.  In
    the Rule 24 response the respondent asserted that it was  not  entirely
    clear what the First-tier Tribunal Judge had meant when she  said  that
    the judgment of the court had  not  been  provided.   Although  it  was
    accepted that there was a document at L1  which  recited  the  sentence
    bestowed upon the appellant headed  "General  Prosecution  Certificate"
    and referred to as a "Certificate Confirming Prison  Sentence"  in  the
    PF1 bundle, the document, in the respondent's assertion, did not appear
    to be signed or to identify a  member  of  the  judiciary  and  it  was
    submitted that this is perhaps what the First-tier Tribunal Judge meant
    when she stated at  [48]  that  "the  court's  judgment  has  not  been
    provided by the appellant and I find that  it  has  not  been  provided
    because it does not exist".

 4.  Mr  Whitwell  quite  properly  acknowledged  that  he  was   in   some
    difficulties in defending this position, not least because  the  Arabic
    document clearly shows a  signature  and  the  judge  stated  that  the
    document did not exist rather than stating that she did not accept that
    the document at L1 and L2 purported to be that  document.   Indeed  the
    judge went on to criticise other documents provided by  the  appellant,
    including a document referring to his court appearance in 2014 which is
    found at K1 and K2 of the bundle and appears to be in a similar  format
    to the court document at L1 and L2.

 5. Although Mr Whitwell indicated that the judge, including at [32] of her
    decision and reasons,  considered  everything  in  the  round  and  was
    clearly not satisfied that this appellant was credible, in my view  the
    respondent is unable in this case to simply rely on the judge's overall
    credibility findings.  The judge specifically cited the lack of a court
    judgment  document  as  integral,  and  arguably   central,   to   that
    credibility assessment.  It cannot be  said,  even  given  the  judge's
    criticisms of the appellant's credibility, that had she considered  the
    document and translation at  L1  and  L2  she  would  have  nonetheless
    inevitably rejected the appellant's credibility.

 6. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made
    a material error of fact of such significance that  it  constitutes  an
    error of law in finding that there was no copy of the  judgment  before
    the Tribunal.  However, I reject Mr Shilliday's submission,  which  was
    misconceived, that this was an issue of procedural unfairness.  Neither
    am I with him on  his  grounds  in  relation  to  the  general  claimed
    procedural unfairness in the judge  considering  credibility  when  the
    Presenting Officer made  no  submissions  nor  cross-examined  on  that
    issue.  The issue of credibility was addressed at length in the Reasons
    for Refusal Letter of the respondent dated 22 March 2016.  It  was  not
    suggested by Mr Shilliday that the  Presenting  Officer  had  made  any
    concession in relation to credibility.  In light of this it was open to
    the judge to proceed to consider that credibility was an issue.

 7. However, as I have found that the mistake of the judge at [48]  of  her
    decision undermines her credibility assessment that is  sufficient  for
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings are preserved.

 8. Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, courts and enforcement  Act
    2007 and Practice Statement 7.2, the nature and extent of judicial fact
    finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by
    any judge other than Judge O'Garro.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid and no fee award is therefore applicable or appropriate.


Signed                                  Date:  30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

