
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03660/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 January 2017                    |On 30 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 Saba Hagos
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey, instructed by Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Saba Hagos, was born on 1 January 1990 and claims to  be
    a  citizen  of  Eritrea.   She  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 26 November 2015 to give directions for her removal to
    Eritrea.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Mensah)  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 13 October 2016 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are a number of challenges to the decision.  The judge had  found
    that the appellant's account  of  her  childhood  in  Eritrea  was  not
    credible.  At [15], she wrote:

         The appellant claims she moved back to Eritrea in 2000 for about  2
         years. This would have been when she was aged  10-12.  The  refusal
         letter evidences compulsory education in Eritrea to  age  14  years
         and argues it is not credible the appellant didn't  go  to  school.
         There is no evidence either way as to whether children do remain at
         home and what happens if they don't go to school  in  Eritrea.  The
         appellant says she assisted her mother but I am not satisfied  this
         is credible as the appellant's mother was able to support them  for
         10 years in Ethiopia running a coffee shop without the  appellant's
         assistance. Further it is not credible the appellant would not have
         attended compulsory education as  she  claims  she  couldn't  speak
         Tigrinya and this would have  been  an  opportunity  to  learn  the
         native language and re-settle in her country of birth.  Further,  I
         find it undermines her claimed history even further that she  spent
         2 years in Eritrea aged 10-12 and yet is unable to  speak  no  more
         than a few basic words of Tigrinya. It is not  credible  she  would
         not have become more conversant in Tigrinya  if  she  had  spent  2
         years there at such an age. This  adds  to  further  undermine  her
         claim to have not picked up the language from her parents.

 3. In so far as they challenge this analysis of credibility,  the  grounds
    of appeal are no more than a disagreement with findings which were open
    to  the  judge  on  the  evidence.   In  particular,  her  observations
    regarding the appellant's inability to speak Tigrinya are  particularly
    pertinent.  There is no inconsistency in the judge's findings regarding
    education in Eritrea; the judge observes that  there  was  no  evidence
    "either way" as to whether the children had remained at home or went to
    school.

 4. The appellant asserts that  the  judge  wrongly  held  it  against  the
    appellant that she could not  produce  corroborative  evidence  of  her
    claim to having remained in Sudan.  The appellant claimed to have lived
    in Sudan from the ages of 14-24 years with her mother and yet  had  not
    produced any evidence from the mother.  It was open  to  the  judge  to
    find that it was not credible that the appellant had failed to stay  in
    touch with her mother.

 5. The judge heard evidence from a witness, Mr Tesfay.  The grounds assert
    that the evidence of the witness only  supported  the  appellant's  own
    account whereas the judge observed [17] that his evidence "did tend  to
    support the appellant's claims and I have decided to consider it in the
    round with the rest of the evidence".  I see no error in that approach.
     The judge accurately observed that the evidence  was  consistent  with
    that of the appellant but she was also careful to consider the evidence
    in the round; the suggestion in the grounds of appeal that  she  should
    have attached especial evidence to  this  witness's  testimony  is  not
    supportable.

 6. The judge found that the appellant was not a Pentecostal Christian.  At
    [19], she wrote:

         The letter from the Grace Gospel  Church  in  Leeds  says  she  has
         attended since the  21  August  2015  on  Wednesdays,  Fridays  and
         Sundays. The Reverend appears to have based his belief that she  is
         a genuine Pentecostal on the fact that she has so attended. This is
         rather limited but I can understand that it is not the role of  the
         Reverend to assess the credibility of his congregation. As  he  has
         not been called to give evidence I have no further  information  as
         his background and experience of asylum. I am unable  to  hear  any
         more from him about his view and how it  was  formed.  There  is  a
         second letter from a representative of a Lambeth Eritrean Community
         group. This is one of many letters from this  organisation  that  I
         have seen lately. They all follow a standard format  and  cite  the
         same methodology. This is very unhelpful as the  letter  refers  to
         "Elders" from the same region who asked questions to establish  the
         appellant's identity and nationality. There is  no  record  of  who
         those individuals are or their status in the UK. There is no record
         of the questions that were asked or the answers  that  were  given.
         There is no record of what they knew about the  appellant's  asylum
         claim or  if  they  had  seen  the  refusal  letter  or  record  of
         interview. The author of the letter has not attended to provide any
         further information. This letter is of limited assistance in  those
         circumstances.

    The grounds do not challenge these detailed reasons given by the  judge
    for finding that the appellant had a limited knowledge  of  Pentecostal
    Christianity; they only refer to a number of answers she  gave  at  her
    asylum interview which the appellant claims indicate a knowledge of the
    religion.  There was no reason  to  suppose  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider the interview record when considering the evidence as a whole.
    There was nothing in the interview record which might compel the  judge
    to find, contrary to  other  evidence,  that  the  appellant's  claimed
    religious beliefs were genuine.  The judge was also  entitled  to  find
    that it was not credible that the appellant (who claimed to  have  been
    "active in the Pentecostal faith from her birth") waited until she  was
    24 years old before she was baptised.  The judge is not, as the grounds
    assert, substituting her own reasoning for that of the appellant.   She
    is making a finding of fact based on the totality of the evidence.  The
    ground of appeal is no more than a disagreement with that finding.

 7. The judge found that the appellant was not an Eritrean  national.   The
    respondent had asserted that the appellant was  an  Ethiopian  citizen.
    The grounds complain that the judge did not make a positive finding  as
    to whether or not she was an Ethiopian citizen.  That she failed to  do
    so is not material.  The appellant claimed to be Eritrean and the judge
    found, giving clear and cogent reasons to support her finding, that she
    was not.  It was not necessary, in the circumstances, for the judge  to
    go beyond that and determine the true nationality of the appellant.

 8. For the reasons I have stated, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

