
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03179/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th February 2018                          |On 6th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    R J J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iraq who said he was  born  on  22nd
    January 2000.  He arrived in the UK on 23rd September 2016 and  applied
    for asylum.  That application was refused for the reasons given  in  an
    Asylum Decision dated 16th March 2017.  The Appellant appealed, and his
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Row  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 12th September 2017.  He  decided  to  dismiss
    the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds for the reasons given  in
    his Decision dated 15th September 2017.  The Appellant sought leave  to
    appeal that decision and on 20th  November  2017  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis that at the time of his claim
    he was 16 years of age and an ethnic Kurd from Kirkuk.   The  Appellant
    feared persecution if he returned  to  Kirkuk  from  ISIS  because  his
    father had been a member of the Ba'ath Party.

 4.  The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  because  although  he  found   the
    Appellant's evidence to be plausible and that any discrepancies in that
    evidence were not of any consequence, he found the Appellant lacking in
    credibility and therefore although the Appellant  was  an  ethnic  Kurd
    from Kirkuk he was not at risk on return  because  the  Judge  did  not
    believe the Appellant's account of events in Iraq.   Further,  although
    the Appellant was at risk on return to Kirkuk following the decision in
    AA (Iraq) and SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  it  would  be  safe  and  not
    unreasonable for the Appellant to return elsewhere in the IKR.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Bedford argued that the Judge had erred in
    coming to  these  conclusions.   Although  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant satisfied the conditions set out in paragraph 339L of HC 395,
    the Judge had failed to give the Appellant the benefit of the doubt  in
    his  assessment  of  credibility.   Further,   when   considering   the
    Appellant's account, the Judge had failed  to  take  into  account  the
    objective evidence relating to the conditions in Kirkuk at the relevant
    time.  As regards the Judge's age  assessment,  he  had  put  too  much
    weight on the absence of an independent social  worker's  report.   The
    Judge had ignored the Appellant's evidence as to his family  background
    and childhood.  Further, he had relied too heavily on the demeanour  of
    the Appellant, and had failed to take account of the possibility of the
    Appellant being a vulnerable witness by  virtue  of  his  age  and  the
    advice of the Presidential Guidance in that event.  Finally, the  Judge
    had not dealt with the Appellant's account of what he had  said  whilst
    in Greece during his journey to the UK.

 6. In response, Mr Mills argued that there had been no such errors of law.
     He pointed out that the  Appellant  had  failed  to  satisfy  all  the
    conditions of paragraph 339L of HC 395, particularly paragraph  399L(v)
    as the Judge had made an adverse finding  as  to  general  credibility.
    The Judge had not insisted upon corroborative evidence.  As regards the
    age assessment, the Judge had explained his decision at  paragraphs  20
    and 21 of the Decision.  He had been entitled to take into account that
    there had been no response from the Appellant to the  original  adverse
    age assessment.  The Skeleton  Argument  presented  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been silent on the subject.   Again  the  Judge  had  been
    entitled to take account of his  adverse  general  credibility  finding
    when considering the Appellant's claims as to his age.  The  Judge  had
    adopted a holistic approach to credibility.  Finally, Mr  Mills  argued
    that the Guidance as to vulnerability did not apply when the Judge made
    a clear-cut finding that the Appellant was well over 18 years  of  age.
    The Judge had referred to the finding in AA (Iraq) at paragraph  39  of
    the  Decision  and  clearly  had  it  in  mind  when  considering   the
    credibility of the Appellant.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The criticisms of the Decision  relate  entirely  to
    the Judge's findings as to the credibility of  the  Appellant.   In  my
    view the Judge came to a conclusion about the  Appellant's  credibility
    open to him upon the evidence before him and which he  fully  explained
    at paragraphs 23 to 39 inclusive of the Decision.  The  Judge  found  a
    lack of corroborative evidence,  but  did  not  treat  that  factor  as
    determinative.  The Judge considered paragraph 339L of HC 395 but as Mr
    Mills argued, this paragraph could not operate to the  benefit  of  the
    Appellant  as  the  Judge  made  an  adverse  finding  as  to   general
    credibility and therefore the conditions of that paragraph were not all
    met.  The Judge found that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  plausible  in
    general terms and in that connection  considered  the  decision  in  AA
    (Iraq) but he concluded that the Appellant had persistently lied  about
    his age, and the Appellant had done little to help himself  by  way  of
    obtaining documentary evidence.  The Judge also found  the  Appellant's
    credibility to be damaged by operation of Section 8 of the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  The Judge applied
    the correct standard of proof and looked at in the round,  his  finding
    as to credibility cannot be faulted.

 8. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the  Judge.



Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside that decision.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue
    for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated 5th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
