
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03737/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7th November 2017                  |On 28th December 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr E R
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel, instructed by Slade & Fletcher
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [ ] 1988 and  he  entered
    the United Kingdom on 17th  May  2016.   In  his  asylum  interview  he
    confirmed his problems began on 26th December 2009 when his cousin M  I
    stabbed and killed K G in a nightclub in Greece.  M I handed himself in
    for the murder and was imprisoned but the  killing  initiated  a  blood
    feud between his family and  the  G  family,  who  vowed  to  kill  the
    assailant "and other members of your family".  The appellant went  into
    hiding and between 2009 and 2015 he lived between Greece  and  Albania.
    He had never encountered any of the G family and on 29th July  2015  he
    was married to a Greek national who lived in Greece.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin heard the  appeal  of  the  appellant
    against the Secretary of State's refusal of the asylum  and  protection
    claim on 9th May 2017 and on the same date recorded that he refused  an
    application for an adjournment on the grounds  of  in  fact  inadequate
    preparation.  The refusal decision was  dated  12th  April  2017.   The
    judge noted at paragraph 2:

    "I indicated I was satisfied it would be fair and just  to  proceed  as
         four weeks had passed  since  the  refusal,  the  appellant  and  a
         witness had made statements which they were both present  to  adopt
         and Mrs Gore had been able to provide a skeleton argument."

 3. In the event, the First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed  the  appellant's
    claim  on  all  grounds  and  the  appellant's  representatives  sought
    permission to appeal on the following basis.

  The appellant had sought  further  time  to  adduce  further  documentary
       evidence, inter alia evidence of the criminal proceedings before  the
       Greek courts.  The absence of  that  evidence  was  material  to  the
       determination of the appeal as at paragraph 24 the judge stated:

         "The absence of any such documentary  evidence  is,  I  find,  both
             notable  and  significant.   It  leaves  the  'primary   fact'
             identified by Mrs Gore herself as 'fundamental' wholly reliant
             on the appellant's word and an attestation  letter  for  which
             there is no proof of posting, a letter which is in itself  odd
             for  the  reasons  given  above,  and  which   refers   to   a
             reconciliation  of  which  the  appellant   clearly   had   no
             knowledge.  I now address other issues."

  It was clear on the judge's own analysis the  evidence  was  critical  or
       capable of making a material difference to the outcome.  The  judge's
       decision to refuse the  appellant  sufficient  time  to  obtain  that
       evidence was irrational in the light of his  own  subsequent  finding
       and procedurally unfair.  The appellant  had  been  deprived  of  the
       opportunity to obtain that evidence.

  It was not relevant that the appellant had been in the country  for  very
       nearly a year  and  could  have  made  arrangements  to  obtain  that
       evidence in that time because first, the  appellant  only  discovered
       the detail in the case against him following receipt of the  decision
       to refuse his protection claim.  It  was  axiomatic  that  evidential
       deficiencies were often first identified and  sought  to  be  met  by
       appellants at the appeal stage and secondly, the appeal  came  before
       the First-tier Tribunal only four weeks after the decision to  refuse
       asylum had been made.  That  left  the  appellant  very  little  time
       indeed to prepare his appeal and obtain  the  documentation  that  he
       sought to rely on.  The appellant was in detention.

  The primary question for the Tribunal when determining the application to
       adjourn was whether the evidence the appellant sought time to  obtain
       was important evidence material to the disposal of the appeal and  it
       clearly was, on the judge's own analysis.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that having placed weight
    on the absence of evidence from Greece it was arguable that  the  judge
    unfairly refused and adjournment.  The appellant  was  only  on  notice
    that this was a matter that he would need to prove for a  much  shorter
    period.

 5. At the hearing Ms Foot made reference to SH (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1284  and  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  whereby  the  test  in
    granting an adjournment was whether there was fairness.

 6. In conclusion, a central issue to the appeal is whether the appellant's
    family was indeed engaged in a blood feud and that was an aspect  which
    was specifically rejected in the reasons for refusal letter.  The judge
    at the outset refused  the  adjournment  on  the  basis  of  inadequate
    preparation but the reasons for refusal letter was issued on 12th April
    2017 whilst the appeal was heard on 9th May 2017, just over three weeks
    later.  The full extent of the case against the appellant was not known
    until the date of the refusal, specifically that the Secretary of State
    did not accept that the appellant was involved or engaged  in  a  blood
    feud and therefore, contrary to the judge's findings, there had  indeed
    been limited time to seek such documents.  The  judge  acknowledged  at
    paragraph 24 that the absence of such  documentary  evidence  was  both
    "notable and significant' and it left the 'primary fact' identified  by
    Mrs Gore herself as 'fundamental', wholly reliant  on  the  appellant's
    word and an attestation letter for which there is no proof of posting".

 7. There was no acceptance of the blood feud and the case was  decided  on
    that basis without sufficient opportunity afforded to the appellant  to
    obtain the documents and indeed for  the  respondent  to  verify  those
    documents from the Greek courts.  I can appreciate that the  judge  was
    not responsible for the speed of the listing in this matter  which  did
    cause its own complications.

 8. Mr Tufan at the hearing conceded that there was indeed an error of  law
    and such I return the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing
    de novo.  The issue of the blood feud is fundamental.



Notice of Decision

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Helen Rimington                       Date Signed 28th November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

