
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03035/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|by Microsoft Teams                              |                              |
|                                                |On 12 July 2021               |
|On 28 June 2021                                 |                              |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                               A A (Palestine)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Stuart McTaggart of Counsel, instructed by R P
Crawford & Co,                  solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of A A  who is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on  14  March  2019  to  refuse  him  refugee  status  under  the  1951
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds. The appellant was born in Saudi Arabia
    but has lived in the Palestinian Territories since 1993, when he was  7
    years old, until he came to the United Kingdom in 2018.

 2. The  appellant  has  a  passport  in  his  own  name,  issued  by  'the
    Palestinian Authority' in September  2014  and  valid  until  September
    2019.  That is the document on which he travelled.  It records that  he
    was born in Saudi Arabia and was living in Ramallah when  the  passport
    was issued.

 3. The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  lawfully,  with  a  Tier  4
    Student visa, on 8 September 2018, arriving first at Heathrow and  then
    travelling on to Belfast on 9 September 2018.   His  asylum  claim  was
    made on 11 September 2018 and is a sur place claim based on information
    which came to him after his arrival, from his brother who is  still  in
    Gaza.

 4. Vulnerable appellant. The appellant has mental health issues.  He is  a
    vulnerable person and is  entitled  to  be  treated  appropriately,  in
    accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance No 2 of  2010:   Child,
    Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance.  No adjustments were
    sought in this respect, save that the  appellant  gave  evidence  today
    from his solicitors' offices rather than his home.

 5. Mode of hearing.  The hearing today took place  remotely  by  Microsoft
    Teams.  Despite some initial technical difficulties, the remote hearing
    caused no significant problems.  I am satisfied that all  parties  were
    in a quiet and private place and that the hearing was completed fairly,
    with the cooperation of both representatives.

Background

 6. The appellant was born in the Saudi Arabia in 1986 and is 35 years  old
    now.  He is an English teacher: he  qualified  at  Al-Aqsa  University,
    Gaza, and went on to teach in two private schools in Gaza before coming
    to the United Kingdom.

 7. Before coming to the United Kingdom, the appellant had  twice  attended
    teachers' demonstrations in Gaza, on 7 February  2017  and  7  February
    2018.   State  school  teachers  and  other  government  employees   in
    Palestine were campaigning against the reduction of their  salaries  by
    Hamas.  The appellant was not a state school teacher, but attended  and
    was arrested on both occasions.  In February 2017, he was charged  with
    disturbing the stability of the  country,  his  USB  flash  drives  and
    electronic devices were confiscated, and he was released after 24 hours
    with a warning not to demonstrate again.

 8. At some point in 2017 or 2018, shots were fired  into  the  appellant's
    home and one came into his room and hit the wall.  After attending  the
    February 2018 demonstration, the  appellant  was  arrested  again,  and
    questioned about his communications with 'foreign powers' and with  the
    Ramallah authorities.  Hamas wanted to know how the  communication  was
    organised.  They used sleep deprivation, withholding of  food,  dousing
    him in cold water and removing blankets, but the appellant had  nothing
    to tell them.  He  was  charged  again  with  destabilising  the  Hamas
    government and also with communicating with the  Ramallah  authorities.
    The appellant was released, after 48 hours' detention.  It  is  unclear
    what became of the charges against him.

 9. The appellant decided to come to  the  United  Kingdom  to  study.   He
    applied to Queen's University Belfast.  He did not get an offer for the
    course he really wanted, but he was offered an Arts  Foundation  for  a
    Masters' degree in translation, which he accepted.  In  the  event,  he
    never attended the course, partly because it was not the one he wanted,
    but also because he was suffering from depression, for which he takes a
    low dose of mirtazapine, an anti-depressant. The  medical  evidence  is
    that he still has depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.

10. About two days after his arrival in Belfast,  on  10  or  11  September
    2018, the appellant heard from his brother in Gaza.  When  he  did  not
    attend work, the Hamas authorities had come looking for  the  appellant
    at the family home.  They arrested and questioned his  brother,  saying
    that when they found the appellant they would shoot him, as  they  knew
    him to be in touch with the Ramallah authorities.

11. Following receipt of that information, on 11 September 2018, just three
    days after his arrival in the United  Kingdom,  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum. On 12 September 2018, when  registration  for  his  translation
    course at Queen's University Belfast  opened,  the  appellant  did  not
    register.  He has never attended the course.

Refusal letter

12. In her refusal letter of 14 March 2019, the  respondent  accepted  that
    the appellant originated in the Palestinian Territories, by  reason  of
    his possession of a Palestinian Authority passport.  She also  accepted
    that the appellant's account of Hamas' control  and  behaviour  in  the
    Palestinian Territories was consistent with  external  materials.   The
    country materials supported the appellant's account that Hamas was  the
    de facto government of the occupied Palestinian Territories,  and  that
    it had  strict  control  of  the  Palestinian  Territories,  backed  by
    sophisticated internal security services.

13. The respondent accepted that arbitrary arrests and abuses were  common,
    and that there was impunity for  any  abuses  committed  by  the  Hamas
    security services.  The conditions of  detention  which  the  appellant
    described, including the seizure  of  his  USB  drives  and  electronic
    devices, were  consistent  with  external  sources.  At  [60-[70],  the
    respondent set out elements  of  the  appellant's  account  which  were
    supported by the external country evidence.

14.  The  respondent's  reasons  for  rejecting  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's core  account  are  given  principally  under  the  heading
    'General Credibility' at [85]-[90], where the respondent placed  weight
    on the appellant's failure to enrol in his course at Queen's University
    Belfast,  where  he  had  enrolled  because  he  could   not   continue
    translation studies in Gaza (see the asylum interview  at  [71]).   The
    respondent noted that  courses  in  English  translation  and  advanced
    English translation were still offered at Al-Aqsa University, where the
    appellant had previously studied.

15. Elsewhere in her letter, the respondent stated that the dates  provided
    for the demonstrations did not match the external  country  information
    available to her and that Hamas had limited  impact  on  the  education
    system in Gaza.  She was concerned to understand why the appellant  had
    twice been released  from  Hamas  detention,  each  time  on  the  same
    conditions of release, not to participate in future demonstrations  and
    not to disturb the peace.   The respondent could not understand why the
    appellant had not been prosecuted, or at least detained  longer.    She
    was also concerned that  Hamas  had  not  confiscated  the  appellant's
    travel documents on either occasion.

16. The respondent was surprised that Hamas became aware of the appellant's
    absence from his teaching job after only 4 or 5 days,  questioning  his
    brother in the week of the 6th-11th September, after the appellant  had
    already travelled out of Gaza.  The  respondent  considered  that  this
    would require Hamas to have been monitoring the appellant's  attendance
    at his school from February 2018  to  September  2018,  but  could  not
    understand why  they  should  do  so  after  only  two  attendances  at
    demonstrations.

17. The respondent was concerned that she had been unable  to  verify  that
    the demonstrations on 7 February 2017 and 7  February  2018  had  taken
    place.  She considered it surprising that the appellant  had  not  been
    pursued further between the two arrests.  She refused the claim and the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

18. As the decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside, the only
    relevant matters in that decision are any record of oral evidence given
    by the appellant.   Unfortunately, it is not possible to  discern  from
    First-tier Judge Fox's  decision  whether  the  evidence  recorded  was
    simply that in the appellant's statements (which  I  have)  or  whether
    oral evidence was received.

19. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Appellant's oral evidence

20. The appellant adopted his two witness statements,  the  first  prepared
    for the hearing of 3 October 2019, and the second dated 31 March  2021,
    bringing forward some additional evidence.  The evidence in  the  first
    statement has already been summarised.

21. With his second statement, the appellant produced a copy document  from
    the Military Justice Commission of the Permanent Military Court of  the
    State of Palestine, obtained by  his  brother  and  sent  to  him  over
    WhatsApp at the end of April 2020.  The document is  dated  26  January
    2020.  It says this:

         "In accordance with the provisions of Title IX of the Revolutionary
         Procedures Act 1979, the Permanent Military Court in Gaza issued  a
         grace order for the Defendant [personal details]  of  the  city  of
         Rafah and currently of unknown location.

         The period of ten days from today Sunday  26/01/2020  to  surrender
         himself to the Military Judiciary - Al Shatae al Shamaly  District.
         In the event that he does not surrender himself to justice, he will
         be considered a fugitive from justice and tried in  absentia.   The
         court ordered all members of the  security  forces  to  arrest  the
         above-mentioned person  and  to  hand  him  over  to  the  Military
         Judiciary.  For anyone who knows his whereabouts, they must  report
         it otherwise they will be considered [to be] harbouring a  fugitive
         from justice."

    The document bears the seal of the State of Palestine, Military Justice
    Commission, twice, once with an illegible signature,  and  the  second,
    signed by the Director of the Courts Department.  The original  of  the
    Military Court document was not  available  to  the  Tribunal  and  the
    appellant does not have it: he received it as  an  image  in  WhatsApp,
    with a message from his brother (which he produces) saying  'the  paper
    is with me'.  The brother  has  since  deleted  it  from  the  WhatsApp
    conversation.

22. The statements having been adopted,  the  appellant  was  tendered  for
    cross-examination.    In cross-examination, the appellant said  he  had
    no further information about the Military Court document.  He  had  not
    contacted his family or his brother in Gaza since  April  2020.   There
    was a conflict raging there and it was not easy to keep in contact.  He
    did not know whether there had in fact been a  trial  in  absentia.  He
    presumed the charge to be the same one, that of destabilising the Hamas
    government.

23. The appellant said that Hamas would know that he was no longer  in  the
    Palestinian Territories: that was why they said he  was  'currently  of
    unknown location' in the document.   Gaza was a very small area and  it
    was not very hard to gather information.  His home city was  small  and
    it was very easy to see whether someone  was  missing.   The  appellant
    said his brother had been interrogated again in April 2021, as before.

24. The Hamas authorities had not  known  the  appellant  was  leaving  the
    Palestinian Territories.  He used an agent to get him through the Rafah
    crossing.  In 2018, that area was not yet under Hamas control.  He  did
    not  know  how  the  agent  had  arranged  it;  that  was  the  agent's
    responsibility, and the agent had carried it out.

25. The appellant confirmed that he disagreed with Hamas.

26. There was no re-examination.





Medical evidence

27. There is no medico-legal report to assist the  Tribunal.   His  general
    medical practitioner's computer records show that  that  the  appellant
    was taking no regular medication when  he  first  signed  up  with  the
    practice in November 2018.

28. However, by 7 January  2019,  he  was  experiencing  'waves  of  social
    anxiety, reduced appetite, anhedonia, 'ntlnwl  or  [suicidal  ideation]
    numbness', hyper arousal in bed at night and nightmares.   The  history
    record included his having been arrested twice in  Palestine,  and  ill
    treated in custody, including sleep deprivation and having  cold  water
    thrown over him.  The  doctor  considered  that  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder was a possibility.  The appellant  was  prescribed  Fluoxetine
    and Propranolol, and the GP notes stated that he would be referred  for
    cognitive behavioural therapy to the  mental  health  resource  centre.
    Later, the Fluoxetine prescription  was  changed  to  Mirtazapine,  for
    reasons unconnected with this case.

29. Seen on 6 February 2019, the appellant had received an appointment  for
    cognitive behavioural therapy at the end of February.  He was  sleeping
    better but his appetite was poor.  The  appellant  ate  only  oats  and
    milk, and he sometimes went two days without eating.  He  felt  he  was
    getting a bit better: he had more energy  and  the  hyper  arousal  had
    improved.  He still felt on edge walking in the street.   He also had a
    problem with his knee following a fall in 2016.

30. A letter dated 28 February 2019 from Ms Naomi Ferguson, a mental health
    social worker with the Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, noted that
    the appellant had moved around a lot: he  was  born  in  Saudi  Arabia,
    moved to Jordan, and began living in Palestine aged 7, in the  care  of
    his father, following the breakdown of his parents' relationship.   The
    appellant  attended  school  in  Palestine,  but   had   no   long-term
    friendships due to all the moving around.  In Belfast, he was living in
    a shared house, not allowed to work, and received minimal benefits.

31. The appellant presented well, but had anxious body language and limited
    eye contact.  He was 'a vague historian at  times'  and  his  mood  was
    subjectively and objectively low.  There were no signs or  symptoms  of
    psychosis observed  or  reported.  The  appellant  complained  of  poor
    concentration and memory, panic attacks, hypervigilance and nightmares.
     The appellant had experienced some episodes of  depersonalisation  and
    derealisation.   He  was  referred  for  'psychoeducational  input  and
    monitoring of mood', with  cognitive  behavioural  therapy  not  to  be
    considered  until  his  mental  health  and  living  circumstances  had
    stabilised.  The appellant  was  given  information  on  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and low mood.

32. The remaining medical documents  support  the  above  records  and  add
    nothing of substance.





Upper Tribunal hearing

33. In oral submissions, Ms Everett relied on the refusal letter and argued
    that the appellant's account was not credible to the required  standard
    for international protection claims.    She accepted that  the  country
    background  evidence  suggested  that  adverse  attention  from   Hamas
    following demonstrations did occur, but it was surprising  that  having
    twice been warned and released, the appellant had managed to leave Gaza
    at the Rafah crossing without difficulty.  It was true  that  the  Gaza
    strip was a small area, but that was  double-edged:  if  the  appellant
    were of interest to Hamas, he would have had  more  difficulty  leaving
    the area.

34. As regards the Military Court document, Ms Everett said it was puzzling
    that there was no more recent information from the  appellant's  family
    as to whether the in absentia trial had occurred, and if so,  what  had
    been the outcome.  With reference to HJ (Iran) the Tribunal should  ask
    itself  whether  the  appellant's  anti-Hamas  position  was  his  real
    opinion, or an embellishment.

35. For the  appellant,  Mr  McTaggart  relied  on  the  skeleton  argument
    provided by his predecessor.  The author, Mr Stephen Hollywood  of  the
    appellants' former solicitors Andrew Russell & Co, made  the  following
    points:

    1) The appellant had been granted a Tier 4 visa for a Masters course in
       Belfast, and the right to work during the period of his studies.  It
       was reasonable to conclude that  the  respondent  in  so  doing  had
       accepted his academic history and that he is a teacher. Further, his
       asylum claim placed him in a  much  more  vulnerable  financial  and
       personal  situation,  which  Mr  Hollywood   described   as   having
       'knowingly plunged his life into  uncertainty,  poverty  and  strain
       over the outcome of his claim';




    2)  The  appeal  bundle  contained  press  reports  of  a   number   of
       demonstrations, in particular, at pages 46-51, an  article  entitled
       After the suspension of  working  in  various  ministries:  A  union
       demonstration for Gaza employees  to  demand  their  salaries  dated
       February 2018 and referring to non-payment of monthly  salaries  for
       government employees and to a demonstration.   (The  exact  date  in
       February 2018 is not given in the  article,  or  at  least,  is  not
       legible in the copy in the bundle);




    3) The country evidence indicated that journalists' ability  to  report
       on events deemed adverse to Hamas occurring in the  Gaza  region  is
       'severely compromised': see section 2(a) of the US State  Department
       Report for 2017 on Israel, Golan Heights, West  Bank  and  Gaza  and
       paragraph 13.1.1 of the  respondent's  December  2018  CPIN  on  the
       Occupied Palestinian Territories;


    4) The appellant  acted  promptly,  claiming  asylum  as  soon  as  the
       information was received from his brother;


    5) Objective evidence of his mental health difficulties was included in
       the bundle and was accepted by the respondent.   The  appellant  had
       not been fit enough to pursue his course; and that


    6) Overall, the only plausible explanation for the appellant's  actions
       and his mental ill health was that he was telling the truth and  was
       at risk in Gaza and the Occupied Territories if returned.    Removal
       to  the  Palestinian  Territories  would  also  breach  the   United
       Kingdom's international obligations under Article  3  ECHR:  see  MI
       (Palestine) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA
       Civ 1872.

36. In oral submissions,  Mr  McTaggart  reminded  me  that  the  appellant
    entered lawfully.  He had a Tier 4 visa and had paid  fees  to  Queen's
    University Belfast.  He also benefited from a �2000 scholarship and the
    right to work during his studies.

37. Although the appellant had concerns about  Hamas  when  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom arising out of his treatment in Gaza previously, it  was
    the message from his brother which had tipped the  balance  and  caused
    him to claim asylum.  This was a sur place claim.

38. The refusal letter accepted that  there  were  no  definitive  external
    credibility issues: the appellant's account was  consistent  with  what
    was known and set out in  external  country  materials,  regarding  the
    circumstances in the Gaza strip, and the Hamas de facto  government  of
    the region.

39. The appellant had post-traumatic  stress  disorder  following  his  two
    claimed detentions.  He had been referred  for  psychiatric  assessment
    and treatment, and had been unable to pursue his course. The  existence
    of his  depression  and  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  boosted  the
    credibility of his account overall, as set  out  in  letters  from  his
    previous solicitors.   The appellant had provided documents to  support
    the protests element of his claim.

40. The Military Court document should  be  regarded  as  reliable  to  the
    appropriate standard (see Tanveer Ahmed) and again,  was  corroborative
    of the appellant's account.

41. The Upper Tribunal should allow the appeal.

Analysis

42. This is an appeal which turns on the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account  and  on  the  lower  standard  of  proof  which   applies   in
    international protection claims.   Only if the appellant has not proved
    his case to the lower standard of reasonable degree  of  likelihood  or
    real risk can this appeal be dismissed.

43. Ms Everett accepted, as the respondent had in the refusal letter,  that
    the appellant's account is consistent with what is known of the country
    conditions: public servants, including teachers,  did  have  their  pay
    reduced by Hamas and did demonstrate against it, as the  press  reports
    in his bundle show, and as the respondent  has  accepted.   Hamas  does
    keep a tight rein in the country and ill-treatment occurs in detention,
    with impunity.

44. I have looked  again  at  the  respondent's  reasons  for  finding  the
    appellant's account not credible.  She conflates the  two  pre-existing
    events with the event which triggered this claim.  The proper  analysis
    seems to me to be that at least one of the demonstrations is  supported
    by a press report  at  about  the  right  time,  and  that,  given  the
    constraints on the media in Gaza, which are set out  in  the  US  State
    Department Report and the respondent's own CPIN reports,  there  is  an
    element of self-censorship which means that not all demonstrations  are
    likely to have been reported in the press.  Absence of evidence is  not
    evidence of absence.

45. The triggering event for this claim was the arrest and  questioning  of
    the  appellant's  brother,  just  after  he  left  Palestine  in  early
    September 2018, because the appellant  had  not  attended  the  schools
    where he worked for 4-5 days.  With  respect  to  the  respondent,  the
    absence of a teacher from school is an obvious matter: Hamas would  not
    need to have been tracking the appellant for seven months  for  someone
    to notice that, in the first few days of the autumn term,  he  was  not
    present in class.  The distinction drawn is without substance.

46. Hamas' reasons for the appellant being released in  February  2017  and
    February 2018 are unclear.  It is not  helpful  to  assume  that  Hamas
    operates exactly like the United Kingdom police: there  may  have  been
    many demonstrators arrested, and the Hamas authorities might have their
    own reasons for arresting and  charging  (or  merely  threatening)  the
    demonstrators on each occasion.

47. As regards the chronology of the appellant's sur place claim,  that  is
    consistent with the account he gives.  There is also  no  inconsistency
    in the evidence about his health  and  the  failure  to  enrol  on  his
    translation course at  Queen's  University  Belfast.   His  failure  to
    register for the Queen's University Belfast translation  course  on  12
    September 2018 (the  day  after  he  made  his  asylum  claim)  is  not
    inconsistent with the core account.  There is force in  the  submission
    that a person with a pre-paid course for which he had paid  fees,  been
    given a bursary, and been authorised to work to support himself,  would
    not lightly abandon that to  live  on  very  limited  benefits  and  be
    debarred from employment, in a state of anxiety, pending the resolution
    of his asylum claim.

48. The appellant told the respondent  on  26  September  2018  during  his
    screening interview that he had no medical issues.  He told his general
    medical practitioner the same thing.  The medical issues only began  in
    November 2018 and accelerated in early 2019, causing a referral to  the
    mental health services.  The evidence of the appellant's mental  health
    problems is not fully set out but what is there is indicative  that  he
    was indeed in difficulty.  As Mr McTaggart said,  the  only  reasonable
    explanation for that difficulty was that his core account was  reliable
    and he was a person who had suffered ill treatment in the past while in
    Gaza, and feared the same on return.

49. I have considered  what  weight  I  can  give  to  the  Military  Court
    document.  It is not an original document and I have not been  provided
    with the statute under which the appellant is said to have been charged
    and the grace period given.  The Military Court document  supports  the
    'cat and mouse' approach which the Hamas  authorities  appear  to  have
    taken to this appellant.  The appellant's evidence is that he has  lost
    contact with his brother and his family since April 2020 and is  unable
    to obtain any more information.  Ms  Everett  did  not  challenge  that
    evidence.

50. I conclude, applying Tanveer Ahmed principles, that it is not  possible
    to assess whether this document is reliable and that therefore, it  can
    bear only limited weight.  However, there have now been  three  threats
    of prosecution, but as far as the appellant is  aware,  no  conviction,
    either when he was in the Palestinian Territories or since he left.  To
    that extent, the Military Court document corroborates  the  appellant's
    core account.

51. The appellant's evidence on entry, and now, is that he  is  opposed  to
    Hamas.  At [23] in the refusal letter, the  respondent  summarised  the
    appellant's position:

         "23. You stated you fundamentally disagree  with  Hamas  objectives
         and  principles.   You   demonstrated   your   objections   through
         attendance  at  protest  rallies  and  discussing   the   political
         situation with colleagues in  the  educational  establishments  you
         worked in (AIR 33). "

    The appellant cannot be expected to conceal that opinion on return, and
    if its concealment were to be based on  fear  (as  on  the  appellant's
    evidence it would be) then applying R (Iran), the Tribunal is  required
    to assess the risk on return as though he did not conceal his political
    opinion.

52. The appellant has been consistent in his assertion  that  he  does  not
    support Hamas and that they know it.  His case is that they also  think
    that he is in communication with the Ramallah authorities which  is  an
    offence under the laws made by Hamas,  specifically  Title  IX  of  the
    Revolutionary Procedures Act 1979.  They know  that  he  has  left  his
    teaching jobs and that his whereabouts are unknown.  They  may  or  may
    not know that the appellant has left the country: he paid an  agent  to
    help him use the Rafah crossing and travelled on  a  valid  Palestinian
    Authority passport with a visa for the United Kingdom.

53. Overall, the evidence before the Upper Tribunal is more than sufficient
    to establish that the appellant's account is  credible,  to  the  lower
    standard applicable in international protection appeals,  and  that  it
    creates a real risk of persecution or serious harm if  he  were  to  be
    returned now.  The appellant has proved to  that  standard  that  Hamas
    regards him as a person who  is  in  communication  with  the  Ramallah
    authorities,  an  anti-Hamas  demonstrator,  and  a   person   who   is
    destabilising the political situation in the  Palestinian  Territories.
    They are looking for him.  They may, or may not, realise that he is  no
    longer in the Palestinian Territories but they do know that  he  is  no
    longer teaching at the schools where  he  was  working,  and  that  his
    whereabouts are unknown. The appellant has been ill-treated in the past
    and if his account is credible, Hamas told his  brother  that  if  they
    could find him, they would shoot him.   That risk engages  the  Refugee
    Convention, and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

54. The appellant has not sought to exaggerate what happened to him in  his
    detentions  in  February  2017  and  February  2018,  but   the   sleep
    deprivation, food deprivation, lack of blankets  and  soaking  in  cold
    water are all accepted to be within the range  of  ill-treatment  which
    Hamas uses.  The appellant still has difficulty  sleeping  and  eating,
    and his general medical practitioner's records show him steadily losing
    weight, as well as requiring anti-anxiolytic medication.

55. That past ill-treatment, which I  find  occurred  as  alleged,  engages
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended):

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

    Nothing in the country evidence accepted on behalf  of  the  respondent
    indicates that there are good reasons to consider that such persecution
    and/or serious harm would not occur again if he  were  to  be  returned
    now.

56. For all of the above reasons,  this  appeal  falls  to  be  allowed  on
    Refugee Convention grounds and under Article 3 ECHR.

DECISION

57. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     29 June
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

