
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/03384/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2019                      |On 28 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     E D
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fripp of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Turfan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Albania  born  in  2000.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent made on 26 March  2019  to  refuse
    his claim for  protection  and  on  human  rights  grounds.   He  seeks
    protection based upon his sexuality. He is gay.

 2. He claims, in summary, to have  become  aware  of  his  sexuality  from
    adolescence.  He lived  in  Tirana  with  his  family.   At  school  he
    confided in a friend but others there became aware of  it  and  he  was
    bullied and taunted.  In early 2015 he began a relationship with a boy.
     His family found out.  His father  became  violent  toward  him.   His
    mother although upset was more sympathetic.  It was she  who  paid  for
    him to leave Albania in early 2017 soon after he had left  school.   By
    this time his relationship with the boy had ended.

 3. Since arriving in the UK a brief  relationship  with  a  man  here  has
    ended.

 4. He fears return due to his sexual  orientation  from  Albanian  society
    generally and his violent father in  particular.   He  has  influential
    police friends.

 5. The respondent while  noting  certain  inconsistencies  in  the  claim,
    accepted that the appellant was gay, however, any fear he has of return
    is not objectively well founded.  There is a sufficiency of protection.
     He could also internally relocate.

 6. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 7. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 8 May 2019 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hodgkinson dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 8. His  findings  are  at  paragraph  26ff.   In  summary,  he  found  the
    appellant's account  in  the  country  context  to  be  plausible.   He
    accepted the evidence as to the relationship in Albania and  that  they
    may have been "outed"; that he suffered discrimination at school;  that
    he was abused and disowned by his father, and that  his  mother  helped
    him leave the country.  The judge, however, did not find it established
    that  the  appellant's  father  has  a  relationship  of  any  material
    substance with any police officer, let alone an influential  one.   Nor
    was it established that his father has any ongoing interest in him.

 9. Going on to consider the situation on return, the judge found from  the
    appellant's evidence that he would not seek to practice  his  sexuality
    in such a manner that it becomes evident to society at large.  He would
    exhibit, as he had in the past, a  degree  of  "cautionary  discretion"
    because he did not wish to be seen to attract  inappropriate  attention
    to himself and would not wish to offend social mores.  As such,  having
    noted HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31  and  the  test
    set out by Lord Hope the judge found that the asylum  claim  could  not
    succeed.

10. He then went  on  to  note  the  recent  Country  Guidance  case  which
    indicated that in Tirana, in general, an openly gay man would not  have
    an objectively well-founded fear of persecution and  that  there  is  a
    sufficiency of protection.

11. Moving on to consider human rights the judge found that  the  appellant
    could not succeed under Articles 3 and  8  on  mental  health  grounds.
    Also, he did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

12. The appellant sought permission to appear which was granted on 20  June
    2019.

    Error of law hearing

13. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Fripp lodged a short  skeleton
    argument. His main point was that the judge erred  in  misapplying  the
    law when concluding why the appellant would live discreetly  on  return
    to Albania.  He confused societal pressures such as the social mores of
    the country with social pressures of a  personal  nature  such  as  not
    wanting to distress his parents or embarrass his friends.  In a country
    where there is a hatred of  gays,  sublimating  his  sexuality  due  to
    societal pressures must mean that he would be doing so out of  fear  of
    persecution.

14. Mr Fripp accepted that the recent Country Guidance  indicated  that  an
    openly gay man would not, in general, have an objectively  well-founded
    fear in Tirana, however, each case had to be assessed on its own facts.
     In that regard the judge's findings that the father  would  no  longer
    have an adverse interest in him  and  that  the  father  did  not  have
    influential friends in the police were inadequately reasoned.  As  such
    the situation for the appellant might be more dangerous.

15. In a short second point Mr Fripp submitted that  the  judge's  analysis
    under paragraph 276ADE was inadequately brief.

16. Mr Turfan's response was that the appellant would live  quietly  as  he
    had done previously. Even if he chose to live openly he would not be at
    risk.  The judge had dealt with the evidence in respect of  the  father
    and reached conclusions which were  open  to  him.   As  for  paragraph
    276ADE such has a high  threshold.  Whilst  the  judge's  analysis  was
    brief, on what was advanced to him, it was satisfactorily decided.

    Consideration

17. I do not find Mr Fripp's submissions persuasive.  The judge  (at  [44])
    correctly noted the appropriate tests as set out  in  HJ  paragraph  35
    (per Lord Hope) including, as Mr Fripp put it, the "why" test at 35(d):
    "The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in fact conceal
    aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is to  consider  why  he
    will do so.  If this will simply be in response to social pressures  or
    for cultural or religious reasons of his own choosing and  not  because
    of fear of persecution, his claim for asylum must be rejected.  But  if
    the reason why he will resort to concealment is that he genuinely fears
    that otherwise he will be persecuted, it will be necessary to  consider
    whether that fear is well-founded."

18. The judge dealt with this at [48] and [50].  At [48] he found that  the
    appellant would not seek to practice his sexuality  in  such  a  manner
    that it becomes evident to society at large.  His history  exhibited  a
    degree of "cautionary discretion."  The judge expands on why  he  would
    do so at [50], where he states that the appellant would "choose to live
    that life with discretion, as he has hitherto, not because of a fear of
    persecution but because he  would  not  wish  to  be  seen  to  attract
    inappropriate attention to himself and would not wish to go out of  his
    way to offend the social mores of Albania ... societal pressures  would
    cause him to choose to live his relatively discreetly, rather than  due
    to a fear of persecution."

19. Mr Fripp criticised the judge  for  referring  to  "social  mores"  and
    "societal pressures" rather than "social pressures."  I do not consider
    the  judge's  wording  of  "societal  pressures"  rather  than  "social
    pressures" to be significant.   I  do  not  accept  that  by  "societal
    pressures" he meant these pressures to be a hatred of gays and thus his
    was a fear of persecution.  The judge twice specifically found that the
    appellant living discreetly was not due to a fear of persecution.   His
    use of the term "social mores," i.e. the traditional customs  and  ways
    of behaving ties in with the reference in HJ to  "social  pressures  or
    for cultural or religious reasons of his own choosing." Also,  as  Lord
    Rodger put it in HL at paragraph 82: "If the  tribunal  concludes  that
    the applicant would choose to live discreetly simply  because  that  is
    how  he  himself  would  wish  to  live...his  application  should   be
    rejected...Such a person  has  no  well  founded  fear  of  persecution
    because, for reasons that have  nothing  to  do  with  persecution,  he
    himself chooses to adopt a way of life which means that he  is  not  in
    fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay." In this case the judge
    found such (namely, living discreetly because that is how he would wish
    to live) to be the appellant's position. On the evidence before him for
    the reasons he gave he was entitled to reach that conclusion.

20. Even if I am wrong in that assessment the decision,  in  my  judgement,
    does not show material error.  The final and conclusive question  posed
    in HJ is "does he have a well-founded fear that he will be persecuted."

21. The judge noted the recent Country Guidance namely  BF  (Tirana  -  gay
    men) Albania [2019] UK 93 where the headnote states:

         "  ...


         (ii)     Turning to the position in Tirana, in general,  an  openly
         gay  man,  by  virtue  of  that  fact  alone,  would  not  have  an
         objectively well-founded fear of serious  harm  or  persecution  on
         return to Tirana.


         ...


         (iv)     There exists in Tirana a  generally  effective  system  of
         protection should an openly gay man face a risk  of  harm  in  that
         city or from elsewhere in Albania."

22. Mr Fripp's submission was that this  was  not  a  standard  case.   The
    appellant had claimed he would be at risk from his father or the police
    with whom the father had influence.

23. The judge did not accept these claims.  I  do  not  find  merit  in  Mr
    Fripp's submission that the judge gave inadequate reasons in so  doing.
    His analysis and conclusion at [42] as to why his father would have  no
    further interest in him, namely, that  his  ability  to  attend  school
    after his sexuality because known to the community and for  the  period
    after he left school before he left  Albania,  without  suffering  harm
    from his father, and  that  he  would  not  be  living  in  the  family
    household, were open to him on the evidence.

24. Similarly, his conclusion (at [34]) that  the  appellant's  failure  at
    interview to make reference to a relationship between  the  father  and
    any influential police officer, despite being specifically  asked,  was
    evidence which entitled the judge to conclude that the  claim  in  that
    respect had not been established.

25. Thus, for the reasons given, the appellant, even  with  a  well-founded
    fear, falls within the general group of people referred to  at  (v)  of
    the headnote of BF.  The judge's decision on the asylum claim showed no
    material error of law.

26. As for paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as  Mr  Turfan  indicated  there  is  an
    elevated threshold.  The  judge's  analysis,  while  fairly  brief,  is
    adequate. The appellant has not established he has a well founded fear.
    While acknowledging some mental  health  issues  the  judge  found  the
    appellant to be physically healthy and capable of employment.   He  has
    not been in the UK long and is familiar with  Tirana.   His  conclusion
    that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  is
    unassailable.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
that decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

An anonymity order is made.  Unless and until a tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.  Failure to comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 23 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
