
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/03993/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 October 2018                    |     On 18 October 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     T S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge R  L  Walker  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 12 March 2018 to dismiss his  appeal
    on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

 2. The appellant did not appear today.  No explanation is  given  for  his
    failure to attend and he has been warned on a previous occasion that he
    would need to attend and that an interpreter would be provided for him.
     No explanation is provided and I am satisfied from the court file that
    due notice of the time, date and venue of this hearing was given.  I am
    also satisfied that the appellant was clearly  warned  in  the  hearing
    notices that if he did not attend the Tribunal may determine the appeal
    in his absence.  In the circumstances, and given the previous  warnings
    given to the appellant, I am satisfied that it is in the  interests  of
    justice to proceed to determine the appeal  today  in  the  appellant's
    absence.

 3. The appellant's case is set  out  in  some  detail  in  Judge  Walker's
    decision.   In  summary  the  appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully in 2008 claiming to be a minor.  He was  assessed  as  being
    older than that and was later found to be older than claimed.   He  was
    interviewed in connection with his asylum claim  and  it  was  refused.
    The appeal was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted and the appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal was dismissed on 11 October 2013 for reasons  given  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge King in his decision.  It is of  note  that  there  were
    significant credibility findings adverse to the appellant.

 4. On his own account the appellant  left  the  United  Kingdom,  went  to
    Italy, was arrested and apparently returned to Afghanistan.  He says he
    was met at the airport and then on returning home discovered  that  his
    four cousins were in the Taliban and had become leaders and that he was
    being threatened in the village as they knew his cousins  were  in  the
    Taliban and thought the appellant was  an  informant.   He  then  fled,
    fearing that he would be at risk not only from the Taliban and his four
    cousins, but also the local army commanders who suspected him of  being
    associated  with  the  Taliban.   His  case  was  that  there  was   no
    sufficiency of protection from Afghanistan nor  would  he  be  able  to
    relocate, the situation deteriorating rapidly on a security  basis  and
    even Kabul would not be safe for him.  The Secretary of State  did  not
    accept his account.

 5. The judge directed himself that in line with  Devaseelan  the  starting
    point would be the earlier appeal determination which he  sets  out  in
    respect of credibility at paragraph 34  of  his  decision.   The  judge
    noted that it was of relevance that the appellant had  claimed  in  his
    earlier appeal that he had no contact with his family  in  Afghanistan,
    something that Judge King doubted, that finding having been  proven  to
    be correct, that it is now said he had been in contact with his  mother
    during the time in the United Kingdom.  The judge also noting  at  [36]
    that  the  adverse  credibility  findings  were   reinforced   by   the
    appellant's acceptance that his claim to be a minor was  untruthful  as
    was his claim not to have contact or communication with his family.

 6. The judge concluded that the appellant's account of events on return to
    Afghanistan was vague and inconsistent and did not accept it.   He  set
    out from paragraphs 37 to 43 why he  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    account and went on to dismiss the appeal, concluding in the  light  of
    the most recent country guidance case AS (Safety in Kabul)  Afghanistan
    CG [2018] UKUT 118 that the appellant would not be at risk.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on three  principal  grounds.
    First, that the judge had failed properly to take account of an  expert
    report, misdirecting himself contrary to Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 in
    failing to say properly why  the  matter  had  been  adjourned  and  in
    wrongly considering  the  appellant's  evidence  in  a  vacuum  without
    considering that the  expert  report  could  be  corroborative  of  the
    appellant's account.  The report referring  to  there  being  a  strong
    Taliban presence in the appellant's home area and addressing  also  the
    issues  of  internal  relocation  protection  and  the  risk  of  being
    westernised.  Second, that the judge erred in his credibility  findings
    in relying in particular on a screening interview, failing properly  to
    have consideration to YL (Rely  on  SEF)  China  [2004]  UKIAT  and  in
    dismissing credibility on  the  grounds  of  plausibility.   Third,  in
    dismissing a later decision or country guidance by a French  court  and
    thus had excluded cogent and  more  up-to-date  evidence  in  assessing
    risk.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Parker on 21 May 2018.

 9. Properly considered it cannot be said that the judge took  an  improper
    approach to the expert report in this case.  It must be borne  in  mind
    in this case, as already noted, that there had been a determination  of
    the Upper Tribunal in which significant  adverse  credibility  findings
    were made.  Second, and importantly, properly viewed the judge did  not
    improperly consider that the expert should have considered  credibility
    as is averred in the grounds at paragraph 20.

10. It is important to note that the judge said  that  he  attached  little
    evidential weight to the report for a variety of reasons.  There has to
    be a starting point for evaluating an expert report and it was open  to
    the judge to note that credibility had been  undermined.   It  is  also
    relevant to note that the report does not address properly the  refusal
    letter and did not factor in concerns of credibility.  That was a point
    open to the judge to make as was  the  fact  that  there  had  been  no
    reference to the appellant being westernised which is a matter of which
    the report took issue, nor was it something the appellant  had  claimed
    and at [47] the judge notes in other matters which make  little  sense,
    there being no previous reference to risks or why he would, at the  age
    of 27, now be at risk, no longer being a minor, from sexual  predators.
    The approach to the evidence was correct and, and this is a  matter  to
    which I will turn later, the decision from the French courts is  not  a
    source which the expert ought to have addressed.

11. Further, the credibility findings in  this  case  were  reached  for  a
    number of reassons.  Turning to ground 2, as noted previously it has to
    be  borne  in  mind  that  in  this  case  there  had  previously  been
    significant and serious adverse credibility findings.  Further  it  now
    transpires, and this is not denied, that the appellant had in fact lied
    about being a minor and had lied about being in contact with family  in
    Afghanistan.  In light of those, and the other factors  which  are  not
    challenged, the adverse credibility findings are ones  manifestly  open
    to the judge and for which he gave adequate  and  sustainable  reasons.
    There is no basis on which he could say that the judge  dismissed  this
    on plausibility grounds.   It  is  evident  that  he  judged  the  case
    properly having directed himself properly as to the law and thus  there
    is no merit in ground 2.

12. Ground 3 is lacking in any merit.  There is simply no basis on which it
    could have been said that a decision on  one  individual  by  a  French
    court was in any way relevant or capable  of  showing  that  a  country
    guidance decision reached by the Upper Tribunal should not be  followed
    and I find therefore there is no merit in ground 3.

13. For these reasons the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold it.

I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal



Signed                                  Date 12 October 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul









