
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03523/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2018                             |On 21st March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     T A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Irvine (instructed by Jacobs & Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant.   The
    Appellant is a Bangladeshi national who had made a protection claim  in
    the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  Judge  Kimnell
    who heard the appeal at Hatton Cross on 31 July 2017.  He dismissed the
    appeal in a Decision promulgated on 9th August 2017.  That in fact  was
    not the first appeal that this Appellant had had.  Initially, he had an
    appeal heard before Judge Wilson on 23rd September  2016  and  on  that
    occasion also the appeal was dismissed.  However Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Monson, hearing the case at Field House in December  2016,  found  that
    there was a material error of law by Judge Wilson in his approach to an
    FIR and remitted the case to the First-tier Tribunal without preserving
    any findings.

 2. So the matter came before  Judge  Kimnell  and  he  was  aware  of  the
    difficulties with the previous Determination.

 3. The Appellant had claimed that he would be at risk on return because of
    his links with the BNP in Bangladesh; that he had been  arrested;  that
    there was an FIR and charges had  been  brought  against  him  and  his
    brother.  He also claimed that he would be at risk on  account  of  his
    sur place activities in the UK for the BNP.  The Judge  found  that  he
    could place reliance on a document verification report from the British
    High Commission in Bangladesh.  They had investigated the FIR and found
    that, although there was one that related to the incident on  the  date
    claimed by the Appellant, it did not in fact name the Appellant.  There
    was a subsequent document which had various names on it but again  none
    of those were that of the Appellant.

 4. The Appellant also claimed in relation to his activities in the UK.  He
    claimed to be active on behalf of the BNP and I am  told  that  he  has
    given lectures that have been videoed and are on social media and  that
    he has campaigned on behalf of a missing MP from his local area, all of
    which it is argued, put him at risk.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge who did not
    find there to be any error in relation to the Appellant being  at  risk
    on account of his brother's activities but did think there  may  be  an
    error in relation  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  sur  place
    activities. The Judge also thought there may  have  been  an  error  in
    relation to the document verification report, specifically referring to
    VT (Article 22 Procedures - Directive confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017]
    UKUT 00368.  I will deal with the latter matter first as Ms Irvine  did
    in front of me.

 6. She says that the way the evidence was provided  by  the  British  High
    Commission was unlawful because no consent had been obtained  from  the
    Appellant prior to the exercise being undertaken. If I was not to  find
    that to be the case then the weight that should  be  attached  to  that
    document, given that it came from the  alleged  actor  of  persecution,
    should be considerably less than was afforded to it by the Judge.   She
    then referred me to the Decision of  Judge  Kimnell,  at  paragraph  8,
    where he described how the Secretary of State arranged for the  British
    High Commission in Dhaka to examine police records to authenticate  the
    documentation that the Appellant  had  submitted,  namely  the  scanned
    copies of the FIR. A visit was made by them on 12th November  2015  but
    no record could be found of FIR number 14 of 297 on the  date  of  29th
    December 2008.  However, a later one was  discovered  relating  to  the
    incident on 29th December 2008 which did not  contain  the  Appellant's
    name.  It referred to between 100 and 150 unknown  people  attacking  a
    presiding officer at a polling station.

 7. The Judge then considered that FIR again in paragraph 48.  Amongst  his
    findings he said that specific enquiry had been made in relation to the
    FIR and that it was probably wrong to say there was no link between  it
    and the date of 29th December 2008 because, although it was  issued  on
    30th December, the date and time of the occurrence to which it  related
    was clearly set out as 29th December.  However it did not identify  the
    Appellant as an accused.

 8. In relation to other documents the Judge noted  the  Appellant  claimed
    that his name did appear on another document  but  had  been  misspelt.
    The Judge however did not accept that.  That document is  not  the  FIR
    but another document.

 9. Ms Irvine referred me to a number  of  paragraphs  in  VT.   That  case
    relates to Sri Lanka but the  principles  apply.  It  talks  about  the
    rather obvious point that the Secretary of State, in  making  enquiries
    to try and verify  an  Appellant's  claim,  must  not  do  anything  to
    increase any risk to an Appellant if returned.  She referred me to  the
    section of VT which quotes Article 22,  the  Council  Directive,  which
    states that:-

         "for the purposes of examining individual cases Member States shall
         not  (a)  directly  disclose   information   regarding   individual
         applications for asylum or the fact that an  application  has  been
         made to the alleged actors of  persecution  of  the  applicant  for
         asylum, and (b) obtain any information from the  alleged  actor  of
         persecution in a manner that  would  result  in  such  actor  being
         directly informed of the fact that an application has been made  by
         the  applicant  in  question  and  would  jeopardise  the  physical
         integrity of the applicant and his/her dependants  or  the  liberty
         and security of his/her family members still living in the  country
         of origin.

10. Ms Irvine  referred  to  the  fact  that  those  provisions  have  been
    replicated in the Immigration Rules at paragraph 339(1A).

11. She then referred to a specific section of VT, paragraph 24,  where  it
    is stated that a State which receives a protection claim should refrain
    from sharing any information with the authorities  of  the  country  of
    origin and from informing the authorities in the country of origin that
    a national has presented a protection claim. It does go on to say  that
    the authorities of the country  of  asylum  may  not  weigh  the  risks
    involved in sharing of confidential information  with  the  country  of
    origin and conclude it will not  result  in  human  rights  violations.
    Effectively, the Upper Tribunal found that the Secretary of State  must
    not do anything that might add to risk.  It also says at  paragraph  25
    that the advisory opinion says the authorities must seek,  in  advance,
    the written consent of an asylum seeker if they want to check  personal
    data in the country of origin. At paragraph 32 it says that breaches of
    confidentiality during an enquiry in the country of origin  could  give
    rise to additional risk to the applicant or to other  people  connected
    to the claim in the country of origin.  That  is  all  fairly  obvious.
    However, the question is does it apply to this particular Appellant and
    what happened in this case?

12. The point was not taken in front of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kimnell.
    That could have been because nobody had thought  to  bring  it  to  the
    Judge's attention or perhaps the representative was not  aware  of  VT.
    Alternatively it could have been because  the  representative  at  that
    time felt that it did not assist and indeed, as I find,  it  does  not.
    What we  are  talking  about  in  this  case  is  not  the  sharing  of
    confidential information.  It is quite clear from the document  in  the
    Home Office bundle at section E that a request was  received  from  the
    Home Office in the UK to verify the FIR in question, 14 of 297 said  to
    have been lodged at  the  Appellant's  local  police  station  on  12th
    November. Two officials went along to the police  station,  introducing
    themselves as officials from the British High Commission and  asked  to
    check on their records the veracity of said FIR.  The FIR  is  produced
    and it does not name the Appellant.  It simply refers to an  occurrence
    taking place on 29th December  when  100  to  150  persons  attacked  a
    polling officer.  Nothing that the officers from  the  High  Commission
    did could possibly count as sharing personal information.  I have  been
    provided with nothing to the contrary and I  find  that  the  enquiries
    made do not contravene the wisdom of VT.  That  leads  me  to  conclude
    that there was no error of law in the way in which the Judge approached
    that documentary evidence.

13. The other ground relied upon by Ms Irvine was  the  way  in  which  the
    Judge dealt with the sur place activities.  She  argued  that  adequate
    consideration was not given to what the Appellant has been doing in the
    United Kingdom.  At paragraph 35 the  Judge  set  out  the  Appellant's
    claim that those activities would put him at risk in Bangladesh because
    anybody related to the BNP  is  apprehended  and  put  in  jail.   That
    particular claim was contradicted by the evidence of his  own  witness,
    the Vice President of the BNP in the UK, who has visited Bangladesh  on
    a variety of occasions without having any difficulties.

14. The Appellant claims to have been active on social media in the UK  and
    to have been campaigning on behalf of a missing MP  and  that,  it  was
    argued, ought to have been found to be sufficient to put him at risk on
    return.  I was referred to country information which, albeit postdating
    the hearing, probably is unchanged in that  time  and  relates  to  the
    activities of the ruling party,  the  Awami  League  against  the  BNP.
    However the evidence before the Judge also  indicated  that  membership
    alone of the BNP would not be sufficient to give  rise  to  a  risk  of
    persecution.  That was supported  by  the  documents  provided  by  the
    Appellant himself for the hearing and also  by  Mr  Rabbani,  the  Vice
    President.  As the Judge noted, his willingness to return regularly  to
    Bangladesh indicated that monitoring of BNP  members  abroad  does  not
    take place, otherwise he would be high on the  list  of  people  to  be
    monitored and his  activities  reported  back  to  Bangladesh.  Had  he
    believed that that was happening the Judge did not accept he would have
    returned as frequently as he had.  On  that  basis  the  Judge  made  a
    finding that the activities in the UK were not monitored  and  reported
    back.

15. The Judge also noted Mr Rabbani's evidence that in fact  the  Appellant
    should properly be  described  as  a  supporter.  The  Judge  found  at
    paragraph 52 that he was acting in the capacity of an  ordinary  member
    and his activities, as he set them out to be, would not become known to
    the Awami League in Bangladesh such as to place him at  risk.   He  was
    hardly likely to be regarded as a high profile figure and, on the basis
    that Mr Rabbani himself, a very high profile figure, was  not  at  risk
    there was no suggestion or evidence to support  the  Appellant's  claim
    that he would be.

16. I find that the judgment of Judge Kimnell does not contain  a  material
    error of law.  The VP point argued by Ms Irvine does not apply in  this
    case given the nature of the enquiries.  Those enquiries did not offend
    against the wisdom of that case and the Judge did properly consider the
    sur place activities and reached reasoned findings clearly open to  him
    on all of the evidence before him and therefore the Appellant's  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 19th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 19th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
