
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03448/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th February 2018                    |On 26th February 2018               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     a k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Heller of Counsel, instructed by JJ Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Fowell of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 12th October 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  12th  February  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK illegally on 29th September 2016.  He made an  asylum
    and human rights claim.  He claimed that if he was returned to Pakistan
    he would face mistreatment from the Taliban, who had connections to his
    family, who disapproved of  the  Appellant  helping  his  sister  leave
    Pakistan.  In particular the Appellant claimed  that  his  cousins  are
    drug dealers and had connections with the Taliban and the police.

 3. The application was refused on 24th  March  2017  and  the  Appellant's
    appeal was heard by the FTT on 5th October 2017.

 4. The FTT heard evidence from the Appellant and his sister.  The FTT took
    into account the findings made in the appeal of the Appellant's sister.
     The FTT concluded at paragraph 58, that the Appellant's claim to  have
    been captured by the Taliban was not true, and that he was not at  risk
    from his two cousins, whether acting directly or through their  claimed
    involvement with the police or the Taliban.  The FTT's primary  finding
    therefore was that the Appellant could return to his  home  area.   The
    FTT however made an alternative finding, if it was found not to be safe
    for the Appellant to return to his home area, and concluded that  there
    was a reasonable option of internal relocation to another  area  within
    Pakistan.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon six grounds which are summarised below.

 6. Ground 1 contends that the FTT erred by making  findings  when  it  was
    apparent  that  the  FTT  found  that  the   Appellant   had   supplied
    insufficient details.  It was submitted that if the FTT had wanted more
    detail the Appellant's Counsel could have been made aware  of  this  at
    the hearing, and asked further questions, or the FTT could  have  asked
    questions directly.

 7. Grounds 2, 3 and 4  take  issue  with  findings  made  by  the  FTT  at
    paragraphs 47, 50, 51, 53 and 54.  In brief  summary  it  is  contended
    that the FTT made an assumption that the only motive that  the  cousins
    had for detaining the Appellant was to obtain information from him.  It
    was contended that the FTT had not taken into account that the  cousins
    may want to kill the Appellant if he returned, even though eight  years
    had elapsed, in the context of honour killings in Pakistan.

 8. It was also contended that the Appellant's account was  not  inherently
    implausible and at paragraph 53 the FTT had referred  to  "a  confusing
    mix of reasons", but it was submitted that at least one  of  these  was
    enough upon which to base an opinion that the Appellant should leave.

 9. Ground 5 contends that the FTT failed to consider whether there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection in  Pakistan.   Ground  6  contends  that  in
    considering internal flight the FTT referred exclusively to the Taliban
    and their ability to locate the Appellant.  The FTT had not taken  into
    account that the Appellant's sister's  boyfriend  had  been  killed  in
    Quetta a city some 400  miles  from  the  Appellant's  home,  and  when
    considering  internal  relocation  the  FTT  had  failed  to  make  any
    reference  to  the  cousin's  network  of  criminal  associates  spread
    throughout the country.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth of the  FTT  who
    found the grounds arguable.

11. Following the grant of  permission  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

12. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions

13. At the  hearing  Mrs  Heller  relied  and  expanded  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal.  I was asked
    to find that the FTT had materially erred in law,  and  as  the  errors
    related to credibility, the decision should be set aside  and  remitted
    to the FTT to be heard afresh with no findings preserved.

14. Mr Avery submitted that the FTT had not erred in law.  It was submitted
    that the grounds amounted to a disagreement with findings properly made
    by the FTT, and the decision should stand.

15. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I do not find that Ground 1 discloses an error of law.  The  burden  of
    proof is on the Appellant.  It is a matter for the Appellant as to what
    evidence is presented to the FTT.  It is not for the FTT  to  make  the
    Appellant's case.  The Appellant was legally represented.  There may be
    occasions when it is appropriate for the FTT to ask questions by way of
    clarification, but in this  case  documentary  and  oral  evidence  was
    presented on behalf of the Appellant to the FTT.  The FTT reserved  its
    decision at the hearing and thereafter considered the evidence.  In  my
    view the FTT was perfectly entitled to conclude, for the reasons given,
    that the burden of proof had not been discharged.  The FTT did not  err
    in law by failing to ask the Appellant to provide further evidence.

17. I deal with Grounds 2, 3 and 4 together.   They  do  not  disclose  any
    error of law.  These grounds display a disagreement with  the  findings
    made by the FTT.  The findings made were open to the FTT to  make,  and
    adequate and sustainable reasons for those findings have been given.

18. I deal with Grounds 5 and 6 together.  The FTT properly and  adequately
    considered internal relocation at paragraphs 59  -  62.   Reference  is
    made to the appropriate case law at paragraph 60.  The  FTT  considered
    the  Appellant's  mental  health,  noting  the  lack  of  any   medical
    diagnosis, but taking into account  a  report  that  he  was  receiving
    counselling, and the opinion of his counsellor  that  he  displays  the
    symptoms of PTSD.  The FTT did not err in law in finding that if  there
    was a diagnosis of PTSD, treatment would be available in Pakistan.

19. It is  stated  that  the  FTT  did  not  consider  the  risk  from  the
    Appellant's cousins and their criminal associates.  I note there was no
    reference  to  the  cousins  and  their  criminal  associates  in   the
    Appellant's skeleton argument placed before the FTT  and  the  skeleton
    argument concentrated on  the  Taliban,  contending  that  their  reach
    encompassed everywhere in  Pakistan.   It  was  also  stated  that  the
    Appellant feared the authorities.  There was no mention of the  cousins
    in the skeleton argument.

20. I find that in relation to internal relocation, the FTT considered  the
    appropriate  authorities,  considered  the  evidence  that   had   been
    presented, and concluded that there was a reasonable option of internal
    relocation that would not be unduly harsh.  Those findings, in my view,
    were clearly open to the FTT to make on the evidence,  and  sustainable
    reasons for those findings have been provided.  There was therefore  no
    need to go on and  consider  sufficiency  of  protection,  because  the
    primary finding was that the Appellant would not be at risk in his home
    area  as  his  account  had  been  found  to  be  incredible,  and  the
    alternative finding was that he had a  reasonable  internal  relocation
    option and would not be at risk.

21. In my view, the FTT properly considered  all  the  evidence  presented,
    made findings open  to  it  on  the  evidence,  provided  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for those findings, and did not fail to  take  into
    account any material evidence.  In my view, the grounds do amount to  a
    disagreement with findings made by the  FTT,  but  do  not  disclose  a
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  Appellant  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.
This direction is made pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    13th February 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    13th February 2018
