
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03974/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2018                   |On 1 March 2018                      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              ENAD SALAH ELYAS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent refused the appellant's  protection  claim  for  reasons
    explained in her decision dated 6 April 2017.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge David C  Clapham  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal by his decision promulgated on 8 July 2017.

 3. The appellant applied to the FtT for permission to appeal  to  the  UT.
    The principal contention in his grounds is  that  the  judge  erred  in
    applying country guidance by making no findings about  relocation,  and
    by making  inadequate  findings  about  relocation  to  the  IKR.   The
    guidance now stands as re-formulated in AA (Iraq) v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944 (11 July 2017).

 4. On 4 October 2017 the FtT refused permission.

 5.  The  appellant  sought  permission  from  the  UT,  through  different
    representatives, but renewing the same grounds.

 6. On 5 December 2017 UT Judge Pitt granted permission.

 7. Ms Loughran submitted that the judge erred by  proceeding  directly  to
    consider the appellant's return to the IKR, and not the guidance  under
    headnote B, documentation and feasibility of return (excluding IKR) and
    D, internal relocation other than the IKR, relevant matters being place
    of origin, and absence of assistance in obtaining a CSID and otherwise,
    headnote C; and that he made none of the findings necessary to  resolve
    matters under headnote E, return to the IKR,  particularly  at  20  (a)
    practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR, (b) the  likelihood  of
    securing employment, and (c) availability of assistance from family and
    friends in the IKR.  Such findings as had been made  tended  towards  a
    favourable rather than a negative outcome.

 8. Mr Matthews said that failure to resolve whether  the  appellant  might
    relocate in Baghdad was immaterial, as relocation to the IKR  was  more
    obviously viable and would be a complete answer.  He accepted, however,
    that the judge erred by leaving matters unresolved on the  IKR  option,
    which required a set  aside  and  a  further  decision.   He  submitted
    further that the onus remained on the appellant and was to be  answered
    on up-to-date  evidence,  which  raised  fresh  possibilities,  as  the
    appellant's home is no longer a contested area; and  that  while  there
    was no basis on which to interfere with  credibility  findings  in  the
    appellant's  favour,  further  findings  needed  include  the   current
    whereabouts of and possibility of contacting family members.

 9. I agree that failure to resolve the question of relocation  in  Baghdad
    might have been immaterial.

10. The appellant has shown that the absence of clear findings to  underpin
    the outcome on relocation to the IKR is an error of law which  requires
    the decision of the FtT to be set aside.

11. Parties agreed on the further course of the case as follows.

12. The generally favourable credibility finding at paragraph 44 stands  as
    the starting point for further decision-making.

13. Further decision-making may also be informed by further evidence  (from
    either or  both  parties)  on  matters  such  as  contested  areas  and
    documentation needed or likely to be available for travel.

14.  The  nature  of  the  further  decision-making  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the FtT for  that  purpose.
    Judge David C Clapham is not  excluded  from  further  decision-making.
    The case may be listed again before him, or, if that is for any  reason
    impracticable within the usual listing timetable, before any other  FtT
    Judge.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




            [pic]


            27 February 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
