
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03976/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2016                             |On 6 October 2016             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     H K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Sidoli instructed by Dorset County Council
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  His  date  of  birth  is  a
    matter of dispute.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 27 August  2015
    and claimed asylum.  He claimed to  fear  the  Taliban  in  Afghanistan
    because his father was a driver for the American Forces.

 3. On 3 December 2015, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.  The  appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against that decision.

 4. A hearing took place before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge K Real) on 4
    July 2016.  The appellant did not attend and was not represented.   The
    judge, nevertheless, decided to hear  the  appeal  in  the  appellant's
    absence under rule 28 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 (SI 2014/2604).

 5. The judge found that the appellant was not a minor and that his account
    was not credible.  As  a  result,  she  dismissed  his  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and, on
    16 August 2016, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Pedro)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  Permission was granted on two  ground.
    First,  it  was  arguable  that  the  proceedings   were   procedurally
    unfairness in that the appellant had not been given an  opportunity  to
    attend the hearing.  Secondly, the judge had arguably erred in  law  in
    finding that the appellant was an adult and not  a  minor  as  the  age
    assessment  had  been  withdrawn  as  a  result  of   judicial   review
    proceedings and that this had not been brought to the attention of  the
    judge.

 7. The appeal was listed before me on 4 October 2016 for mention.

 8. At that hearing, Mr Richards, who represented the  Secretary  of  State
    did not seek to uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  He accepted
    that there was material before the Secretary of State that called  into
    the question the age assessment relied upon by the judge and also that,
    on the basis of documents held on  the  Tribunal's  file,  it  did  not
    appear that the appellant or his statutory parent the local  authority,
    had been given notice of the hearing.  There was procedural  unfairness
    albeit through no fault of the Judge.  Mr Richards  accepted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

 9. Mr Sidoli, who represented the appellant,  agreed  that  this  was  the
    proper disposal of the appeal.

10. I accept Mr Richards's submissions.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal cannot stand.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

12. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Real.


                                 Signed


                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 6 October 2016

