
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: pa/03126/2017
     pa/03128/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2018                          |On 6th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 (1) mr A P
                                 (2) Mrs S P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs S Panagiiotopoulou (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R L Walker, promulgated on 23rd October 2017, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 16th October 2017.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the  Appellants,  who  are  husband  and  wife,
    whereupon the Appellants subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are both citizens of Ukraine and were born on [  ]  1980
    and [ ] 1985 respectively.  The essence of the appeal arises  from  the
    activities of the first Appellant,  the  husband,  who  had  undertaken
    military service with the  army  in  Ukraine  in  1998,  trained  as  a
    rifleman, and upon completion of his military service in 1999, had held
    the rank of a captain. His military service was fraught and distressing
    and he was subject to ill-treatment  and  bullying.   In  2010  various
    military summonses were sent to his parent's home  where  he  had  been
    registered to stay, but he did not  respond  to  them.   The  summonses
    requested that he report to the military commissariat.  He assumed that
    he  was  required  to  complete  further  military  service.   He  made
    arrangements for himself and his wife to leave the country  which  they
    did on 13th October 2010.  After  he  left  the  Ukraine,  he  received
    another military summons requesting him to attend the court in Ukraine.
     He failed to do so.  He was tried in absentia.  He  was  convicted  to
    five years' imprisonment.  The appeal before Judge R L  Walker,  turned
    upon an expert report  from  Professor  Mark  Galeotti,  who  gave  his
    opinion on documents provided by  the  Appellant,  namely,  a  military
    identity card, service registration card, call up papers for 15th April
    2010, 18th August 2010 and 20th October 2010,  together  with  a  court
    summons for 10th December 2010 and a court decision dated 10th December
    2010.   Professor  Galeotti  concluded  that  these  were  all  genuine
    documents.  In his decision, with respect to whether the claim had been
    made out by the Appellants, Judge Walker concluded  that  the  expert's
    report could not be relied upon because it  did  not  explore  all  the
    questions arising in relation to the documents submitted.

Grounds of Application

 3. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  relation  to
    the assessment of the court documents provided by the  Appellants,  and
    upon which the expert report was predicated, given that the expert  had
    deemed those documents to be genuine.

 4. On 15th November 2017 permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that the  judge,  in  rejecting  the  expert
    report, had appeared to rely upon immaterial factors, such as the  fact
    that comparison documents were not provided and that the reasons  given
    were not sufficient to lead to a rejection of the report.

Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me on 12th  January  2018,  Ms  Panagiiotopoulou,
    appearing as Counsel  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  submitted  that,
    although the judge sets out the Respondent's case (from  paragraphs  23
    to 30) which concludes that the Appellant had not raised  a  Convention
    reason for persecution, the fact  was  that  this  was  not  a  Refugee
    Convention  claim  but  one  predicated  upon  the  subjection  of  the
    Appellant to inhuman and degrading treatment, on the basis of Article 3
    ECHR, because if the Appellant, as the documents suggested, would  upon
    return, be detained as a draft evader, then he would be imprisoned  and
    the prison conditions were such that this would violate his  Article  3
    rights to be free from inhuman and degrading treatment.

 6. She submitted that she would rely upon the country guidance case of  VB
    and Another (draft evaders and prison  conditions)  Ukraine  CG  [2017]
    UKUT 00079, and in particular the  headnote  at  paragraphs  2  and  3.
    These stated that, although it is not reasonably likely  that  a  draft
    evader avoiding conscription or mobilisation in the Ukraine would  face
    criminal or  administrative  proceedings,  if  there  were  aggravating
    factors, then "there is a real risk of anyone being returned to Ukraine
    as a convicted criminal sentence to imprisonment in that country  being
    detained on arrival" (paragraph 2).  It was also stated  that  if  this
    happened then "there is a real risk that the  conditions  of  detention
    and imprisonment" would lead "to a breach of Article 3 ECHR" (paragraph
    3).

 7. Finally, Ms Panagiiotopoulou submitted that  the  judge  did  not  make
    cogent and coherent  findings  in  rejecting  the  court  summons,  the
    warrant, and the "determination against the Appellant, particularly  as
    the expert report  had  already  come  to  the  conclusion  that  these
    documents were genuine."

 8. For his part, Mr Bramble submitted that the  judge  had  fully  engaged
    with the expert report.  This was because at the outset  (at  paragraph
    33) the judge had stated that he had "considered the  evidence  in  its
    totality".  He had gone on to say that he would "focus  upon  the  core
    and  centrepiece  of  the  claim"  (paragraph  33).   He  accepted  the
    Appellants' Counsel's submission that there was no  Refugee  Convention
    reason relied upon by the Appellants because their claim was based upon
    Article 3 ECHR.  He had had regard to the case of VB and Another, which
    was the country guidance case.  He had then gone on  to  say  that  the
    expert's report did not ask all the relevant questions before coming to
    the conclusion that the documents "appear genuine" (see paragraph  39).
    He was entitled, in this respect, to come to  the  conclusion  that  he
    would "attach little evidential weight to this report" (paragraph  41).



 9. Finally, it could not be overlooked,  as  the  judge  found,  that  the
    Appellant in relation to the credibility of his claim, had not  made  a
    protection claim at all, until all other avenues had been closed off to
    him.  It was only after he had been detained that he made a claim,  and
    even then the claim he made was based upon family and private  life  on
    24th August 2015.  His fear of return  to  Ukraine  was  not  mentioned
    until three months after his detention and  this  "reinforces  my  view
    that their claim has no merit" (paragraph 44) according to  the  judge.
    The judge was entitled to come to this conclusion.

10. In reply, Ms Panagiiotopoulou submitted that  the  judge  was  not  the
    expert.  It was not for him to say, or not to say, what he  would  have
    expected the expert to do.  The expert was aware  of  his  professional
    duties.  He had, after all, made it quite clear that  he  had  "handled
    some twelve such similar call up summonses before, had seen and handled
    some 24 court summonses before and seen and handled  more  than  twelve
    court determinations"(paragraph 39 of the determination).  Accordingly,
    it was wrong for the judge to knit pick with the  expert's  assessment,
    and the matter ought to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a rehearing of the appeal.

No Error of Law

11. I have come to the conclusion,  notwithstanding  Ms  Panagiiotopoulou's
    valiant and determined efforts to persuade me otherwise, that the judge
    did not err in law.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, the judge correctly identified the relevant issue at the  outset
    (see paragraph 36).

13. Second, the judge was guided by the country guidance  case  of  VB  and
    Another.  What this case makes quite clear is that it is not reasonably
    likely that a draft evader avoiding conscription or mobilisation in the
    Ukraine would face criminal or administrative proceedings.  This is  so
    unless such a draft evader can point to "aggravating matters".  If that
    were to be the case then there would be a real risk  for  anyone  being
    returned to Ukraine as a convicted  criminal  sentence  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment being detained on arrival.  However, even if this were  to
    happen, it was then likely that such a person, if he had been convicted
    in absentia, "would probably be entitled thereafter  to  a  retrial..."
    The real risk of detention contrary to Article 3 ECHR only materialises
    after that.

14. The judge, in taking this step by step approach, assessed the evidence,
    prior to his coming to the expert report, and  already  concluded  that
    there would be no risk of ill-treatment because prison  sentences  "are
    highly unlikely and are unusual for draft evading" (paragraph  38)  and
    in this case, "there  is  no  reference  anywhere  to  any  aggravating
    factors".

15. It was only after  this  that  the  judge  then  considered  the  court
    documents.  He fastened upon the court judgment which appears at  pages
    19 and 20 of the Appellant's bundle and he noted, as he was entitled to
    do, that this refers "to the decision not to  be  appealable"  and  the
    judge here commented that,

         "This was curious given that the  objective  evidence  states  that
         anyone convicted in  absentia  would  probably  be  entitled  to  a
         retrial in accordance with Article 412 of  the  Criminal  Procedure
         Code of Ukraine.  If the sentence was incapable of  being  appealed
         against then  I  would  expect  there  to  be  some  further  legal
         references and explanation other than the basis  comment  that  the
         sentence cannot be appealed" (see paragraph 38).

16. Nothing that I have heard today provides any reason for suggesting that
    the judge had erred in making such a finding of  fact  in  relation  to
    this court determination.  The expert did not address  this  particular
    anomaly in the court determination.  After  all,  Article  412  of  the
    Criminal Procedure Code of Ukraine provides for a retrial, and  it  was
    for the judge (in the absence of the expert commenting on this) to come
    to the view.  This the judge did.

17. Third, as far as the expert report itself is concerned,  the  dicta  of
    Lord Justice Wall in Re M-W (Care Proceedings: Expert Evidence)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 12 bear consideration (at paragraph 39).  It is said here that
    experts do not decide cases judges do.  The  expert's  function  is  to
    advise the judge.  The judge is fully  entitled  to  accept  or  reject
    expert opinion.  If the judge decides to reject an expert's advice,  he
    or she must have a sound basis on which to do so, and must explain  why
    that advice has been rejected.   In  this  case,  the  judge  has  done
    exactly that.  He has provided reasons.

18. Fourth, even insofar as criticism of Mr Galeotti's report is  concerned
    (which Ms Panagiiotopoulou accepted as being a brief report) the  judge
    takes issue with the fact that the summons or call up  papers  did  not
    contain a warning regarding evasion of military  service.   Given  that
    this was the case, the judge rightly queried why Professor Galeotti had
    not addressed this issue when it was raised in the refusal letter.  The
    expert could have said whether or not such warnings are routinely given
    and whether he seen them in the various  summons  and  court  documents
    that he had seen in the past, given  that  he  had  said  that  he  had
    handled some 25 court summonses prior to this particular summons.

19. For all these reasons, I do not find that the judge erred  in  law  and
    cannot conclude that the strictures in the country guidance case of  VB
    and Another had not been followed.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018

