
  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03780/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2017                        |On 16 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                   VINOTH PRIYANTHA PERERA PALLIYA GURUNGE
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra of Counsel instructed by Nag Law
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Khawar promulgated on 17  February  2017  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against a decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  11  April  2016
      refusing a claim for protection.




   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  14  May  1983.  The
      Appellant's claimed personal history and the basis of his asylum claim
      are a matter of record and are summarised in the Respondent's 'reasons
      for refusal' letter (RFRL) dated 11 April 2016, and in the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 3-7 and 11-19.




   3. In such circumstances I do not repeat  the  entirety  of  the  history
      here. In any  event  the  focus  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not
      specifically in respect of the claimed history -  which  was  rejected
      for sustainable reasons by the First-tier Tribunal Judge - but on  the
      Appellant's mental health and the potential impact of removal  to  Sri
      Lanka upon his  mental  health.  Suffice  for  present  to  offer  the
      following summary: the Appellant entered the UK  on  22  October  2012
      with entry clearance as a student valid until 28 February 2016; during
      the currency of his leave he returned to Sri Lanka on 19  April  2014,
      re-entering the UK on 2 May 2014; on 24  September  2015  his  student
      Visa was curtailed; on 18 November 2015 the Appellant claimed  asylum;
      the application for asylum was dismissed by  the  Respondent  for  the
      reasons set out in the RFRL.




   4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. His appeal was heard on 16  January
      2017 and dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision and Reasons  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar promulgated on 17 February 2017.




   5. It was a feature of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
      the Appellant did not offer oral evidence  in  support  of  his  case.
      Paragraphs 8 and 9 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  are  in
      these terms:


      "8. This appeal was listed as an oral hearing. I did not hear evidence
      from the Appellant. I was informed by his Counsel [Ms Seehra] that  he
      was "not very well"  and  that  she  did  not  propose  to  bring  the
      Appellant into the Court room (even to confirm his identity), although
      he was in the Court building. Ms Seehra sought to rely upon  a  letter
      dated 13 January 2017 from the Appellant's solicitor, to establish the
      Appellant's lack of fitness to give  evidence.  This  letter  in  turn
      refers to the Report of Dr Julia Heller dated  16  August  2016  which
      declares that the Appellant is unfit to give evidence.


      9. Consequently I did not hear any evidence from the Appellant in this
      appeal consisted of hearing submissions in relation to the documentary
      evidence from both representatives."




   6. In his Decision Judge Khawar gave careful and  detailed  consideration
      to the materials  and  submissions  relied  upon  in  respect  of  the
      Appellant's fitness to give evidence (paragraphs 38-46), and reached a
      closely reasoned conclusion that there "is no adequate and/or reliable
      evidence before me to establish that the Appellant is not fit to  give
      evidence", also noting that in any event  the  medical  report  relied
      upon was not up-to-date, preceding the date of hearing  by  some  five
      months (paragraph 46).




   7. Consequentially, and necessarily,  the  Judge  observed  that  in  the
      absence of oral evidence the Appellant's testimony "can only be viewed
      as being untried and untested", and in all the  circumstances  of  the
      case determined that he should "attach extremely limited weight to the
      evidence of the Appellant" (paragraph 47). Thereafter the  Judge  gave
      reasons for why he was dismissive of other aspects  of  the  available
      supporting evidence (paragraphs 48-49), and reasons  for  why  he  was
      dismissive in respect of the absence of supporting evidence  that  the
      Appellant might have been expected to provide in support of  his  case
      (paragraph 50). The Judge also gave  reasons,  at  paragraph  51,  for
      rejecting a  core  element  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  account
      relating to the purchase of a Sim card  in  2006  in  the  Appellant's
      identity which it was claimed  had  been  given  to  his  cousin  who,
      unbeknownst to the Appellant was an LTTE member.




   8. In addition to the Appellant's claimed fears based on  the  perception
      that he was involved with the LTTE, the Judge noted that the Appellant
      also maintained that he was  "now  suffering  from  depression,  post-
      traumatic stress disorder and is suicidal" (paragraph 20), and that it
      was argued on his behalf that he  was  "entitled,  in  any  event,  to
      succeed on the basis of the medical evidence under Articles 2 and 3 of
      the ECHR" (paragraph 52). The Judge rejected this line of argument for
      reasons set out at paragraphs 52-54.




   9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, which
      was initially refused on 14 March 2017 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Robertson but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson  on
      13 April 2017.




  10. The Appellant's grounds in support of the application  for  permission
      to appeal raised arguments in respect of the Judge's approach  to  the
      available medical  evidence  both  with  regards  to  the  Appellant's
      fitness to give evidence and the risk on return.  Complaint  was  also
      made as to the Judge's approach to other elements  of  the  supporting
      evidence, and in respect of observations and findings  in  respect  of
      the Appellant's knowledge of his cousin's involvement with the LTTE.




  11. Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson granted permission to appeal on a limited
      basis only, viz. "on the second part of the  first  ground  of  appeal
      only in relation to the claim under Articles 2 and 3 of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights".  Judge  Jackson  further  stated  "it  is
      arguable that the First-tier Tribunal gave insufficient weight to  the
      medical evidence as to the appellant's mental state  when  considering
      risk on return such that insufficient findings were made on the  point
      to support the dismissal of the appeal at  least  on  the  grounds  of
      Articles 2 and 3".




  12. For completeness I observe that Judge Jackson stated in respect of the
      other grounds of challenge that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
      concluded "for sustainable reasons that it had  not  been  established
      that [the Appellant] was unfit to give evidence. There is no  arguable
      error of law in the  consideration  of  the  medical  report  in  that
      regard"; and "Adequate and sustainable reasons were given  as  to  why
      the appellant was not considered to have given a credible  account  of
      his claim which were open to Judge Khawar on the evidence before  him.
      These were not based merely  on  speculation  nor  did  they  fail  to
      consider all of the material evidence".




Preliminary Matters

  13. The Appellant attended the  hearing  centre  on  the  morning  of  the
      hearing. However, by the time the case was called on at 3:10pm he  had
      returned home. Ms Seehra indicated that it had  not  been  anticipated
      that he would be required to give evidence today in any event, and she
      was content to present the case in respect of 'error of  law'  in  his
      absence. In the circumstances I consider nothing turns one way or  the
      other on the Appellant's absence, and I only  mention  it  herein  for
      completeness.




  14. The Appellant had provided a new bundle under cover of letter dated 22
      May 2017 which included evidence that postdated the hearing before the
      First-tier  Tribunal.  In  particular  at  pages  1-7  there   was   a
      psychological report prepared by Dr Julia Heller dated 7 May 2017.  Ms
      Seehra acknowledged that any such new evidence would only be  relevant
      if the Tribunal were to conclude that there had been an error  of  law
      in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.




  15. Ms Seehra made an application for the Tribunal in effect to expand the
      scope of the grant of permission to appeal, and to permit argument  on
      all grounds pleaded in the application for permission to appeal.  This
      application was articulated in a Skeleton Argument dated 19 May  2017,
      and amplified by way of oral submissions.




  16. It  was  argued  that  there  was  no  limitation  on  the  Tribunal's
      jurisdiction so  to  act.  My  attention  was  also  directed  to  the
      observations of the Tribunal in Ferrer (Limited appeal grounds;  Alvi)
      [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC) as to the need for the  Tribunal  to  consider
      carefully the utility of granting permission only on limited  grounds.
      Ms Seehra otherwise argued that there  was  a  degree  of  overlap  or
      interlinking between the issue upon which  permission  to  appeal  had
      been  granted,  and  the  ground  of  challenge  in  respect  of   the
      Appellant's fitness to give evidence  in  that  both  related  to  the
      supporting medical evidence. Moreover in respect of the other line  of
      challenge Ms Seehra placed particular emphasis on  incidences  of  the
      Judge's use of the phrase 'self-serving', and in this context referred
      to R (on the application of SS) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department ("self-serving" statements) [2017] UKUT 00164 (IAC).




  17. Mr Norton opposed the application.  He  essentially  argued  that  the
      Judge  had  given  entirely  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons   for
      rejecting the evidence in respect of the Appellant's fitness  to  give
      evidence. He also submitted that the Judge  had  adequately  explained
      his reasons for attaching little or no weight to the evidence that  he
      characterised as 'self-serving'.




  18. In the premises I  accept  that  the  Tribunal  has  power  to  permit
      amendment of grounds of appeal, which in effect empowers it to  permit
      argument on grounds that have already been rejected at the  permission
      to appeal stage. However, it seems to me that some distinction  is  to
      be made between the situation where an application to amend is made on
      the basis of previously un-argued grounds, and where an application to
      amend is made in effect on the basis of renewing grounds in respect of
      which permission has already been refused. (Indeed, on the facts here,
      the grounds that are the subject of  the  application  to  amend  have
      already been renewed once in the renewed application for permission to
      appeal, and so are now renewed for a second time.) Where  the  grounds
      relied upon in an application for permission  to  amend  have  already
      been  the  subject  of  judicial  scrutiny  and  rejected,  the  Judge
      considering the application to amend should approach such grounds on a
      different basis from grounds that have not previously been  raised  at
      all. This is because the  Judge  is  being  invited  to  go  behind  a
      judicial decision already properly made in circumstances where  he  or
      she is not constituted to sit in  appeal  or  review  of  the  earlier
      decision. Whilst I do not suggest that this prevents  the  Judge  from
      coming to his or her own independent decision on  the  merits  of  the
      grounds, I do suggest that a greater degree of scrutiny is required if
      only because the Judge must consider and address the reasoning of  the
      previous judicial  decision-maker  who  rejected  permission  on  such
      grounds.




  19. I bring my own independent scrutiny to  bear  on  the  merits  of  the
      grounds that Ms Seehra invites me to  consider  notwithstanding  their
      rejection by both Judge Robertson and Judge Jackson.




  20. I find that there is no merit in  the  argument  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge fell into error in his consideration of the Appellant's
      fitness to give evidence. In my judgement Judge  Khawar  gave  careful
      and detailed consideration to the evidence relied upon in  submissions
      before him on this issue, and gave entirely adequate  and  sustainable
      reasons for his conclusion. This line of challenge is unarguable.




  21. I also consider that the further  line  of  challenge  pursued  by  Ms
      Seehra is unarguable. I acknowledge and entirely accept what  is  said
      in SS about the value (or lack of  value)  of  the  expression  'self-
      serving': in itself it has little meaning and is best avoided.  It  is
      unfortunate that in what is  otherwise  a  very  carefully  and  fully
      reasoned decision that Judge Khawar has  used  the  phrase:  e.g.  see
      paragraphs 48 and 49. However, I accept the submission  of  Mr  Norton
      that notwithstanding the use of such a phrase the Judge has  otherwise
      offered detailed and sustainable reasons for marginalising  the  value
      of the evidence that he has characterised  as  self-serving.  To  that
      extent even if criticism is rightly to be made of the use  of  such  a
      phrase, its use  is  ultimately  immaterial  to  the  Judge's  overall
      evaluation of the supporting evidence.




  22. The Appellant's application  to  expand  the  grounds  of  Appeal  was
      refused accordingly.



Consideration of 'error of law'

  23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge addressed the question of risk on return
      in respect of the Appellant's mental health in the following terms  at
      paragraphs 52-54:


      "52. It is also submitted in the Appellant's skeleton argument that he
      is entitled, in any event, to succeed on  the  basis  of  the  medical
      evidence under Articles 2 and 3  of  the  ECHR  as  was  concluded  in
      relation to one of the appellants in GJ and others. Having  considered
      carefully the evidence of Dr Heller, I conclude against the Appellant.
      It is evident from Dr Heller's Report that although she expresses  her
      opinions as to the Appellant's suicide risk in strong terms (paragraph
      6.3 of her Report) I have little option but to note that  her  opinion
      is expressed on the basis of assertions made by the  Appellant,  there
      being no history of any suicide attempts or the Appellant  having  any
      real intent to act on his "occasional suicidal ideation".


      53. Further and in any event this is in the context  of  an  Appellant
      who has failed to establish in my  judgement  that  he  was  genuinely
      detained and ill treated by the army and/or the police in  Sri  Lanka;
      other than his assertion there is no objective independent evidence to
      establish such assertions. It  is  asserted  that  Appellant  received
      medical treatment upon being released at a medical centre.  Given  the
      length that the Appellant appears to have gone to in order  to  obtain
      statements from members of his family and/or friends in Sri Lanka,  in
      my judgement there was nothing to prevent the Appellant from obtaining
      evidence from such medical centre of his injuries and/or treatment, he
      allegedly sustained during his claimed detentions. The Appellant is an
      intelligent man and it cannot possibly be maintained  that  he  and/or
      his lawyers would not have considered  the  possibility  of  obtaining
      such evidence.


      54. Therefore I conclude that  the  Appellant's  case  does  not  fall
      within the same category as any of the Appellants  or  indeed  and  in
      particular the Appellant in GJ and others who  succeeded  due  to  his
      medical condition on medical grounds under Articles 3 of the ECHR."




  24. The Appellant now essentially challenges the  Judge's  marginalisation
      of the value of Dr Heller's report and opinion in respect  of  suicide
      risk. It is emphasised by way of  the  grounds  of  challenge  and  Ms
      Seehra's oral submissions: that there was no challenge to Dr  Heller's
      credentials as a Chartered Clinical Psychologist with  over  20  years
      post qualification experience; Dr  Heller's  opinion  was  not  simply
      based on the assertions of the Appellant but was also founded  upon  a
      number of other diagnostic  criteria  including  "his  demeanour,  the
      psychometric test results and other behavioural indicators" (page 4 of
      the report), and that there had been an incident  of  self-harm  (page
      3); the Judge failed to have regard to other supporting evidence  from
      the Appellant's GP and a NHS care  plan;  the  absence  of  a  suicide
      attempt did not negate the notion of a suicide risk.




  25. Further to the above Ms Seehra seeks to draw an analogy  with  one  of
      the successful appellants in GJ and others [2013] UKUT 00319. She also
      pleads in aid Paposhvili v Belgium, but in light of  the  observations
      of the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 35 of SS (cited above) acknowledges
      that it is only of value as guidance rather than  having  any  binding
      effect.




  26. The Appellant argues that the Judge did not have  regard  to  evidence
      "separately obtained from the Appellant's GP and NHS, which  showed  a
      care plan review letter and that he  had  been  prescribed  medication
      since December 2015" (paragraph 7 of the Grounds, to which  Ms  Seehra
      in turn referred).




  27. In this context it is to be noted that before the First-tier  Tribunal
      the Appellant put his case in respect of Article 3 and  the  'physical
      and moral integrity' element of Article  8  essentially  only  on  the
      specific opinion expressed by Dr  Heller:  see  Skeleton  Argument  at
      paragraph 20 - "she opined the Appellant is a severe suicide  risk  if
      removal is advised". The other materials that were before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal - which I explore in further  detail  below  -  did  not
      address the risk of suicide if returned to Sri  Lanka,  and  at  their
      highest only go so far as to state "Thinks about suicide; Not acted on
      suicidal thoughts". As such the  other  materials  did  not  in  terms
      support the Appellant's case under Article 3, but at best  potentially
      provided contextual support for Dr Heller's opinion.




  28. In such circumstances it seems to me that the  Judge's  focus  on  the
      report of Dr Heller was not only understandable, but  appropriate:  it
      was the only  document  that  expressly  addressed  the  risk  to  the
      Appellant's mental health if he were to be returned to Sri Lanka,  and
      it was the document upon which the Appellant placed  express  reliance
      on this issue.




  29. Dr Heller expressed the opinion  that  the  Appellant  had  a  current
      diagnosis of 'Major Depressive Disorder' in the 'moderate  to  severe'
      clinical range, and also met the diagnostic criteria for  'Generalised
      Anxiety Disorder'; she did not consider that  the  Appellant  met  the
      full diagnostic  criteria  for  Post-traumatic  Stress  Disorder.  She
      characterised the current risk of suicide as moderate. However, having
      commented that the Appellant "is of the strong opinion that  he  faces
      imminent danger (detainment and torture) were he to be removed to  Sri
      Lanka", she expressed the belief "that he presents a  severe  risk  of
      suicide if removal is advised", commenting  that  she  considered  "he
      would not be able to cope with  the  real  prospect  of  a  period  of
      further detainment and torture".




  30. Ms Seehra  accurately  identifies  that  Dr  Heller  stated  that  her
      diagnoses were based on more than the Appellant's  narrative  account.
      Under the heading 'Current Diagnoses' she states: "This  is  based  on
      his self-report, his demeanour,  the  psychometric  test  results  and
      other behavioural indicators".




  31. However, in this context it is to be noted that the psychometric  test
      results were themselves a "self-report measure" (see section 5 of  the
      Report,  page  2).  The  'other  behavioural   indicators'   are   not
      identified,  nor  is  it  explained  how  such  factors  informed  the
      assessment. As regards 'demeanour', as the Judge observed at paragraph
      44, Dr Heller amongst other  things  "notes  that  the  Appellant  was
      "fully orientated" and... "Although there was evidence of  shaking  in
      the interview which he says is a frequent daily  presentation  he  was
      however able to sit moderately still for  about  an  hour  during  the
      interview without any notable clinically significant agitation", [and]
      "his concentration was generally intact and he was able to respond  to
      questions without  undue  difficulty..."".  Inevitably  the  narrative
      account and the patient's description of symptoms whilst not the  only
      basis of current diagnosis constituted a significant  aspect  of  such
      evaluation.




  32. Further in this context, it is to be noted that the  particular  focus
      of this aspect of the case is not specifically in respect  of  current
      diagnoses but the likely impact of a future event, viz. removal to Sri
      Lanka. I have referred to  Dr  Heller's  opinion  in  this  regard  at
      paragraph 29 above. In full, at section 6.3 of  the  report,  page  5,
      under the heading 'Comment on his risk of suicide were removal to  Sri
      Lanka be advised', Dr Heller writes:


      "[The Appellant] is of the  strong  opinion  that  he  faces  imminent
      danger (detainment and torture) were he to be removed  to  Sri  Lanka.
      When asked to rate the likelihood of him  being  detained  further  he
      commented that this was one hundred percent.
      Based on the available evidence, I believe that he represents a severe
      risk of suicide if removal is advised. I consider that he would not be
      able to cope with the real prospect of a period of further  detainment
      and torture. I  would  urge  the  authorities  to  take  note  of  his
      particular vulnerabilities."




  33. It seems to me that this  aspect  of  the  opinion  of  Dr  Heller  is
      expressed in terms that refer solely to statements of  the  Appellant:
      it is based on his opinion of facing imminent danger of detainment and
      torture; it is also informed by a perceived  inability  to  cope  with
      further detainment and torture - which indicates it is  premised  upon
      an acceptance of past incidents of detainment and torture.




  34. The Judge, however, for sustainable reasons rejected  the  Appellant's
      past narrative account and rejected that he currently  had  any  well-
      founded fear.




  35. My attention has been drawn to a passage in the case of Y (Sri Lanka),
      Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362, referenced both in the  Appellant's
      Skeleton Argument before the First-tier Tribunal and in his Grounds of
      Appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Paragraph 12 in part states:


      "Similarly, where the factual basis of  the  psychiatric  findings  is
      sought to be undermined by suggesting that the  appellants  have  been
      exaggerating their symptoms, care is required. The factual reality  of
      an appellant's account of his or her history may be so controverted by
      the tribunal's own findings as to undermine the psychiatric  evidence.
      This happens from time to time, but it did not happen here."


  36. Whilst 'it may not have happened' in the case of either  Y  or  Z,  it
      happened in the case of the Appellant. In  my  judgement,  when  Judge
      Khawar commented in the specific context of  considering  the  suicide
      risk identified by Dr Heller, that "her opinion is  expressed  on  the
      basis of assertions made by the Appellant" (paragraph  52),  and  that
      "this is in the context of an Appellant who has failed to establish in
      my judgement that he was genuinely detained and  ill  treated  by  the
      army and/or the police in Sri Lanka" (paragraph 53), he was expressing
      sustainable reasons on the facts and evidence of the  particular  case
      entirely consistent with the notion recognised by the Court of  Appeal
      that the Appellant's  account  was  so  controverted  by  the  Judge's
      findings  that  it  undermined  the  evidence  of  the   psychological
      assessment.




  37. In such circumstances I detect no error  of  law  in  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge's approach, reasoning, and conclusion.




  38. For the avoidance of any doubt, in reaching my conclusion I have given
      careful consideration to the contents of the  other  medical  evidence
      filed before the First-tier Tribunal. It is to  be  acknowledged  that
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not expressly address such evidence,
      but I am satisfied that  this  made  no  material  difference  to  the
      outcome of the appeal, and moreover in circumstances where  the  focus
      of the Appellant's submissions was in respect  of  the  report  of  Dr
      Heller this did not arguably constitute an omission  amounting  to  an
      error of law.


  39. The Appellant's main bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (filed
      under cover of letter dated 17  August  2016)  contains  a  number  of
      copies of prescriptions, and a letter from his GP dated 5 August  2016
      which confirms  his  registration  with  the  surgery  and  states  in
      material part: "He is  known  to  suffer  from  Post-traumatic  stress
      disorder problem for which he has seen specialist in the past.  He  is
      currently on Mirtazapine, Orphenadrine and Risperidone medication  for
      his mental health related illness" (Bundle at page 18). There is  also
      included in the bundle copies of  'patient  information  leaflets'  in
      respect of mirtazapine and risperidone (pages 19-22).



  40. A document headed 'Significant change of care/Care Plan review  letter
      (MH4)' appears at pages 25-26 of the bundle. The author of the  report
      is Dr Isadora Ranjit-Singh, and it is  written  in  Dr  Ranjit-Singh's
      capacity as a member of the Brent East Mental Health Service community
      mental health team ('CMHT');  in  context  it  is  apparent  that  the
      Appellant was referred the CMHT by his GP, and indeed in the index  to
      the Appellant's bundle this document is characterised as  having  been
      issued by the "Appellant's Consultant". The document  is  based  on  a
      review when the Appellant was seen on 14  June  2016  and  confirms  a
      diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder with current medication of
      mirtazapine, and recommends commencing risperidone  and  orphenadrine;
      it details his mental state, including reference to fluctuating  mood,
      anxiety, hypervigilance, poor concentration,  and  flashbacks;  it  is
      written "Thinks about suicide; Not acted on  suicidal  thoughts".  The
      concluding 'Impression' is stated to be "He has predominantly symptoms
      of PTSD with some low mood; mild paranoia and anxiety". The  Appellant
      is discharged back to the care of his GP, although it is noted that he
      has been referred to Freedom from Torture "for therapy and  help  with
      his asylum application".




  41. Beyond the one reference to suicidal ideation there is nothing in  any
      of this material that offers an evaluation of suicide risk  generally,
      and more particularly nothing that offers  an  evaluation  of  suicide
      risk in the context of removal to Sri Lanka. In such circumstances the
      contents of these materials do not particularly assist the Appellant's
      case - and hence no doubt the  exclusive  reliance  upon  Dr  Heller's
      report in the Skeleton Argument.




  42. It may be observed that the  respective  diagnoses  referenced  by  Dr
      Ranjit-Singh, and made by Dr Heller are not ad idem. Whilst Dr Ranjit-
      Singh refers to a diagnosis of PTSD and predominant symptoms  of  PTSD
      with some low mood and mild paranoia and anxiety, Dr Heller  concludes
      that the Appellant does not meet the  diagnostic  criteria  for  PTSD,
      notwithstanding that she considers his depression to  be  moderate  to
      severe. Whilst it may be that in some cases different diagnoses may be
      explained by a change of circumstance - and here the two  consultation
      dates are approximately two months apart - this does  not  present  an
      obvious explanation on the facts of this case in  circumstances  where
      on the one hand Dr Heller appears  to  identify  a  greater  level  of
      depression than Dr Ranjit-Singh, yet declines to diagnose  PTSD  which
      was considered to  be  the  predominant  symptom  by  the  Appellant's
      consultant. It may of course also be that the particular  presentation
      of a patient on a particular day offers an explanation  for  different
      diagnoses. In this context it may be  relevant  to  observe  that  the
      consultant would have had the benefit of a  greater  familiarity  with
      the Appellant and his case notes than Dr Heller who saw the  Appellant
      on a one-off basis - which, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge observed,
      appeared to have been "for a period of about an hour" (paragraph  44).
      Whatever the explanation might be, given that there is a difference of
      emphasis, it is not readily apparent that consideration of  the  other
      medical evidence would have bolstered the opinion of Dr Heller  rather
      than have undermined it. Be that as it may,  and  in  any  event,  the
      simple reality is that the other medical evidence did not express  any
      sort of opinion in respect of suicide risk in the event of removal and
      was therefore at best of marginal significance and relevance  on  this
      issue.




  43. Finally, for completeness, I have noted that Dr  Heller's  description
      of the incidence of self-harm is limited to it having only taken place
      in the week before  the  appointment  with  Dr  Heller,  who  observed
      "evidence of substantial/superficial cutting" (page 3 of the  report).
      There is no suggestion in any of the other materials of  there  having
      been any prior incidences of self-harm. Ultimately, such an  event  is
      of little weight in establishing  a  risk  of  Article  3  type  harm.
      Similarly, whilst Ms Seehra is in principle correct in her observation
      that an absence of suicide attempts does not negate  a  suicide  risk,
      the Judge was, in my judgement, unobjectionably entitled to take  into
      account the absence of suicide attempts  as  one  factor  in  a  wider
      evaluation of future risk of suicide; there is nothing in the  wording
      of the Decision to suggest that the Judge thought such a  circumstance
      was determinative.




  44. I have also noted and had regard to the analogy  sought  to  be  drawn
      between the Appellant's  case  and  that  of  one  of  the  successful
      appellants in GJ and others: see in respect  of  the  third  appellant
      therein, at  paragraph  435  et  seq.  The  instant  case  is  readily
      distinguishable: the  Appellant  does  not  have  severe  PTSD  -  his
      consultant referred to PTSD symptoms with low mood and  mild  paranoia
      and anxiety, and  Dr  Heller  concluded  that  he  did  not  meet  the
      diagnostic criteria for PTSD; he does not have severe depression - his
      consultant referring to low mood  and  mild  anxiety,  and  Dr  Heller
      opining that his symptoms were in the range of 'moderate  to  severe';
      the Appellant's  presentation  at  consultation  with  Dr  Heller  was
      markedly different from  that  of  the  'third  appellant'  -  see  at
      paragraph 443. Moreover it is clear that in GJ and others "the gravity
      of the appellant's past experience of ill-treatment" was considered  a
      significant factor in evaluating  a  potential  breach  of  Article  3
      (paragraph 453), whereas the Appellant's account of past ill-treatment
      was rejected herein. The Tribunal's identification at paragraph 450(5)
      of one of the six elements set out in J v Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department - "Where the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in  the
      receiving state upon which the risk of suicide is said to be based  is
      not objectively well-founded, that will tend to  weigh  against  there
      being a real risk that the removal will be in breach of article  3"  -
      is  particularly  pertinent.  Accordingly  I  find  that  the  Judge's
      conclusion at paragraph 54 that the Appellant's circumstances did  not
      match those of the third appellant in GJ was entirely sustainable.




  45. In all the circumstances I do not identify any error  of  law  in  the
      approach of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.




NOTICE OF DECISION


  46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of law  and
      stands. The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.




Signed:                                    Dated:   15 August 2017

...............................................
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis



