
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03838/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 20 January 2017                   |On 25 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            SUTHAKAR RAJANAYAGAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr N Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malcolm, promulgated on 7 November 2016,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against refusal of recognition as a refugee from Sri Lanka.

 2. I condense the key points from the rather lengthy grounds as follows.

   i. The judge said at paragraph 63 that the appellant claimed to have been
      released from detention on payment of a bribe,  which  was  consistent
      with an expert report. However, the appellant had not claimed that his
      release involved bribery.

  ii. The judge at paragraph 97 referred to a report  by  Dr  Mitchell,  and
      said that it did not assess the appellant's credibility  but  appeared
      simply to accept the information he provided, the only comment by  the
      doctor being, "I believe Suthakar's account to be true". However,  the
      report also said, "Injuries consistent  with  having  been  beaten  as
      described" and, "History given in a  clear  and  credible  manner  and
      injuries consistent with claim of having  been  tortured".  The  judge
      erred in considering that the report did not include an assessment  of
      credibility.

 iii. The error in assessing the report of Dr Mitchell led  the  judge  into
      further  error  when  assessing  a  report  by  Dr  Dignon  and   when
      considering credibility in relation to the adverse findings of a judge
      in a previous appeal.

  iv. The judge at paragraph 106 referred  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
      having gone to his family home in August 2014 and October 2014, saying
      that they had evidence of his attendance at demonstrations in Glasgow,
      when his evidence had been of a visit also in May 2015.

   v. The judge at paragraph 111 described the  evidence  of  the  appellant
      regarding visits to his mother's house as convenient,  but  failed  to
      demonstrate that she considered the claimed visit  in  May  2015,  and
      placed too much emphasis on absence of supporting evidence.

  vi.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  Sri  Lankan  government  engaged  in
      sophisticated   intelligence-regarding   activities   in   the   Tamil
      diasporas, but erred in her assessment of  the  appellant's  claim  to
      have come to the attention of the government.

 vii.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  involvement  in  diasporas
      activities in the UK was limited to attendance at demonstrations,  but
      failed to consider adequately evidence of the perception  of  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities of the appellant,  including  what  was  reportedly
      said to his mother about his working with LTTE elements in the UK  and
      being a security risk. The judge failed to assess the evidence  before
      her.

 3. The gist of the points I have noted from the submissions by Mr Ruddy is
    as follows. Judge Malcolm was entitled to apply Devaseelan and to  take
    the previous decision of Judge Edwards,  who  dismissed  an  appeal  in
    2011, as a starting point.  However, when  dealing  with  the  evidence
    which had since emerged, she fell into a series of errors, cumulatively
    enough to require her decision to be set aside.  She  was  entitled  to
    find that a letter from the Bishop of Batticaloa added little,  because
    it only repeated what he had been told. She went wrong in thinking that
    the appellant said he had been released on a bribe, when  he  had  said
    that he been released simply on conditions. The decision  at  paragraph
    97 went wrong in thinking  that  Dr  Mitchell  made  no  assessment  of
    credibility and about what was lacking in that  report.  This  led  the
    judge further astray, giving less weight to the findings of  Dr  Dignon
    than she otherwise might have done. Properly examined, the  information
    from both doctors added up to more than the judge thought, once seen in
    the correct light, so that was a material  error.  That  was  the  most
    important point.  If not sufficient on its own, it became so once taken
    with the other grounds. The judge  went  wrong  in  thinking  that  the
    evidence showed only 2 visits to the appellant's  home  in  Sri  Lanka,
    when he clearly said there were 3.  That might not be a major  slip  by
    itself, but the visit left out of account  was  the  most  recent.  The
    perception of the authorities of the appellant was important, and  this
    emerged from  his  evidence  of  what  was  said  to  his  mother:  the
    authorities  saw  him  as  a  security  threat.  The  judge  in   total
    underplayed the fresh evidence, and fell into  errors,  but  for  which
    there might have been another conclusion.

 4. The submissions by Mr Matthews were  along  the  following  lines.  The
    judge made a slip on  whether  the  appellant  said  that  his  release
    involved a bribe, but she drew no adverse  conclusion  from  that.  The
    report by Dr Mitchell had some evidential  value,  but  it  had  to  be
    placed in context. It is  a  report  obtained  by  the  respondent  for
    purposes of considering whether the appellant  should  continue  to  be
    kept in immigration detention. It is not an expert report instructed by
    solicitors, providing the doctor with full information, including prior
    assessments,  and  seeking  an  opinion  for  purposes  of  a  hearing.
    Paragraph 97 might by itself sound a little  unclear,  but  read  along
    with paragraph 98 what the judge plainly meant  was  that  Dr  Mitchell
    made no reasoned assessment of credibility, by way of contrast with the
    FtT judge in the previous appeal, whose function it was to make such an
    assessment.  The judge gave the assessment of Dr Mitchell  such  weight
    as it deserved. Whether the authorities were alleged to have made 2  or
    3 visits to the appellant's family home made no difference. It was  for
    the judge to resolve whether such visits took place  at  all,  and  she
    gave good reasons for not accepting that the Sri Lankan  government  is
    aware of the appellant going to demonstrations in the  UK.  Grounds  vi
    and  vii  were  based  on  the  credibility  of  the  appellant   being
    established, and on their own did not lead anywhere. On the sustainable
    finding that the appellant's attendance at demonstrations in the UK was
    not known to the Sri Lankan  authorities,  that  was  the  end  of  his
    argument. The judge might have made one or two minor  slips  in  noting
    the facts, which emerged on a very close scrutiny of her decision,  but
    nothing  amounting  to  error  of  law  in   reaching   her   essential
    conclusions.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. The relevant paragraphs about Dr Mitchell's decision are these.

      [97] The report from Dr Mitchell... is in respect of  the  examination
      of the appellant following his detention at Dungavel on 9  June  2015.
      Dr Mitchell has narrated the information provided by the appellant and
      has confirmed the appellant's scars  and  has  further  stated  "these
      injuries are consistent with having been  beaten  as  described".  The
      report however  does  not  make  any  assessment  of  the  appellant's
      credibility but appears to simply accept the information  provided  by
      the appellant. The only comment on credibility is the statement by  Dr
      Mitchell "I believe Suthakar's account to be true".

      [98] I have to contrast this  with  the  findings  of  the  first-tier
      tribunal judge who did not accept the credibility of the appellant.

 7. At paragraphs 99 to 102 the judgement goes on to consider the report by
    Dr Dignon, and the extent to which it disclosed  that  the  appellant's
    scarring was consistent with his account.  It has not  been  said  that
    the judge fell into any error in that respect. She  did  not  find  the
    report "persuasive that the injury has been  sustained  in  the  manner
    described by the appellant" (paragraph 103).

 8. The two medical reports, one prepared  for  the  respondent's  purposes
    relating to immigration detention, and the other as  an  expert  report
    instructed by the appellant's representatives, are both broadly to  the
    same effect: the appellant is scarred in a manner consistent  with  but
    not  necessarily  probative  of  his  account  of  ill-treatment  while
    detained in Sri Lanka.

 9. The evidence of scarring was accepted by the judge  as  supporting  the
    appellant's account, as far as it was capable of doing so.

10. In appeals, the assessment of credibility is the function of  a  judge,
    not of a doctor or any other witness, although their evidence  must  be
    properly taken into account.

11. The wording of paragraph 97 does not quite reflect the full wording  of
    Dr Mitchell's brief report, which says also, "History given in a  clear
    and credible manner".

12. (Dr Dignon correctly did not opine directly on  credibility,  confining
    himself to the observations  that  the  appellant  "appeared  to  be  a
    consistent historian", and describing his demeanour.)

13. It may have been a slip to  describe  the  report  by  Dr  Mitchell  as
    containing "no assessment of credibility", but the consistency  between
    scarring and account having been established, the judge's task  was  to
    go on to her own judgment of credibility.  She  was  right  to  observe
    that  a  prior  judicial  decision  was  a  starting  point.    As   to
    credibility, a doctor's opinion  is  not  such  a  starting  point,  so
    paragraph 98 is accurate.   The  judge  was  careful  to  identify  the
    evidence before her which was not before the  previous  judge,  and  to
    evaluate it.

14. The identification of the slip takes a close reading  of  the  decision
    and of the evidence.  This was no more than a minor  misdescription  of
    the terms of report.  It played no part in the decisive analysis.

15. There was  another  slight  slip  over  a  bribe  being  paid  for  the
    appellant's release, but nothing at all turned on that.

16. It is unimportant that the  judge  said  that  the  appellant's  mother
    reported 2 visits by the authorities to  her  home,  when  3  had  been
    alleged.

17. A few minor blemishes  have  been  found,  but  nothing  going  to  the
    essential reasons for which the appellant's account  was  found  to  be
    less than credible.  Read fairly and as a whole, the decision remains a
    coherent explanation to the appellant of why his case failed.

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            23 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




