
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                              Appeal Number: PA/03475/2019 &
                                                               PA/03476/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House              |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                    |Promulgated                         |
|On 16 December 2020                 |           On 17 December 2020      |
|                                    |                                    |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     RK
                                     KM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Decision made under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Though aware that it  will  usually
be in the public interest for proceedings to be conducted by means  of  open
justice,  I  am  mindful  that  the  appellants  have  sought  international
protection and I make this order to  avoid  a  likelihood  of  serious  harm
arising to them from the contents of their protection claim  being  publicly
known.

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the appellants. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  the
appellants and the respondent. Any failure to  comply  with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


1. The Tribunal has previously set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal in this matter by means of a decision of UTJ Bruce sent  to  the
   parties on 19 November 2019.

2. By email correspondence dated  10  December  2020,  Mr.  McVeety,  Senior
   Presenting Officer, confirmed that the respondent had taken the  decision
   to withdraw  her  decisions  refusing  the  appellants'  application  for
   international  protection,  dated  14  March  2019,  and  to  grant   the
   appellants asylum status based on the individual circumstances  of  their
   appeal.

3. Mr. McVeety seeks  to  vacate  the  hearing  of  this  matter  listed  at
   Bradford on 18 December 2020.

4. This Tribunal confirmed in SM (withdrawal of appealed  decision:  effect)
   Pakistan [2014] UKUT 64 (IAC) that rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
   (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  ('the  2008   Rules'),   concerned   with
   withdrawal, does not enable the Upper Tribunal to withhold consent to the
   withdrawal by the respondent of  the  decision  against  which  a  person
   appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

5. The Tribunal confirmed  that  where  such  a  decision  is  withdrawn  in
   appellate proceedings the Tribunal continues to have  jurisdiction  under
   section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to
   decide whether to re-make the decision in the appeal, notwithstanding the
   withdrawal of the appealed decision. Withdrawal is not, without more, one
   of the ways in which an appeal  under  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ceases  to  be  pending.  Consequently,
   withdrawal does not terminate the appellant jurisdiction of the  Tribunal
   and it may complete its appellate functions  by  remaking  the  decision.
   Further, withdrawal of the respondent's decision does not  mean  that  an
   appeal must be treated as academic.

6. I am required to apply the overriding objective confirmed by  rule  2  of
   the 2008 Rules and to have regard to all relevant matters, including  the
   principle that the respondent should, ordinarily, be the primary decision-
   maker  in  the  immigration  field  and  the   reasons   underlying   the
   respondent's withdrawal of the appealed decision.

7. In this matter the respondent has accepted that the appellants  meet  the
   criteria for refugee status. This is a determinative factor in proceeding
   to formally consider the appeal and allow the appeals on asylum grounds.

8.  Consequent  to  such  decision,  there  is  no  requirement   that   the
   appellants' human rights appeals be considered.

Notice of decision

9. Upon the Upper Tribunal having previously set aside the decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal the decision is remade, and the  appellants'  appeals
   are allowed on asylum grounds.

10. An anonymity direction is made.



Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 16 December 2020
