
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03086/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Birmingham Civil Justice Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2018                            |On 9 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    A Z I
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr J Dewa, IAS Birmingham
For the Secretary of State:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He claimed asylum in the United
      Kingdom and asked to be recognised as a refugee on 25 June 2015. The
      Respondent refused his application in a letter dated 11 November 2015.
      The Appellant appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal and
      his appeal was heard and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Row in
      a decision promulgated on 10 August 2016. The Appellant sought
      permission to appeal this decision which was granted on renewal to the
      Upper Tribunal on 15 December 2017.


   2. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer who found that
      it was arguable that, having accepted aspects of the Appellant's
      evidence, the First-tier Tribunal inadequately reasoned why his
      evidence that he was involved in a committee investigating fraud was
      rejected, beyond its view is that there was inadequate support in the
      documentary evidence. It was further arguable that the First-tier
      Tribunal had unlawfully required corroboration of part of the
      Appellant's evidence, without giving reasons as to why his own
      detailed account was not accepted.

The Grounds

   3. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal, having accepted a
      number of aspects of the Appellant's account, then appeared to raise
      the required standard of proof finding that the documents he provided
      did not advance his case and then recommending the type of evidence
      which would have sufficiently satisfied the standard of proof. It is
      said that this evidence would no doubt have been strong enough to
      satisfy the standard of the balance of probability, however that was
      not the standard required. Further, it is stated that the First-tier
      Tribunal did not take into consideration the evidence given in the
      Appellant's witness statement where he provided a very detailed
      account. Further, the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account
      explanations given in oral evidence as to why the Appellant was unable
      to provide the type of evidence suggested by the First-tier Tribunal.
      The Appellant confirmed that the documents the First-tier Tribunal
      suggested he obtained were sensitive government documents. It is
      further asserted that the First-tier Tribunal did not make any adverse
      credibility findings on the oral and written evidence provided by the
      Appellant and therefore the First-tier Tribunal had not justified why
      the documentary evidence was not accepted and the written and oral
      evidence not considered.

The Hearing

   4. The appeal therefore came before the Upper Tribunal in order to
      determine whether there was an error of law in the decision of Judge
      Row and if so whether to set that decision aside.


   5. I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Dewa submitted that
      the Appellant could not get further evidence. It would have exposed
      him to a risk. It was not in dispute that he was a government auditor.
      It was his case that a member of the committee he was on was murdered
      despite having police protection. It was not disputed that he died. It
      was this that that made it impossible for the Appellant to find
      redress from the police. The Judge equated the environment in the UK
      to the one in Iraq. It was in transition and because it held elections
      did not mean that they respected the rule of law. When it came to
      corruption it had been reported that there was a culture of corruption
      by public officials. An auditor would have been at risk if trying to
      expose what he was seeing. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was
      not sustainable as some aspects were accepted and the Judge came to a
      conclusion which was not consistent with his findings. The Appellant
      did not have redress in Iraq nor could he avail himself of internal
      relocation. As an Arab and Sunni and he could not be able to go to
      Kurdistan and could not resettle there. Mr Dewa reminded me of the
      facts of the case and asked me to find that there was a material error
      of law.


   6. Mr Mills submitted that there was a genuine and important principle
      that corroboration can be expected.  Whilst that was the general
      principle there were exceptions (TK (Burundi) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ
      40). When evidence was likely to be available but had not been
      produced without explanation the Judge was entitled to make an adverse
      inference. Despite what we knew about Iraq it was a relatively
      developed country with a very developed bureaucracy. If the Appellant
      was able to produce some evidence, why could he not produce other
      evidence. The Judge was entitled to come to those conclusions. Beyond
      the documents that he accepted from the Ministry of Oil, the question
      was why he could not get the others. If the risk emanated from the
      authorities that would be explained but he said that it was corrupt
      people who were linked to militias who were the ones who were after
      him. He could have got the information from the Ministry of Oil.

   7. Mr Dewa said that IAS took the decision not to get the documents
      because they risked exposing him. It was difficult to see how he could
      have trusted corrupt employers.

Discussion

   8. It is the Appellant's case that he worked as an auditor for the
      Ministry of Oil and when investigating a contract between a company
      owned by the government and a privately owned company, he, and others
      who were part of his committee, discovered irregularities. It is the
      Appellant's case that there were corrupt dealings involving a manager
      of the government owned company and an individual in the private
      company. Consequently, a formal investigation was started. The
      Appellant and the other members of the committee were asked to conduct
      this investigation and a report was prepared, and threats were made by
      the allegedly corrupt individual. The private company was blacklisted
      by the government as a result of its corrupt involvement in the
      contract. It is the Appellant's case that the corrupt individual
      threatened revenge and murdered one of the members of the committee by
      the instigation of a militia. All other members of the committee had
      fled.


   9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the Appellant was an
      employee of the Ministry of Oil, a matter which was in issue between
      the parties. However, the Judge found that the documentary evidence
      adduced by the Appellant did not advance his case. He found that the
      report which caused the problems could have been obtained, his
      employer could have confirmed that he was on the committee and that
      the other members had fled. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a
      number of adverse credibility findings and concluded that although the
      Appellant was employed in a minor capacity as an auditor, he was not
      involved in any committee investigating fraud or a joint author of any
      report.

  10. It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge unlawfully required
      corroboration when obtaining such documentation would put him at risk.
      In ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119 the
      Tribunal held that it was a misdirection to imply that corroboration
      was necessary for a positive credibility finding.  However, the fact
      that corroboration was not required did not mean that a Judge was
      required to leave out of account the absence of documentary evidence,
      which could reasonably be expected.  In Gedow, Abdulkadir and Mohammed
      v SSHD 2006 EWCA 1342 the Court of Appeal concluded that the Tribunal
      was entitled to draw conclusion from the absence of corroboration as
      long as it bore in mind the difficulties faced by asylum seekers in
      producing corroborative evidence.   In TK (Burundi) v SSHD (2009) EWCA
      Civ 40 the Court of Appeal said that where there were circumstances in
      which evidence corroborating the Appellant's evidence was easily
      obtainable, the lack of such evidence must affect the assessment of
      the Appellant's credibility.  Where a judge in assessing credibility
      relies on the fact that there is no independent supporting evidence
      where there should be and there was no credible account for its
      absence, there is no error of law when he relies on that fact for
      rejecting the account of the Appellant.


  11. It is clear that the absence of corroborative documentary evidence was
      not the only reason the Judge rejected the Appellant's account but
      that he considered it to be material matter. The Appellant sets out in
      his detailed witness statement that the corrupt individual in question
      still works for the government despite the corruption which the report
      unveiled and had been able to arrange the murder of a colleague on the
      committee. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not take this into
      account as an explanation or consider that he could be exposed to risk
      by seeking to obtain further documentation and that this was capable
      of being a credible explanation for its absence. In the circumstances,
      I find that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account the
      Appellant's explanation as to why the documentation could not
      reasonably be expected and in so doing unlawfully made adverse
      credibility findings based on the absence of corroboration. I find
      that this error was material because it clearly affected the
      assessment of the Appellant's credibility.

  12. In the light of the fact finding required in accordance with part 7.2
      of the Practice Statement I remit this matter for a de novo hearing
      before a Judge other than Judge Row.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remit the appeal for a de novo hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 October 2018
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray



