
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03346/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2016                           |On 23rd August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     V M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms H Short, Counsel, instructed by Elder
Rahimi Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a citizen of Iran who claimed asylum  upon  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom on 22nd June 2015.  His claim for  asylum  is  based
    upon his fear that if he were to return to Iran he  would  be  arrested
    because of his imputed political opinion as  he  has  been  accused  of
    being a spy.  He attended an interview  on  12th  November  2015.   His
    application for  protection  was  refused  in  a  decision  dated  25th
    November 2015.

2.   The claimant appealed against that decision, which appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet on 5th May  2016.   The  claimant  gave
    evidence and produced a number of documents.  The appeal was allowed.

3.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department now seeks  to  challenge
    that decision, essentially on the basis that inadequate reasoning or no
    reasoning was provided as to why the  claimant's  account  should  have
    been accepted in the face of numerous criticisms made upon it.

4.   In one sense the chronology of the claimant's activities lacks  clarity
    in the interview and in his statement of grounds.   What  the  claimant
    has to say about the  matter  is  summarised  in  some  detail  in  the
    determination.

5.   In summary, the claimant began working for a senior  imam  in  2002  or
    2003 and was employed until 12th February 2009 when he was  transferred
    to a different department, namely  to  the  imam's  private  office  in
    February 2009.  He was there until 2014.

6.   It is his case that during his period of employment he provided to  one
    B, an investigative journalist, certain documents which he had acquired
    in the course of his employment.  B was arrested on 3rd April 2015,  it
    having been revealed that  he  had  obtained  the  documents  from  the
    claimant, resulting in the authorities raiding  his  home,  taking  his
    laptop and documents from his home.  It was his case that he  has  been
    sentenced to a term of five years' imprisonment for spying.   He  fears
    worse treatment were he to return.  Subsequent to the asylum  interview
    and decision a number of court documents were presented in  support  of
    the claim, such documents  said  to  have  been  obtained  through  the
    assistance of his wife.

7.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department in her decision of  27th
    November 2015 raised  a  considerable  number  of  concerns  about  the
    account which the claimant gave.  The Presenting Officer at the hearing
    also raised a number of  matters  of  concern  which  are  recorded  at
    paragraphs 31 to 34 of the determination.

8.    Mr  Avery,  who  represents  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department in this appeal, contends that fundamentally  the  Judge  has
    failed to engage with those concerns or to indicate why it is that they
    are not material to the outcome of the decision.

9.   I find that there is  some  merit  to  the  concerns  as  raised.   The
    determination consists of some 41 paragraphs.  It is right to note that
    for the first 38 paragraphs the account of the claimant and  record  of
    evidence presented at the hearing is set out.

10.  The Judge acknowledges in paragraph 41 that,  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence of a particular interest in the claimant, there  would  be  no
    risk to him upon return.  The leading  case  of  SB  (risk  on  return-
    illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 is cited.

11.  In practical terms it is only in paragraph 41  that  any  reasoning  is
    adopted as to why the account of the claimant is accepted.

12.  It is submitted that even that paragraph is flawed by  reason  of  lack
    of anxious scrutiny and failure to give adequate reasons.

13.  Concern was expressed that the court documents were produced at a  late
    stage, seemingly having been obtained by the  claimant's  wife.   There
    is, however, no statement from the wife as to  how  she  contacted  the
    authorities or obtained the documents.  The Judge does not seem to deal
    with that concern other than to note it.

14.  It is said that there is curiosity in relation  to  the  court  verdict
    document which purports to show that the verdict was delivered on  30th
    December 2015 but the confession obtained on  11th  January  2016.   Ms
    Short, on behalf of the claimant, submits that that is to misunderstand
    the document which is to be found at pages 8 and 9 of the  bundle.   In
    that connection it may be helpful just to  set  out  the  paragraph  in
    which the reference is made:-

         "Given the record of accused  no  1  who  has  a  long  history  of
         propaganda against the regime and disseminating lies as well  as  a
         record of a variety of crimes and also [taking  into  account]  the
         manner of his arrest in the Baha'I  Golestan  Javid  cemetery,  and
         given his confession as recorded in file no  94-528314527621  dated
         11th January 2016 [Persian calendar: 21/09/1394] in branch 8 of the
         Interrogation Centre under the  pretext  of  invalid  and  baseless
         arguments and distortions and attempts to change the  investigative
         process..."

15.  Ms Short submits that, in that context, 11th January  is  referring  to
    the date of the file rather than  the  date  of  the  confession.   The
    language of the context is ambiguous but if ambiguous clearly should be
    read in favour of the claimant, given the burden and standard of proof.

16.  However, it is the opening words of that paragraph which  it  seems  to
    me is a real concern as to the claim itself.

17.  I mention that matter because indeed it was the very  matter  that  the
    Judge made reference to in paragraph 41:-

         "I accept the genuineness of those documents, even if I have  found
         some of the appellant's evidence to be not wholly consistent -  for
         example his lack of explanation as to why there were no issues with
         the authorities between the end of 2009 and May/June  2014,  during
         the period when he was indeed working in  the  Ayatollah's  private
         office."

    There is, however, no consideration further of  that  concern.  In  the
    light of what the claimant had said at the hearing, coupled  with  that
    particular passage  from  the  judgment  document,  this  is  a  matter
    obviously calling for anxious scrutiny and consideration.

18.  As I have indicated, one of the difficulties in this case is  the  lack
    of clear definition of chronology.  It is fundamental to the  claim  of
    the claimant that he was fully trusted by the imam in the course of his
    duties.   The  court  document  would,  however,  if  correct,  give  a
    different view of the claimant, referring as it does  to  a  period  of
    time.

19.  The claimant speaks of having  been  accused  of  spying.  There  is  a
    degree of a lack of clarity as to when that allegation was  made.    It
    is recorded in the determination at paragraph 26 that in December  2009
    he took part in a demonstration on Ashora Day and was seen to do  that.
    He was questioned as to why he was there and why  he  participating  in
    the demonstration.  He was accused of spying.  There were  no  problems
    and he then started his job in the Ayatollah's offices.   The  problems
    that caused him to leave were following the arrest of  Babak  in  April
    2015. That account, whether it be accurate or not, was is  recorded  as
    the evidence of the claimant that he was accused of spying in 2009.  It
    may be considered that if that be so it  is  highly  unlikely  that  he
    would be given any job of trust in the imam's office.  How he  came  to
    have that employment in spite of the allegation of spying falls  to  be
    clarified.  His lack of explanation as to why there were no issues with
    the authorities from 2009 to 2014 was in the context  of  the  claim  a
    very important matter.  It was identified by the  Judge  quite  rightly
    but then not pursued.

20.  A matter, also highlighted by Mr Avery  in  his  submissions,  was  the
    seeming circularity of any reasoning by the Judge in  relation  to  any
    criticism that was raised as to the claim.  An example of that  can  be
    seen in paragraph 38 of the  determination  when  the  Judge  comes  to
    consider the inconsistencies as to the details of employment,  earnings
    and of B's address. It may be  that  those  matters  perhaps  are  more
    peripheral to the claim than central.  Nevertheless,  the  response  of
    the Judge is informative when the Judge remarks:  "I  do  not  consider
    these inconsistencies to be material, because to the lower standard  of
    proof I have accepted the essence of the appellant's claim".


21.  At paragraph 39 in response to the concerns as to the  late  production
    of key documents the response of the Judge is exactly the same, namely:
    "I have accepted the appellant's  account  to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof."

22.  The Judge gives no reason as to why he accepts the credibility  of  the
    account but nevertheless, having done so, then views the criticisms  in
    the light of his finding.  That is clearly in my judgment not a  proper
    approach to take on matters of  credibility.   It  is  also  emphasised
    that, in assessing credibility, all matters need to  be  considered  in
    the round if it is apparent that before  addressing  the  concerns  the
    Judge had already come to a firm conclusion.  That is  to  reverse  the
    normal approach that is to be taken to these matters.

23.  Ms Short, in her submissions,  invites  my  attention  to  her  written
    reply.  I have taken that into account.  Nevertheless I find  that  the
    decision of the Judge is materially flawed, having failed  properly  to
    address the concerns that have been expressed. Further,  resolving  the
    issue of credibility in favour of the claimant before  considering  the
    concerns and relevant matters,  in  other  words,  failing  to  take  a
    holistic view of the evidence before coming to conclusions.

24.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal of the Secretary of State  is
    allowed to the extent that the decision is set aside.

25.  Given that credibility is at large and that a  detailed  assessment  of
    the facts and chronology and documentation will  be  required,  I  find
    that  it  is  a  case  which  falls  within  the  President's  Practice
    Direction, such that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing.

26.  I do not set any directions at this stage.  They  can  be  set  by  the
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed .The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside
to be remade.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed        [pic]                          Date 23 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the outcome of the claim remains to be decided.

Signed        [pic]                          Date 23 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

