
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/03832/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Tuesday 15 September 2020                   |On 21 September 2020           |
|                                               |                               |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     A D
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr A Chakmaktian, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  as
this is an appeal on protection grounds, it  is  appropriate  to  make  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.          The Appellant appeals against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge D Ross dated 1 October 2019 ("the Decision").   By  the
      Decision, the Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision dated 27 March 2019 refusing his protection  and
      human rights claims.  The challenge to the Decision  relates  only  to
      the appeal on protection grounds.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Egypt who came to  the  UK  as  a
      student in 2012.  He did not claim asylum until 2016.  His  claim  for
      asylum is based on his  support  for  and  membership  of  the  Muslim
      Brotherhood.  He claims to have attended  demonstrations  against  the
      Egyptian authorities in support of that group in Egypt and in the  UK.
      He claims to be at risk specifically because he says that the Egyptian
      authorities have become aware of his link to the organisation  due  to
      his association with friends who have, since his departure from Egypt,
      been prosecuted and convicted of activities in support of  the  group.
      He claims that a case has been brought against him.

3.          The Judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  sympathises  with  the
      Muslim Brotherhood but did not accept that he had  played  any  active
      role with the organisation. As such, for reasons I will return to, the
      Judge did not accept that the Appellant would have  been  targeted  by
      the Egyptian authorities as he claimed and  did  not  accept  that  he
      would be at risk on return.

4.          The Appellant challenges the Decision on  two  grounds.   First,
      he says that the Judge failed properly to understand or  consider  two
      crucial pieces of evidence, namely a medical report of  Dr  J  Hajioff
      dated 29 August 2019 ("the  Medical  Report")  and  a  court  document
      purporting to show the conviction of the Appellant's friends  and  his
      association with them ("the Court  Document").   In  relation  to  the
      Court Document, the  complaint  made  is  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      appreciate that there was an amended translation of that document  and
      therefore did not take into consideration the full import of it.   The
      second ground concerns the Judge's reasoning on the specific aspect of
      the Appellant's claim, namely the risk arising  from  his  association
      with his friends who had been convicted for activities in  support  of
      the Muslim Brotherhood and the perception therefore of his involvement
      with that group.   It is said that there is an error of logic  in  the
      Judge's reasoning.  As I will come to below, it may  be  more  a  case
      that the Judge has misunderstood this part of the Appellant's case.

5.          Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  J
      M Holmes on 14  November  2019  in  the  following  terms  so  far  as
      relevant:

            "... 3.    There appears  to  be  little  merit  in  the  second
           ground, which is no more than a disagreement with the weight the
           Judge placed upon the evidence before him.


            4.   There are two limbs to the first  ground;  that  the  Judge
           omitted to consider the psychiatric evidence, and,  a  corrected
           translation of a document from Egypt - both of which could  have
           a  bearing  on  his  assessment  of  the  credibility   of   the
           Appellant's evidence.  These are arguable, since  although  both
           are mentioned in the decision (eg [17]) it is arguable there  is
           no adequate analysis of the content".

6.          The appeal came  before  me  first  on  24  January  2020.   The
      Appellant and his representatives failed to attend for  reasons  given
      in my adjournment decision dated  24  January  2020  and  therefore  I
      directed that the hearing be adjourned and relisted after  27  January
      2020.

7.          Due to the interruption  of  normal  Tribunal  business  by  the
      Covid-19 pandemic, a Note and Directions  were  issued  by  the  Vice-
      President on 24 March 2020, indicating that it might be  possible  for
      the error of law issue to be determined on the papers  and  without  a
      hearing.  The views of the  parties  on  that  proposal  were  sought.
      Written submissions were made by the Appellant on 23  April  2020,  by
      the Respondent on 28 April 2020 and in reply by the Appellant on 7 May
      2020. The Respondent's submissions also stand as her  Rule  24  Reply.
      In the Appellant's Reply, an oral hearing was requested.

8.          The error of law hearing was  accordingly  listed  to  be  heard
      orally.  Notice of the hearing before me was sent to the parties on 20
      August 2020 indicating that the hearing would  be  conducted  remotely
      via Skype for Business given the current restrictions  caused  by  the
      Covid-19 pandemic.   Neither  party  objected  to  that  course.   The
      hearing was attended via remote means by Mr Chakmaktian as Counsel for
      the Appellant and Mr Melvin as Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer
      for the Respondent.  They  confirmed  that  there  were  no  technical
      issues and that they were able to follow the hearing  throughout.    I
      had before me a bundle and supplementary bundle filed by the Appellant
      in the First-tier Tribunal before Judge Ross as well  as  the  amended
      translation of the Court  Document  and  the  written  submissions  as
      aforesaid.

9.          The matter comes before me to  determine  whether  the  Decision
      contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make  the
      decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

10.         I deal with the  Appellant's  grounds  in  order.  Although  the
      indication given by Judge Holmes was that ground two had little merit,
      permission was not  refused  on  that  ground  and  Mr  Melvin  agreed
      therefore that I could and should consider it.  There is,  as  I  will
      come to, a degree of  overlap  between  that  and  the  first  ground,
      particularly in relation to the Court Document.

11.         Before turning to consider the grounds, it  is  helpful  to  set
      out the main findings and reasoning of the  Judge  for  rejecting  the
      asylum claim in order that those grounds can be set in context.  Those
      findings appear at [20] to [22] of the Decision as follows:

            "20. It is accepted by the respondent that the  appellant  is  a
           sympathiser with the brotherhood, but on being questioned  about
           his role in the organisation, he is extraordinarily vague.   The
           evidence therefore suggests that he played no particular role in
           the organisation since all he would say about  his  position  is
           that  he  assisted  in  spreading  the  movement  and  collected
           donations.  What he has said about this must  therefore  be  the
           summit of his involvement.


            21.  I do not therefore accept that he would have been  targeted
           in the way which he describes by the Egyptian  authorities.   It
           is worth remembering that the appellant was out of  the  country
           during the period when the brotherhood ran the  government.   He
           came to the UK in May 2012 using his own passport.  He therefore
           could not have been  a  supporter  of  the  brotherhood  and  in
           particular Mr Morse [sic] when they controlled the country,  and
           when the present government took over.  In any event as  I  have
           indicated his role was very minor in the organisation.  A letter
           has been produced from the Muslim Brotherhood  UK  which  states
           that the appellant has been an active supporter member in  Egypt
           and the UK.  It was stated that he had joined demonstrations  in
           2015 and 2018.  They stated that he is a  wanted  activist,  and
           there is no doubt that he would be  detained  and  subjected  to
           torture.  I can place little weight on this letter because it is
           so vague, it does not stipulate what  activities  the  appellant
           was engaged in in Egypt, and why he is described  as  an  active
           supporter.  The appellant states that he only had  attended  two
           demonstrations, there is no reason to suppose that this very low
           level of activity would have brought him to the attention of the
           Egyptian authorities, or that they would be  able  to  recognise
           him on return to Egypt.  The background evidence  suggests  that
           the authorities would not be interested in  a  person  with  his
           profile.


            22.  At the time of his interview the appellant stated  that  he
           had been  prosecuted  but  could  produce  no  documentation  in
           support.  He  has  now  produced  documentation.   The  original
           document as translated at page 8 is slightly  confusing  because
           it does not set out what offence the  appellant  has  committed.
           The  document  refers  to  the  fact  that  there  had  been   a
           demonstration by three men who are named outside the Directorate
           of Security on 14 July  2013.   The  investigation  showed  that
           there were members of a terrorist group and had  a  relationship
           with the appellant.  The document however  does  not  apparently
           refer to  any  conviction  against  the  appellant  himself,  or
           explain why the fact that they  have  association  with  him  is
           significant, bearing in mind that he had left the  country  more
           than one year before  the  demonstration  had  taken  place.   I
           consider that it is highly significant that  the  appellant  was
           out of the country at the time of all these political activities
           in Egypt and I do not consider that this  document  when  it  is
           considered in the round can carry  much  weight.   It  certainly
           does not appear to explain his offence.  The conviction was said
           to be on first of October 2016, which is three years  after  the
           demonstration which led to the arrest of the three men."




GROUND ONE

12.         I deal first with the Medical Report.  In  very  short  summary,
      Dr Hajioff deals with both the mental health problems of the Appellant
      and some scarring which he  claimed  arose  from  an  injury  suffered
      during the one demonstration which he had attended in Egypt (in  2011)
      when police attacked the demonstrators.

13.         The only mention of the Medical Report in  the  Decision  is  at
      [17] and [24] which paragraphs read as follows:

             "17.   The  appellant  produced  a  psychiatric  report   which
           suggested that he was suffering from chronic  PTSD  and  has  an
           injury  consistent  with   his   account   he   should   receive
           antidepressant medication.  The doctor had observed  that  there
           was a scarring on the appellant's knee.  He told the doctor that
           he feels depressed and hopeless but he will never commit suicide
           because of his Muslim beliefs.  The age and  appearance  of  the
           scar is consistent with the appellant's account.


            ...


            24.   I do not consider that the medical evidence  advances  the
           appellant's case.  The injury is consistent with his description
           but a laceration to the knee is a common injury,  and  it  could
           have occurred in other ways."

14.          I  did  not  understand  Mr  Melvin  to  disagree  that   these
      references do not explain whether and if so what weight has been given
      by the Judge to the diagnosis of PTSD which is, as Mr Chakmaktian  put
      it, set out uncritically at [17] of the Decision.  However, this is an
      unusual case in that the PTSD is not  said  to  arise  from  any  ill-
      treatment said to have occurred whilst the Appellant was in Egypt  but
      rather from the Appellant's own fear of return to Egypt.  As such, the
      only reference in the Medical Report to the reasons why the  Appellant
      may be suffering from PTSD is that "[a]s  result of, what he sees  as,
      a threat to his  life,  [AD]  is  now  suffering  from  chronic  post-
      traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and has signs  of  injury  consistent
      with his account".  It is  to  be  noted  that  Dr  Hajioff  does  not
      actually express a view whether the PTSD diagnosed is likely  to  have
      been caused by the fear which the Appellant expresses.  However, it is
      self-evident that the cause attributed  to  the  Appellant's  PTSD  is
      based solely on the Appellant's self-reporting as to his fear  and  it
      is difficult to see therefore what additional weight could be  put  on
      the Medical Report as opposed to the  Appellant's  own  evidence.   As
      such, the Judge was entitled to  say,  as  he  does  at  [24]  of  the
      Decision that the medical evidence does not advance the  case.   I  do
      not consider that the failure  to  deal  specifically  with  the  PTSD
      diagnosis amounts to an error of law.  There are also some  criticisms
      which could be made of the Medical Report in this  regard  which  were
      canvassed in oral submissions but, since I have found an error of  law
      to exist for other reasons and the Medical Report will therefore  have
      to be considered afresh by another Judge, I do not need to  deal  with
      those.

15.         I turn then to the Court Document.  The  Court  Document  itself
      appears at [AB/7].  The first translation of it is at  [AB/8].   There
      is an amended translation  which  was  produced  on  the  day  of  the
      hearing.  Mr Chakmaktian explained the two main differences which  are
      as follows:

                 Original translation:
            "From the schedule of the assizes in case No. [..] for the  year
           2013 in  the  assizes  Court  of  [...]  it  turned  out  to  be
           restricted against [AD]  that  it  is  on  Friday  14/7/2013  in
           chamber of [...], [KJ], [AM] and [MA]  were  arrested  during  a
           demonstration in front of the directorate of security"
                 Amended translation:
            "From the schedule of the assizes in case No. [..] for the  year
           2013 in the assizes Court of [...] it turned out that  the  case
           had been registered against [AD] because on Friday 14/7/2013  in
           chamber of [...], [KJ], [AM] and [MA]  were  arrested  during  a
           demonstration in front of the directorate of security"




            Original translation:
            "The investigations showed that they were members of a terrorist
           group, the Muslim Brotherhood, and also at an external level, in
           contact with aforenamed [AD]..."
            Amended translation:
            "The investigations showed that they were members of a terrorist
           group, the Muslim Brotherhood,  and  also  have  a  relationship
           outside the country with aforenamed [AD]..."


16.         I do  not  accept  the  Appellant's  challenge  to  the  Judge's
      treatment of the Court Document which is on the basis that  the  Judge
      has failed to consider the amended translation at all.  I note at  the
      outset that there is no explanation  for  the  different  translations
      carried out by the same translator.  There  has  been  no  independent
      check done of either the  original  or  amended  translation  nor  any
      explanation  by  the  translator  himself  for   the   two   different
      interpretations.  Those are not necessarily  significant  differences,
      but they do change the sense to some degree.  However, the Judge  does
      appear to have looked at the amended translation as otherwise he would
      not have made reference as he does to the investigation  showing  that
      the accused persons were in a relationship with the Appellant nor  the
      significance of him being outside Egypt.

17.         I also consider that the Judge was entitled to place  weight  on
      the lack of any reference to any offence having been committed by  the
      Appellant  himself.   However,  there  is  one  notable  omission   by
      reference to the amended translation and that is the failure  to  note
      that there is  said  to  have  been  a  case  registered  against  the
      Appellant in  2013.   There  is  admittedly  no  explanation  of  what
      happened to that case nor confirmation  that  it  led  either  to  any
      conviction or indeed to any prosecution.  It is not said why the  case
      was registered and what the Appellant is said to have done (at a  time
      when he was outside the UK).  In and of itself, for those  reasons,  I
      would not have found any failure to mention  this  to  be  a  material
      error of law.  However, when taken with ground two, I  have  concluded
      that there is a material  error  for  reasons  which  I  now  turn  to
      explain.

GROUND TWO

18.         The Appellant's ground two is that there is, as  Mr  Chakmaktian
      put it, an error of logic in the Judge's reasoning  in  particular  at
      [21] and [22], particularly as regards what is said  about  the  Court
      Document.  It is said that the fact that  the  Appellant  was  outside
      Egypt at the time when the  case  was  brought  and  when  the  Muslim
      Brotherhood fell from power has no relevance to the credibility of the
      claim.  What is asserted by the Appellant is that the authorities only
      became aware of his own support following the arrest  of  his  friend.
      Thus, what is said to be of significance is the arrest of  his  friend
      and his own association with that friend.

19.         Whether this is termed an error of logic in the reasoning  or  a
      misunderstanding of the Appellant's claim, I  am  persuaded  that  the
      Judge failed to appreciate the fundamentals of  the  Appellant's  case
      that the risk to him from the authorities presently  arises  from  his
      association with others  who  have  been  arrested,  charged  and  now
      convicted for support of the Muslim Brotherhood which is considered to
      be a terrorist organisation.  Whether or  not  the  Appellant  had  an
      active support or organisational role in that group (which  the  Judge
      found he did not) is not relevant to that part of his  case  which  is
      rather that the Egyptian authorities will perceive him as having  such
      a role because of his association with the persons named in the  Court
      Document.

20.         I have carefully considered whether this can be  said  to  be  a
      material error.  I have already pointed out the difficulties  for  the
      Appellant which arise from the lack of any evidence to explain the two
      different translations.  There are  also  some  peculiarities  in  the
      wording of even the amended translation in relation to whether  it  is
      the accused persons' association with the Appellant which is  said  to
      be of interest or his association with them.  There is  also,  as  the
      Judge rightly observed, no explanation as to the offence said to  have
      been committed by the Appellant nor, as I have already  observed,  any
      indication what has happened to  the  case  against  him.   Those  are
      however matters which need to be considered and weighed in the balance
      with the other evidence. In short, therefore, the error which  I  have
      identified is a material one.  The Judge has failed fully to  consider
      the content of the Court Document (in its amended translation) and  as
      a result has failed to consider the  core  of  the  Appellant's  fact-
      specific claimed risk on return.

21.         It follows from the foregoing  that  I  am  satisfied  that  the
      Decision should be  set  aside  so  far  as  concerns  the  appeal  on
      protection grounds.   Although there is no challenge to  the  Decision
      on human rights grounds, the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      took place about one year ago and, particularly in light of the mental
      health  problems  identified  in  the  Medical  Report,  it  would  be
      appropriate for a second Judge to re-evaluate the position in relation
      to the human rights claim as at the date of the further hearing.  I do
      not therefore preserve the findings in relation to the appeal on human
      rights grounds either, notwithstanding the lack of challenge to  those
      findings and the conclusion in that regard.

CONCLUSION

22.   For those reasons, I am satisfied that the combination of grounds  one
      and two discloses an error of law as set out above.  I  therefore  set
      aside the Decision.  My decision has identified an error which impacts
      on the previous Judge's credibility findings  as  to  the  Appellant's
      protection claim.  Accordingly, it will be necessary for another Judge
      to make credibility findings which  will  be  initial  ones  and  will
      require entirely fresh findings of  fact.   I  therefore  consider  it
      appropriate to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
      determination.  Both parties invited me to take that course if I found
      an error of law as I have done.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  D  Ross  dated  1
October 2019 is set  aside.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Ross.


Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 16 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
