
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03551/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|29 November 2018                     |6 December 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                    [S K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 29 October 2018 I wrote to the parties as follows:

         "I have reviewed the file in this case.

         Permission to appeal was granted for the following reasons:

                "The grounds allege that the Judge erred by referring to the
                public interest factors in Part 5A of the NIAA 2002  in  the
                context of an asylum claim and failed to adequately consider
                the appellant's explanation for delay in  making  an  asylum
                claim before finding against him  and  applying  s8  of  the
                Asylum and immigration (Treatment of  Claimants)  Act  2004.
                The Judge referred to paras 339L & 339N  of  the  rules  and
                made negative credibility findings without identifying which
                statements he found not to  be  coherent  and  plausible  or
                providing reasons. The  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the
                asylum claim did not occur until September/October 2012  and
                there was good reason for no claim  being  made  before  May
                2013. The Judge placed insufficient weight on  the  decision
                of  Judge  Buckwell  who  determined  the  appeal   of   the
                appellant's  partner,  Iqbal  Hussain  (IH)  and  found  the
                appellant's  evidence  (as  a   witness)   credible.   Judge
                Gillespie dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  refusal
                of  asylum  in  2014  and  disbelieved  his  claim   to   be
                homosexual.  Too  much  weight   was   placed   upon   Judge
                Gillespie's finding  and  insufficient  weight  on  evidence
                produced at the hearing. The appellant attempted to  rectify
                the defects in his evidence identified  by  Judge  Gillespie
                but this was viewed as further undermining his credibility.

                The Judge placed weight  upon  the  appellant's  failure  to
                adduce evidence of activities within the gay community. This
                was irrelevant and inappropriate; based on a  stereotypical,
                prejudicial assumptions about homosexual men and contrary to
                caselaw and the  respondent's  policy  on  assessing  sexual
                orientation in asylum claims.  The  appellant  had  provided
                evidence of activity within the gay community by  virtue  of
                IH's evidence to which  the  Judge  appeared  to  attach  no
                weight.  The  Judge  erred  by  not  taking   into   account
                translations of text messages containing death threats  from
                the appellant's family in Pakistan."

         I propose without more ado to allow  the  appeal,  set  aside  the
         determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  direct  a  fresh
         hearing before that Tribunal.  Any  submissions  to  the  contrary
         will be considered if received within 14 days of the date of  this
         letter."

 2. No response has been received.

 3. I now allow the appeal to this Tribunal, set aside the  decision  under
    appeal on the ground of error of law.  I remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal and direct that it be determined afresh.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 29 November 2018.
