
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03647/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 October 2019                 | 17 October 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Anderson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on the 10th June 2019,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights  claim
    dated 29 March 2019 was dismissed.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted on a number of grounds all  of  which
    were relevant to the credibility findings made by the FtTJ and were set
    out with particularisation in the grant of permission.

3.    At the oral hearing,  after  hearing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, Ms Everett appropriately conceded that there was a  material
    error of law as set out in the grounds when  read  with  the  grant  of
    permission. For the same reasons, I find a material error of  law  such
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside, and the
    hearing remitted for de novo consideration of the appeal.

4.    I therefore set aside the decision of the judge  in  its  entirety.  I
    have taken into account paragraph 7.2 of the  practice  statements  for
    the Immigration and Asylum Cis of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper
    Tribunal which recognises that it may not be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal shall proceed to remake the decision when it is satisfied that
    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or  other  opportunities  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
    (b) the  nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is  such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective 2, it is appropriate to
    remit the case of the First-tier Tribunal.

5.    Having  exercised  my  discretion  and  by  considering  the  practice
    statement, the case falls under (b) given that the court  will  now  be
    required to assess the case afresh and make findings of fact on all the
    evidence. I am satisfied that the appropriate course is  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

6.    The parties consented to a decision without reasons pursuant  to  Rule
    40(3)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and
    therefore no further reasons are given in writing for this decision.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law. As such it is necessary to set aside  the
decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal;  no  findings  of  fact
are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and
to the respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                       Date: 14/10/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

