

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/03626/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                  |Decision Promulgated              |
|On 12th October 2018                     |On 18th October 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     IS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

Introduction


       1. This is an  appeal  by  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Slovakia,
          against decisions dated (i) 1 October 2015 to deport her  pursuant
          to regulation 19  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
          Regulations 2006 ('the 2006 Regs') on the basis that  her  removal
          is justified on grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or
          public health in accordance with regulation 21,  and;  (ii)  dated
          19 February 2016 to refuse her protection and human rights claim.


       2. The decision to make a deportation order  on  15  March  2016  was
          made as the result of  the  appellant's  sole  conviction  in  the
          United  Kingdom  ('UK')  for   conspiracy   to   assist   unlawful
          immigration to a member state (by entering into  a  sham  marriage
          with a  Nigerian  national),  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
          evidence of improvement in her personal  circumstances  so  as  to
          prevent further offending and she would be  able  to  re-establish
          herself in Slovakia.

       3.  The  Appellant's  protection  claim  is  based  on  her  fear  of
          persecution in Slovakia as a woman of Roma ethnicity and the  risk
          of serious harm she fears at the hands of her  abusive  partner  M
          L, and R S, who she claims coerced and threatened her into a  sham
          marriage.

       4. In a decision dated 13 August 2018 I found that  the  decision  of
          the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 18 May 2017, dismissing  the
          appellant's appeals against both  decisions  contained  errors  of
          law such that it should be set aside and remade by me.

Vulnerable witness


       5. The FTT accepted that the appellant is  a  vulnerable  witness  by
          reason of her mental health condition.  At the  beginning  of  the
          hearing before me Mrs Aboni clarified that  she  agreed  that  the
          appellant should continue to be treated as a  vulnerable  witness,
          notwithstanding the vintage of the medical  evidence  relating  to
          her  condition  -  see  the  recommendations  of  Dr  RC   Thomas,
          Consultant  Clinical  Psychologist  dated  22  January   2016   as
          summarised in my earlier decision identifying  an  error  of  law,
          the Natalia Dawkins trafficking report dated 24 June 2016 and  the
          report of Dr Tabani, a  Consultant  Psychiatrist,  based  upon  an
          interview with the appellant on 30 September 2016.


       6. Mrs Aboni agreed with my observation that the  symptoms  described
          in the medical evidence are unlikely to  have  materially  changed
          given the significant stress and anxiety the appellant has had  to
          deal with since the birth  of  her  daughter,  L,  prematurely  in
          April 2018.  The appellant was therefore treated as  a  vulnerable
          witness and  the  relevant  guidelines  were  applied  during  the
          course of the hearing.

Hearing

       7. At the beginning of the hearing Mrs Aboni  gave  her  consent  for
          the appellant to rely upon a "new matter" not  considered  in  the
          decisions under appeal and not the subject  of  a  s  120  notice,
          namely the birth and medical condition of L in  2018,  to  support
          her claim that it would  be  disproportionate  to  deport  her  to
          Slovakia because that would necessarily result in  her  separation
          from L.


       8. Mrs Aboni at my request found  the  Competent  Authority  decision
          dated 7 July 2016, which concluded that there were  no  reasonable
          grounds to believe that the appellant was  the  victim  of  modern
          slavery.  Copies were made for Ms Smith and the Tribunal.


       9. Mrs Aboni also confirmed at the  beginning  of  the  hearing  that
          given the continued fragility of  the  appellant's  mental  health
          and the nature of the issues in  dispute,  she  did  not  wish  to
          cross-examine her and was content for the hearing  to  proceed  by
          submissions only.  Ms Smith agreed with this approach.

      10. Mrs Aboni relied upon the two decision letters and invited  me  to
          dismiss both appeals.

      11. Having heard from Mrs Aboni and  having  had  the  opportunity  to
          carefully  consider  the  detailed  evidence  in  advance  of  the
          hearing (as contained in the SSHD's  bundle  and  the  appellant's
          comprehensive and supplementary bundles  especially  prepared  for
          the hearing before me), I announced that I would be  allowing  the
          EEA appeal.  I therefore invited Ms Smith to take instructions  on
          whether the appellant still wished  to  proceed  with  the  appeal
          against  the  refusal  of  her  protection  claim.   Having  taken
          instructions, Ms Smith confirmed that  the  determination  of  the
          protection  claim  would  provide  the  appellant  with  no  clear
          practical benefit and she was content to withdraw that appeal.   I
          consented to  the  withdrawal  of  the  appeal,  having  satisfied
          myself that this was a course that the appellant agreed to.

      12. In this decision I give my reasons for allowing the EEA appeal.

Background facts

      13. The appellant is a Roma.  She was born in Slovakia and grew up  in
          difficult circumstances. At a young age she became  involved  with
          a man called M L, who she claimed was a  violent  drunk  and  drug
          addict who was involved in the mafia, including  prostitution  and
          who subjected her to ill-treatment. He is the father of  her  son,
          who was born in Slovakia in 2006, albeit he  does  not  know  that
          she gave  birth  to  their  son,  who  currently  lives  with  the
          Applicant in the UK.


      14. On 5 April 2014, the appellant came to the UK,  where  her  sister
          resided.   She  began  working  as  a  packer  of  food  products.
          Shortly after her arrival, in May 2014, the appellant met R S  (no
          relation) who she claims threatened and cajoled her to enter  into
          a sham marriage.


      15. On 15 July 2014, R S took the Appellant to a  Registry  Office  to
          marry, however police  arrested  them  before  the  ceremony  took
          place.  On 16  December  2014,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
          conspiracy to assist unlawful immigration pursuant to  section  25
          of the Immigration  Act  1971  and  on  2  January  2015  she  was
          sentenced  to  15  months  imprisonment.  She  was  subjected   to
          extended periods of immigration detention  following  the  end  of
          her custodial sentence (subsequently  succeeding  in  an  unlawful
          detention claim)  but  was  released  on  4  March  2016.   It  is
          undisputed that  the  appellant  has  not  re-offended  since  her
          release from detention.  Her case was referred  to  the  Competent
          Authority who concluded in a decision dated 7 July 2016  that  she
          had provided an internally consistent account of  R  S  repeatedly
          threatening, pressurising, cajoling and  pestering  her  to  enter
          into the sham marriage.  It was accepted that  the  appellant  may
          have been subject to the threat of force or abuse  of  a  position
          of vulnerability.  It was concluded that whilst the appellant  met
          the definition of part 'a' of the definition  of  modern  slavery,
          she did not meet 'b' because the marriage did not exploit  her  as
          she entered it hoping for a 'better life'.


      16. In April 2018  the  appellant  gave  birth  to  L,  who  was  born
          prematurely at 33 weeks and five days, weighing  2.2  kg.   L  was
          born in a very  poor  condition  and  suffers  problems  with  her
          heart.  Since birth she has remained in hospital on  a  ventilator
          with chest drains in place.  L's poorly condition is described  in
          letters dated 1 June 2018 and 28 September  2018  from  Dr  Shauq,
          L's Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist  at  Alder  Hey  Children's
          hospital.   The  most  recent  assessment   describes   a   recent
          procedure  but  concludes  that  L  remains  critically  ill   and
          ventilator dependent.  The plan is to  re-discuss  her  case  with
          colleagues at Great Ormond Street and  if  they  offer  a  further
          procedure, L will be transferred there.


      17. In July 2018 the appellant's son came to the UK  to  be  with  his
          mother, and is attending school.  Prior to this, he  resided  with
          the appellant's mother in Slovakia.


Legal framework

      18. Both representatives agreed that regulation 21 of  the  2006  Regs
          apply given the date of the EEA decision appealed  against.   This
          states as follows:


                 "Decisions taken on  public  policy,  public  security  and
                 public health grounds
                 21. (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means  an
                 EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public
                 security or public health.
                 (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve  economic
           ends.
                 ...
                 (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public
                 policy  or  public  security  it  shall,  in  addition   to
                 complying with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,
                 be taken in accordance with the following principles-
                 (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle   of
                proportionality;
                 (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;
                 (c) the personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                 represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                 threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                 society;
                 (d) matters isolated from the particulars of  the  case  or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;
                 (e) a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                 themselves justify the decision.
                 (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of
                 public policy or public security in relation  to  a  person
                 who is resident in the United Kingdom  the  decision  maker
                 must take account of considerations such as the age,  state
                 of health, family and economic situation of the person, the
                 person's length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
                 person's social and cultural integration  into  the  United
                 Kingdom and the extent  of  the  person's  links  with  his
                 country of origin.


      19. The SSHD has the burden of proving  that  a  person  represents  a
          genuine, present and sufficiently  threat  affecting  one  of  the
          fundamental interests of society under Regulation 21(5)(c) of  the
          2006 Regs - see Arranz (EEA  Regulations  -  deportation  -  test)
          [2017] UKUT 00294 (IAC).


Findings of fact

      20. I bear in mind that although the  Competent  Authority's  decision
          was negative, it assessed her claims to broadly  credible  as  did
          the professionals who wrote reports about her claim as  summarised
          above.  I appreciate that there are discrepancies in  her  account
          but I find that these can be explained by her  PTSD  symptoms,  as
          set out by the professionals.


      21. Dr Thomas found the Appellant to  present  at  the  relevant  time
          with severe psychological symptoms of Major  Depressive  Disorder,
          with additional symptoms of (complex) PTSD.  These  findings  were
          based not only on what Dr Thomas was told  by  the  appellant  but
          also by her observations.   The  trafficking  expert,  Ms  Dawkins
          observed similar behaviour.  Dr Thomas gave a  number  of  reasons
          why the Appellant was  'credible  psychiatrically'  including  her
          presentation in interview, which I accept.

      22. A rule 35 report completed  when  the  appellant  was  held  under
          immigration detention  powers  identified  a  scar  on  her  scalp
          likely from a blunt trauma,  missing  front  teeth  attributed  to
          being punched in the mouth, a wound  attributed  to  blunt  trauma
          caused from self-defence, and scars  showing  her  ear  lobes  had
          been traumatically  damaged,  attributed  to  her  earrings  being
          ripped out.

      23. This evidence viewed together supports the  appellant's  claim  to
          have been ill-treated by her  partner  in  Slovakia  and  to  have
          arrived in the UK as a vulnerable person in a vulnerable  position
          given her particular background.  There is  very  little  evidence
          to support the appellant's fear that her ex-partner and R  S  have
          maintained any adverse interest in  her  many  years  after  their
          last contact.  The appellant's son  resided  with  her  mother  in
          Slovakia until recently and there have been  no  credible  reports
          of  any  continuing  threats.   I  nonetheless  accept  that   the
          appellant remains anxious about what might happen in Slovakia  and
          this together with her past abuse,  her  mental  health  fragility
          and the discrimination she is  likely  to  encounter  for  reasons
          relating to her Roma origins, means that she  is  likely  to  find
          life in Slovakia difficult.

      24. Like the Competent Authority  I  accept  that  the  appellant  was
          threatened and exploited, and this led to her agreement  to  enter
          into the sham marriage but  that  she  entered  the  marriage  not
          through  force  or  trafficking  but  as  a  consequence  of   her
          vulnerability and naivety.  Although I accept that  the  appellant
          was broadly credible in describing how  she  came  to  be  at  the
          registry office, I find that she was not trafficked or the  victim
          of modern slavery.

Discussion


      25. In my judgment the SSHD has come nowhere close to  displacing  the
          burden of proof upon him.  The appellant's deportation  would  not
          be in accordance with the principles in  regulation  21(5)  and  6
          for the reasons I set out below.

      26. Although I have concluded that the appellant is not  a  victim  of
          human  trafficking  or  modern  slavery,  she  was  clearly   very
          vulnerable and taken advantage of both in Slovakia  and  when  she
          first arrived in the UK.  She  remains  a  vulnerable  person,  as
          accepted by Mrs Aboni.


      27. The appellant has only one conviction and her offence  took  place
          over four years ago.  The offence is a  serious  one  involving  a
          breach of trust  and  a  disregard  for  immigration  rules.   The
          sentencing judge acknowledged that the appellant  did  not  obtain
          any financial advantage or benefit from the arrangement, and  this
          was reflected in the significantly longer  sentences  handed  down
          to the other parties involved in the attempted sham marriage.  The
          appellant has not re-offended in over two years.  She has  clearly
          demonstrated remorse to the professionals and  has  been  assessed
          as being at a low risk of harm and re-offending -  see  the  OASys
          assessment  from  29  October  2015  which  concludes   that   the
          appellant poses a low risk of harm and Dr Tabani's  assessment  in
          April 2017 that the appellant's future risk of reoffending in  the
          UK is "extremely low to nil" due to having developed insight  into
          her own  illness  and  her  vulnerabilities.   The  appellant  has
          demonstrated that she has been able to cope better and  has  built
          up greater resilience.  Her days are  mostly  consumed  by  caring
          for her children.   I accept that the risk of her  reoffending  is
          very low indeed.

      28.  The  appellant's  fragile  mental  health  is  very   likely   to
          significantly deteriorate if separated from L.  She has  confirmed
          in her witness statement that she visits L  every  single  day  at
          hospital, spending  long  periods  there.   The  medical  evidence
          concerning L is such that the  prospects  of  her  being  able  to
          travel to Slovakia with her mother are next to nil.  She  is  very
          ill  indeed  having  been   hospitalised  and   dependent   on   a
          ventilator  for  her  entire  life.   During  the  course  of  her
          submissions Mrs Aboni acknowledged  that  this  might  be  a  case
          where the appellant should be provided with some  form  of  status
          to reflect  that  at  present  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
          separate her  from  L  but  she  argued  that  L's  prognosis  was
          uncertain and the  situation  might  change.   I  must  of  course
          determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence available to  me
          as at the  date  of  hearing.   In  my  judgment  the  appellant's
          separation from L would cause her intense suffering and would  not
          be in L's best interests.

      29. In addition, the sister to whom the appellant is closest lives  in
          the UK with her children. Dr Thomas  noted  that  if  returned  to
          Slovakia the  Appellant  would  be  "deprived  of  the  protective
          support she has received from her sister".

      30. When all these matters are viewed cumulatively,  it  follows  that
          the appellant's deportation on grounds of  public  policy,  public
          security and public health grounds  is  not  justified  and  would
          breach the principles of proportionality.

Decision

      31. I allow the appellant's EEA appeal.


Signed:   UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
12 October 2018

