
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03071/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28th October 2016                     |On 2nd December 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD FAHEEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Talacchi, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  3rd  March  1986.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration  history.   He  visited  the  UK
    between November 2009 and February 2013 using a student  visa  that  he
    had acquired.  Between  July  2013  and  February  2015  the  Appellant
    applied for a substantial number of family visit visas  some  of  which
    were issued, others refused and on one occasion one voided.   The  last
    application for a visit visa made on 3rd June 2015 led to the Appellant
    on 9th September 2015, with  his  dependant,  using  his  own  national
    passport travelling to the UK where on the same day he  claimed  asylum
    upon arrival.

 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum is based on a  purported  well-founded
    fear of persecution on the basis of a non-Convention reason namely  his
    fear of persecution due to his marriage.  The Appellant claims to  have
    been subject to four attacks as a result of his marriage and fears that
    he would be at risk on return from his wife's family due to his  having
    married her against her family's wishes.  The  Appellant's  application
    was considered by the Secretary of State and was refused by  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 19th November 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Khan sitting at Harmondsworth on 17th June 2016.  In  a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 19th July 2016 the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and  Articles  2  and  3  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights and the Appellant was found not  to
    be in need of humanitarian protection.

 4. On 29th July 2016 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds submitted that the judge should have  accepted
    the oral evidence of the witnesses and failed to make adequate findings
    on the testimony and in relation to the documents  produced.   On  10th
    August 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers  refused  permission  to
    appeal stating that the  grounds  sought  to  re-argue  issues  already
    appropriately dealt with by the judge.

 5. On 5th August 2016 renewed Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal were
    lodged.  On 26th September  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Blum noted that  although  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was undoubtedly entitled to draw  an  adverse  inference
    from the inconsistencies between the accounts given  by  the  Appellant
    and his wife it was  arguable  that  there  had  been  no  satisfactory
    assessment of the medical evidence and the other  documentary  evidence
    contained in the Appellant's bundles and that  had  the  judge  engaged
    with this evidence his ultimate credibility conclusions may  have  been
    different.

 6. On 14th October 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That response notes that  the  Appellant  argues
    that the judge had failed to consider core elements of the  Appellant's
    case and that the judge's findings at paragraphs 54 to 57,  62  and  65
    were ones that were open to him.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor Mr Talacchi and the Respondent by her Home Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Armstrong.

The Basis of the Appeal

 8. As a preliminary issue it  is  appropriate  to  record  that  there  is
    agreement between the legal representatives that despite the wording of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal what I have  before  me  is  an
    appeal for a protection claim as  defined  within  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Submissions

 9. Mr Talacchi relies as his starting point on the Grounds of  Appeal  and
    the amended Grounds of  Appeal.   He  reminds  me  that  in  brief  the
    Appellant's claim is that he and his wife are at risk  of  attack  from
    her family because they  married  without  her  family's  consent.   He
    states that they suffered attacks in Pakistan from  her  family  before
    fleeing to the UK after the Appellant's wife became pregnant  and  that
    although the attacks were reported to the police the police  failed  to
    provide them with any sufficient protection because they took the  part
    of their attackers.  He acknowledges that  in  essence  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge refused the appeal because he did not believe  the  oral
    testimony of the witnesses as he has explained in paragraphs 55  to  61
    of his  decision.   He  states  that  the  Appellant  had  given  clear
    testimony that there had been four attacks and they  are  described  in
    the Appellant's witness statement.  He further points out that at pages
    5 to 8 of the Appellant's bundle there is  a  short  witness  statement
    from Mrs Bibi and that the judge made no  findings  regarding  it.   He
    submits that statement was material and that it was open to  the  judge
    to find it credible and that that might have  ultimately  affected  the
    findings made by the Immigration Judge in his conclusions.

10. Secondly he takes me  to  the  incident  that  occurred  on  24th  July
    referred  to  at  paragraphs  19  to  23  of  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement.  He submits that there are three  salient  features  therein
    namely that there was corroboration of the  injuries  received  in  the
    police report to be found at page 33 of the Appellant's bundle and page
    36 with regard to the medico-legal examination certificate which  makes
    reference to the injuries.  He submits that the judge made no  findings
    regarding these documents and that he should have done so and that  had
    he made a finding that was consistent with the evidence this would have
    been  material  as  it  again  affected  the  Appellant's   credibility
    findings.  Further he considers that the police report (to be found  in
    the supplemental bundle pages 9 to 12) has not been factually  referred
    to.

11. Further he turns  to  the  incident  of  10th  August  referred  to  at
    paragraphs 24 and 30 of the Appellant's witness statement and that  the
    medical evidence relating thereto to be found in the bundle.  He  again
    comments that the judge had failed to make reference to this  evidence.



12. At this juncture Mr Armstrong intervened  pointing  out  that  this  is
    actually inaccurate and that this evidence is referred to at  paragraph
    65.  He submits that the judge is aware and has given due consideration
    to the evidence and that he has given further  consideration  to  legal
    authority.  He contends that the judge has justified his  findings  and
    considered the core elements of the case along with the  pertinent  and
    relevant documents.  He takes me to paragraphs 64 to 67 and the  strong
    findings made therein by the Immigration Judge.

13.  In  brief  response  Mr  Talacchi  points  out  that  the  judge   has
    concentrated on credibility findings, as has the Secretary of State  in
    his Rule 24 response, but has failed to  make  a  proper  and  detailed
    assessment on the medical evidence.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

16. A proper approach to credibility requires an assessment of the evidence
    and of the general claim.   In  asylum  claims,  relevant  factors  are
    firstly the internal consistency of the claim;  secondly  the  inherent
    plausibility of the claim; and thirdly the  consistency  of  the  claim
    with  external  factors  of  the  sought  typically  found  in  country
    guidance.  I accept that it is theoretically correct  that  a  claimant
    need do no more than state his claim but that claim still needs  to  be
    examined for consistency and inherent plausibility.   In  nearly  every
    case external information against which the claim could be checked will
    be available.

17. In this case the judge had the benefit of hearing the oral testimony of
    the Appellant and his wife.  He notes that the Secretary of  State  has
    raised credibility  issues  against  the  Appellant  stating  that  the
    Appellant's account was not credible nor consistent  and  that  he  had
    made inconsistent and contradictory statements  in  his  screening  and
    substantial asylum interviews.  He noted the oral  testimony  given  by
    three witnesses before him.

18. It is important to note what the judge has found.  At paragraph  56  he
    found  that  the  Appellant  continued  to   make   contradictory   and
    inconsistent statements throughout his oral evidence.  He gave  reasons
    for that.  At paragraph 57 the  judge  was  so  disenchanted  with  the
    evidence provided by the Appellant that he concluded that the Appellant
    was making up his evidence as he went along during the proceedings.  At
    paragraph 58 he goes on to  set  out  examples  of  contradictions  and
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's testimony.

19. He makes similar findings against the testimony of the Appellant's wife
    at paragraph 59 having taken into account her mental  health  and  then
    gives examples of her  contradictory  and  inconsistent  evidence.   At
    paragraph 60 he makes a finding that  the  Appellant  had  changed  and
    fabricated his evidence in order to make an asylum  claim  in  the  UK.
    Finally at paragraph 61 he gives an overview of the  evidence  provided
    by the Appellant, his brother and his wife and makes findings that they
    were neither credible nor consistent witnesses.

20.  Those  are  findings  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  make.   The
    submissions on behalf of the Appellant contend that he  has  failed  to
    give due and  full  proper  consideration  to  a  number  of  documents
    produced before him.  That is not  accurate.   So  far  as  the  wife's
    mental health is concerned it is clear from paragraph 65 that the judge
    has been very much aware of this issue and of the documents relating to
    it.  He has clearly examined this  evidence.   Further  the  judge  has
    specifically referred at paragraphs 16 to 22 to the Appellant's case on
    documents.  It is acknowledged by Mr Armstrong that not every  document
    is referred to by the judge in his decision but the obligation  of  the
    judge is to consider documentary evidence in the round and it is  clear
    from his decision that he has done so.

21. Having heard the submissions and given due and  full  consideration  to
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge it would appear that  the
    judge has considered the evidence including documentary evidence albeit
    he has not referred to  all  of  it.   He  has  having  considered  the
    evidence made  detailed  credibility  findings  and  given  sustainable
    reasons for those conclusions.  They are damming in the extreme against
    the Appellant.  This is a judge who has carried out a full and thorough
    analysis of the evidence.  He has made findings of  fact  that  he  was
    entitled to and albeit the lower standard of proof  that  is  upon  the
    Appellant in protection claims it is clear that he has come a long  way
    short of meeting the  required  burden  of  proof  and  being  able  to
    discharge it.  The Appellant was disbelieved by the judge.   The  judge
    was entitled to make such a finding providing he gave his reasons which
    he has done.  The grounds consequently do little more than seek to  re-
    argue issues already dealt with appropriately by the  judge.   In  such
    circumstances they amount to little more than mere  disagreement.   For
    all the above reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses
    no material error of law and the appeal is dismissed and  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2nd December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 2nd December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

