
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03722/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 July 2017                          |On 27 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                mrs hong chen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors (Balham
     High Street)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of China, has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Fox  sent  on  5  May  2017
    dismissing her appeal against a decision made by the  respondent  on  8
    April 2016 refusing to grant asylum, or humanitarian  protection.   The
    judge did not find the appellant credible and  did  not  accept  either
    that she was a Protestant Christian or that she  was  targeted  by  the
    Chinese authorities.  Nor did the judge accept  she  had  lost  contact
    with the father of her two children or that she would face problems  as
    a result of having had two children.

2.   The grounds of appeal raise six points regarding  which  the  judge  is
    said to have  materially  erred  in  law:  (i)  in  failing  to  assess
    credibility, fairly or lawfully; (2)  in  failing  to  give  proper  or
    adequate reasoning in support of his adverse credibility findings;  (3)
    in failing to make a finding of fact in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    claim that she is  an  unmarried  mother;  (4)  in  failing  to  assess
    credibility by reference to  proper  consideration  of  the  background
    country evidence; (5) in failing to accept that there were  exceptional
    circumstances warranting allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    outside the Immigration Rules; and (6) in failing to take into  account
    relevant factors when considering Article 8 and the best  interests  of
    the child.

3.   The FtT judge who granted  permission  (Judge  Robertson)  stated  that
    there was little arguable merit in any of  the  grounds  save  for  (3)
    although he accepted that error as regards (3) could impact on  grounds
    5 and 6.  Despite the appellant's failure to file a written response to
    the grant of permission renewing the challenge he brought on the  other
    grounds, Ms Yong sought to argue all six grounds afresh.  Whilst it  is
    poor practice on the part of those representing the appellant  that  no
    response was lodged, I shall address all six grounds on their merits.

4.   The nub of ground 1 is  that  the  judge  was  procedurally  unfair  in
    relying on two inaccuracies in the appellant's evidence that  were  not
    identified as such at the hearing either by the Home Office  Presenting
    Officer or the judge.  The first concerned her claim to have been  sent
    an arrest warrant by the Chinese authorities.  At [56]-[57]  the  judge
    wrote:

         "56.  The  appellant  has  provided  evidence   that   her   friend
             accompanied the first child  to  China,  obtained  the  arrest
             warrant  from  the  home  of  the  child's  grandparents   and
             forwarded the arrest warrant to the appellant by post  and  by
             email; witness statement dated 15 March 2017 paragraph 20.  It
             is reasonable to  expect  that  this  active  and  transparent
             engagement with the appellant's circumstances would bring  the
             friend and the grandparents to the adverse  attention  of  the
             authorities.  The absence of evidence in this regard does  not
             assist the appeal.

         57.   I also note that the appellant  stated  that  she  asked  her
             friend to obtain the arrest warrant  from  her  home;  witness
             statement  dated  15  March  2017  paragraph  32.    This   is
             inconsistent with her statement as  particularised  above  and
             damages her credibility."

5.   As regards the appellant's marital status,  the  judge  said  at  [60]-
    [62]:

         "60. AW also states that many children are  unauthorised  and  that
             this cannot amount to persecution of a  breach  of  Article  3
             ECHR in itself.  I do not accept the appellant's  self-serving
             statement that she has lost contact with  the  father  of  her
             children.  The appellant  has  stated  that  the  first  child
             resides with  his  paternal  grandparents;  witness  statement
             dated 15  March  2017  paragraph  27.   It  is  reasonable  to
             conclude that the  appellant  has  an  avenue  of  enquiry  at
             minimum to communicate with the father of her children.

         61.  I have considered  the  possibility  that  the  appellant  has
             conceived children with 2 men.  However she  stated  that  she
             separated from the father in April 2015.  This  leads  to  the
             reasonable conclusion that there is only one biological father
             for her 2 children.

         62.  The appellant appears to have complied with the spirit of  the
             family planning policy in relation to  late  birth  and  birth
             spacing.   The  medical   evidence   demonstrates   that   she
             terminated an earlier pregnancy due to  the  inconvenience  of
             its timing.  There is no reliable evidence to demonstrate  the
             appellant's marital status.  I can place no  weight  upon  the
             appellant's uncorroborated statements for the  reasons  stated
             above."

6.   I find ground 1 is not  made  out.   The  appellant  had  said  in  her
    witness statement that the arrest warrant was sent  to  "our"  home  in
    China.  At the hearing she said that the arrest warrant  was  delivered
    to her mother ([30]).  Yet she also provided evidence that her  friend,
    Yah He, had obtained the arrest warrant from the home  of  her  child's
    (paternal)  grandparents.   That  was  a  clear  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's account.  It is true that it was not one that  was  put  to
    the appellant at the hearing, but at  the  same  time  she  was  cross-
    examined very fully as regards the arrest warrant, when she learned  of
    its existence, why she had not mentioned its  existence  at  interview,
    and Ms Yong (who also represented her before the FtT judge) did not re-
    examine the appellant and in her submissions in response  to  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer said the  appellant  was  not  aware  of  the
    arrest warrant at the time of her interview even though  the  appellant
    had said in her evidence that she was (see [29] and [41]).   The  judge
    was entitled to consider that the appellant's evidence  on  this  issue
    had been fully tested and it was a matter for  the  judge  to  appraise
    whether the appellant's account, including as to  the  address  it  was
    sent to, hung together.

7.   Similarly the appellant clearly had full  opportunity  to  support  the
    claim that she made at interview that she had  lost  contact  with  the
    children's father (Q165).  In her subsequent witness statement she  had
    stated that the first child resides with his paternal grandparents.  It
    was entirely reasonable and  fair  for  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    appellant had not satisfactorily explained why she would not have  been
    able to maintain contact with the father  via  his  parents.   I  would
    accept that the judge can be criticised for describing the  appellant's
    statement that she had lost contact with the father of the children  as
    "self-serving", since that descriptor is to a large  extent  a  protean
    one: see R (on the application of SS v SSHD ("self-serving  statements)
    [2017] UKUT 00164 (IAC), but it is sufficiently clear that by that term
    the judge only meant to highlight that it served her own case to  claim
    that, it was not credible that she would have lost  contact.   It  must
    also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  judge  very  properly  found  the
    appellant's evidence regarding the circumstances of the child  who  had
    gone back to  China  unsatisfactory.   The  appellant  claimed  he  was
    unregistered, yet she had successfully obtained a travel  document  for
    him  and  had  failed  to  demonstrate  why   the   authorities   would
    subsequently refuse to register him.   It  was  for  the  appellant  to
    substantiate her case and, even though she had been able to  produce  a
    letter regarding the arrest  warrant  sent  to  this  child's  paternal
    grandparents, she had not produced any documents to  show  registration
    of the child had been denied.  It was not incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    confront the appellant about the unsatisfactory nature of her  evidence
    regarding her own claim to be an unmarried mother.

8.   In relation to ground 2, I have  already  observed  that  although  the
    judge can be criticised for more than once describing  the  appellant's
    statements as "self-serving" it is clear that what the judge  meant  to
    convey by this was that such statements served  her  own  case  without
    satisfactory  explanation  for  their  non-corroboration  (contrary  to
    Article 4(5) of the Qualification Directive).  Ground 2  also  contends
    that the judge failed to give consideration to the consistency  of  the
    appellant's lack of knowledge of the Christian faith with "someone who,
    for  a  period,  has  had  difficulties  attending  Church  because  of
    children".  That contention  amounts  to  mere  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings.

9.   As regards ground 3, its logic is hard to follow.  To the  extent  that
    it appears to submit that the judge's error was in failing  to  make  a
    finding of fact in relation to the appellant's claim that  she  was  an
    unmarried mother, it is abundantly clear that the judge's comprehensive
    rejection of credibility embraced a rejection of  this  claim.   It  is
    true the judge does not say in terms "I  reject  her  claim  to  be  an
    unmarried mother", but  at  [62]  the  judge  said  very  clearly  that
    "[t]here is no reliable evidence to demonstrate the appellant's marital
    status".  Given that the onus of proof lay on the appellant, the  plain
    effect of this finding was a non-acceptance  of  her  claim  to  be  an
    unmarried mother who would return  to  China  on  her  own.   [58]-[64]
    clearly convey rejection of the  appellant's  attempt  to  portray  her
    family circumstances as those of an  unmarried  lone  mother.   To  the
    extent that this  ground  invokes  background  country  information  on
    unmarried/single mothers, this would only significantly assist  if  the
    judge had accepted she was an unmarried/single mother.

10.  A related difficulty afflicts ground 4 which protests  that  the  judge
    made adverse credibility  findings  without  properly  considering  the
    background country  evidence.   Plainly  the  judge  did  give  careful
    consideration to the background country evidence, noting the  extensive
    material set out in the parties' bundles and the  "available  evidence"
    relating to family planning as well as the evidence to which the  Upper
    Tribunal had had regard in AX (family  planning  scheme)  China  [2012]
    UKUT 0093  (IAC)  (see  [58]  and  [59].   Such  consideration  to  the
    background evidence is also clear from what the  judge  said  at  [62]-
    [63].  The COI cited in ground  4  simply  relate  concerns  about  the
    problems of unregistered children.  The judge did not accept  that  the
    first child was unregistered and was also clearly satisfied the  second
    child could be registered as well: see [64].

11.  Grounds 5 and 6 focus on Article 8  considerations,  making  the  valid
    point in the abstract that cases  can  succeed  under  Article  8  even
    though they fail under the Immigration  Rules  on  private  and  family
    life.  However, ground  5  is  empty  of  any  substantive  content  in
    relation  to  how  it   is   considered   there   existed   exceptional
    circumstances in the appellant's case.

12.  Further, ground 6 principally relies not on  any  arguments  about  the
    strength of the appellant and her second child's ties to the UK, but on
    a reassertion of the fact that she  would  be  returned  as  a  single,
    unmarried mother with a first child who  has  breached  China's  family
    planning scheme.   On  the  judge's  clear  findings  of  fact  on  the
    appellant's asylum claim, both these claims had been entirely rejected.
     Given  the  judge's  findings,  there  was  no  evidential  basis  for
    considering that the appellant and her  second  child  would  face,  as
    asserted, "detrimental consequences" if removed to China.

13.  For completeness I would add  that  the  judge's  assessment  that  the
    appellant, just because she had two children, would not be at  risk  of
    persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment on  return,  was  consistent
    with the assessment of the Upper Tribunal in the country guidance  case
    of AX at [189]. The judge's observation about this at [63] was correct.

14.  For the above reasons, the FtT judge did not  materially  err  in  law.
    His decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 27 July 2017

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

