
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03130/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 November 2018                      |On 23 November 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     DLH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. Following a hearing on 18 April 2018 at the  Birmingham  Employment
         Tribunal the  Upper  Tribunal  found  a  judge  of  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal has erred in law in relation to the first  ground  of  the
         appellant's challenge, that relating to the appellant's  protection
         appeal.
      2. The appellant is a citizen of Zambia born on 21 April 1971.
      3. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appellant's  protection
         claim based upon a real risk  on  return  to  Zambia  as  a  person
         opposed to the  current  Zambian  regime.  The  challenge  to  that
         finding asserted the conclusions are  irrational  when  considering
         the guidance provided by  the  Supreme  Court  in  HJ  (Iran).  The
         finding of the First-Tier Tribunal was that the appellant would not
         be at risk in Zambia if he blogged under a pseudonym and joined the
         opposition party which overlooked extensive evidence that  ordinary
         UPND supporters are targeted by the Patriotic Front government  and
         its supporters and that the  situation  is  deteriorating.  It  was
         argued that in the circumstances it was irrational for  the  First-
         Tier Tribunal to conclude that the appellant would be able to voice
         his genuinely  held  political  beliefs  in  Zambia  without  being
         exposed to a risk of ill-treatment.
      4. A further bundle has been provided in  accordance  with  directions
         that shows the appellant has continued to express views adverse  to
         the government under  a  pseudonym  and  also  country  information
         relating  to  action  taken  by  the  ruling  party  against  those
         perceived to be contrary to their interests.
      5. I find that the adverse political views expressed by the  appellant
         represent a genuinely held fundamental belief in which  he  clearly
         expresses opposition to the ruling Patriotic Front party in Zambia.
         I accept that the appellant has done so under a pseudonym and  that
         there is no evidence, at this time,  that  anybody  in  Zambia  has
         connected the appellant to the pseudonym.
      6. I find that if the appellant returns to Zambia he will continue  to
         express his opposition to the Patriotic Front as he has  done  from
         the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the  country  information  clearly
         indicates  that  doing  so  will  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
         persecution to the appellant on the basis of his actual or  imputed
         adverse political opinion.
      7. I accept that the appellant could continue to use his pseudonym  to
         avoid being identified as the person responsible for the  blogs  or
         other adverse material but also  find  on  the  evidence  the  only
         reason why the appellant would not use his real  name  or  disclose
         his identity is to avoid the risk of persecution  or  ill-treatment
         that he is likely to face if he does.
      8. In accordance with HJ (Iran) if a person is found to have a genuine
         fundamental belief such as that held by the appellant  which  could
         give rise to a real risk on return, but that person acts discreetly
         out of fear of persecution, then they are entitled to be recognised
         as a refugee.
      9. I find the appellant has discharged the burden of proof upon him to
         the required standard to show this is the situation he  faces  and,
         accordingly, I allow the appeal under the Refugee Convention on the
         basis of the appellant's adverse political opinion.

Decision

     10. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.

  Anonymity.

         The anonymity order made on 1 June 2018, pursuant to rule 14 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  shall  continue
         until further order.


Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 15 November 2018
