
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03194/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th September 2018                        |On 19th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Roberts, IAC
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Turnock  promulgated  on  29   September   2016,
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 17
    November 2015 to refuse her asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born in 1978. She is qualified as
    a lawyer in Algeria. Although previously married, she was  divorced  in
    2012. During a visit to the United Kingdom between 8 October 2014 and 4
    January 2015, she met ND, also an Algerian citizen. They entered into a
    relationship  and  the  appellant  became  pregnant.  She  returned  to
    Algeria; and, when she fell ill, her family discovered  the  pregnancy.
    She was beaten by her elder  brother,  and  was  hospitalised;  he  had
    accused her of bringing shame on her family.  She left home that  night
    and went to stay with relatives in Constantine, not informing  them  of
    the situation. While there, her brother continued to  threaten  her  by
    telephone.

 3. The appellant contacted her mother about this, and she  told  her  that
    she would never forgive the appellant if she reported the  incident  to
    the police, and that the brother would "calm down" if she  aborted  the
    child. She then moved to Algeria to stay with relatives. She  contacted
    the police but they  refused  to  help  without  a  specialist  medical
    report.

 4. The appellant then  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  3  February
    2015using the visit visa earlier issued to her, and claimed asylum. Her
    child was born in the United Kingdom.

 5. Although accepting that the appellant had had  an  illegitimate  child,
    the respondent refused the asylum claim on the grounds  that  her  fear
    was not  objectively  well-founded,  as  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for her in Algeria; and, that  it  would  in  any  event  be
    reasonable for her to relocate to a part of the country where she would
    not be at risk.

 6. On appeal, the judge found that: -

      i)  The  appellant  would  not  be  provided  with  a  sufficiency  of
         protection in her home area [50], given that the police would  only
         take action after a serious attack;

     ii) The appellant's brother would not seek to locate her if she were to
         relocate to an area away from her home as had not  sought  to  find
         her in Constantine where she was known to be, a comparatively short
         distance away, and where  he  could  have  travelled  without  real
         difficulty [59];

    iii) There was no reason why the child's birth could not  be  registered
         [65] and there was supported for single mothers  in  Algeria  [67],
         albeit that it was not ideal;

     iv) The appellant's family would not attempt  to  locate  her,  and  so
         there was no reason why she could not pursue her former  employment
         as a lawyer, alternatively in some other legal field where she  did
         not have to register, and while she might face  discrimination,  it
         would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh, although she might needs
         supported in the early years of bringing up  her  child  which  she
         could pay for out of her income [69];

      v) Accordingly, as it was neither  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
         expect her to relocate, she had not shown the is a refugee.

 7. The appellant, acting in person, sought permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  not  properly  taking   into
    consideration the stigma that her child would face as  an  illegitimate
    child.

 8. On 31 January 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted  permission  to
    appeal, stating:

         "2.  It is arguable  that  the  reasons  provided  for  finding  an
         absence of a real risk that the appellant's brother would track her
         down outside her home area are inadequate [59] bearing in mind  the
         respondent's  acceptance  of  much  of  her  claim  [33]  and   the
         appellant's own evidence [57-8].

         3.   It is also arguable that in assessing  the  reasonableness  of
         relocation the FTT has not adequately addressed the evidence in the
         report of the country expert Dr Seddon or the  evidence  supporting
         the likelihood of endemic discrimination towards the appellant  and
         her child"

 9. Owing to an unfortunate sequence of events, resulting  in  the  hearing
    being adjourned on two occasions, the appeal did  not  come  before  me
    until 25 September 2018.

    Submissions

10. Ms Rogers submitted that  at  [59]  the  judge  had  misunderstood  the
    evidence about the extent of the brother's knowledge,  the  appellant's
    evidence in interview (questions 75 and 76) being that the mother,  and
    by extension the brother, did not know where she was, any communication
    only being by  telephone.   She  submitted  that  this  undermined  the
    finding that there was unlikely to be a risk elsewhere in Algeria.

11. Ms Rogers further submitted that it was logical to  conclude  that  the
    risk would extend beyond the home area and that the  reason  the  judge
    found there would be no sufficiency of  protection  there  would  apply
    equally across the whole  country.  It  was  submitted  also  that  the
    appellant could not set up as a lawyer as she would have to advertise.

12. Ms Rogers submitted also that the judge had  erred  in  his  assessment
    that it would be neither unreasonable or unduly harsh for the appellant
    to relocate, given that he had not  properly  taken  into  account  the
    difficulties the appellant would face through a combination of being  a
    single woman and having a young illegitimate child.

13. Mr Howells submitted that any error in the judge's assessment  of  what
    the brother knew was not material, given that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show he had the resources or the inclination  to  seek  out
    the  appellant.  He  submitted  further  that  the  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of relocation was not flawed and cured any defect.

    Did the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
    error of law?

14. For the reasons set out below I am satisfied that it did.  It is  clear
    from what the appellant said in interview that she  had  not  told  her
    mother where she was going. She expressly said that her family did  not
    know she was with distant relatives who in turn did not  know  why  she
    was visiting. These relatives were not  usually  in  contact  with  the
    appellant's immediate family and communication was by phone. The  judge
    appears at [59] to have based  his  conclusions  about  the  steps  the
    brother would take on an assumption that he knew the appellant  was  in
    Constantine. That was misplaced, and undermines that conclusion.

15. I am satisfied that this error was material.   The  submission  to  the
    contrary -that he would not have the resources to  trace  her,  or  the
    inclinations, is speculative as the judge made no  findings  on  either
    point.  There would be difficulty in  her  concealing  her  whereabouts
    were she to practise as a lawyer and it is notable  that  the  brothers
    used to contact her by phone (interview Q. 86) and,  that  the  brother
    had threatened to find her  wherever  she  was  from  her  office.  She
    explained how that was possible, and there is no reason to  doubt  that
    as in most countries it is relatively easy to track down the practising
    address  of  a  lawyer.   It  is  also  evident  from  the   subsequent
    communications with the mother (Q. 126) that the same threats are made.



16. There is significant merit in the submission that it follows  from  the
    judge's assessment of the lack of sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    appellant from the state in her home area would be the  same  elsewhere
    in Algeria. The system, and the problems identified  by  the  judge  at
    [35] to [50] would be the same throughout the  country.   Thus,  it  is
    only if the risk to the appellant would not extend to areas  where  she
    could relocate, that the error would be immaterial.

17. Further, and in  any  event,  the  finding  that  the  appellant  could
    relocate and work as a lawyer was predicated on the  finding  that  the
    family would not try to trace her. That, for the reasons set out above,
    is not a sustainable finding.

18. For these reasons, the decision did involve the making of an  error  of
    law and must be remade on the basis that the judge's finding that there
    was no sufficiency of protection for the appellant in her home area was
    sustained, and that remaking would be confined  to  the  assessment  of
    risk beyond the home area, sufficiency of protection beyond that  area,
    and the reasonableness of relocation.

19. I am, however, satisfied that the judge properly directed himself as to
    the law when assessing that there was no sufficiency of protection.  As
    was noted in AW (Sufficiency of Protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31  in
    Bagdanavicius the House of Lords at [2005] UKHL 38 left undisturbed the
    proposition set out  by  Auld LJ  on  real  risk  and  sufficiency  of
    protection in the Court of Appeal [2005] EWCA Civ 1605. While it will
    always be relevant to  ask  whether  or  not  there  is  in  general  a
    sufficiency of protection in a  country,  the  critical  question  will
    nevertheless remain  in  an  asylum  case  as  set  out  in  the  sixth
    proposition by Auld LJ and in an Article 3 case as  set  out  in  the
    fifteenth proposition.  Thus  a  judge  must  look,  notwithstanding  a
    general sufficiency of protection  in  a  country,  to  the  individual
    circumstances of the appellant and ask himself the relevant  questions.
    I am satisfied that the judge did so, and came to a conclusion open  to
    him on the evidence that on the particular facts  of  this  case  there
    would not be a sufficiency of protection for this appellant.

20. I announced that at the hearing and heard further submissions  which  I
    took into account in reaching my decision. I also took into  account  a
    report from the Immigration and Refugee Board in Canada of which I  had
    become aware prior  to  the  hearing  when  I  had  believed  that  the
    appellant would be unrepresented, and on which I asked the  parties  to
    comment. It is entitled Algeria: Situation of single or divorced  women
    living alone, particularly in Algiers; whether they can find  work  and
    housing; support services available to them (2012-2015) [DZA105233.FE].

21. I conclude from this, and from the report from Dr Seddon, that a single
    woman faces significant problems in living alone in  Algeria.  Much  of
    this flows from the societal expectation that a woman  will  live  with
    her parents or with a brother.  Some women, particularly in the  larger
    cities, live in small groups in apartments.   I accept that the ability
    to do so is reliant on socio economic statues,  wealthier  women  being
    able to afford their own housing.  That said, it appears from the  IRBD
    report that even this may be difficult. At section 4.4 of that  report,
    it is recorded that it is rare for landlords to rent to a single woman,
    and that landlords consider the morals of the women, and that woman are
    able to rent under the name of a male relative, or by agreeing  to  pay
    more.  Access to social housing is (section 4.1) difficult,  given  the
    shortage of housing, very difficult.

22. It is apparent from IRBD report that women who live alone are  seen  as
    having loose morals, more so in poorer neighbourhoods. That is  equally
    so also in the hostility to women who have children  outside  marriage,
    them being more at risk of sexual violence.  That  there  is  hostility
    towards extra-marital sex is also seen in Dr Seddon's report at [3.13].
    This appears to extend also to those born illegitimately

23. As against this, the appellant was  able  to  qualify  and  work  as  a
    lawyer. She is thus is a considerably better position, in theory,  than
    other younger and less well-qualified women as Mr Howells submitted.

24. In considering the risk to the appellant beyond her home area, I accept
    that were she to continue to practise as a lawyer, it would be easy for
    her brother to track her down. Her evidence in interview which I accept
    was that he was aware that he could trace her through the  register  of
    lawyers maintained in Algeria.  I have no reason to doubt that  such  a
    register exists, nor was it submitted that  it  does  not.   There  is,
    therefore a relatively easy means by which the brother could trace  the
    appellant. I am satisfied also that it is  reasonably  likely  that  he
    would wish to do so, given the continuing nature of the threats relayed
    via the mother. Given his attitude to the pregnancy, and the prevailing
    attitude to illegitimate in Algeria, I conclude that he is unlikely  to
    have become less of a  threat.  Similarly,  I  conclude  that  for  the
    reasons given by Judge  Turnock,  there  would  be  no  sufficiency  of
    protection in the home area. I am also satisfied that the reasoning and
    evidence as to the lack of availability of such  would  apply  wherever
    the appellant went in Algeria were she to continue  to  practise  as  a
    lawyer as she could easily be traced. I accept, however, that were  she
    not to practise as a lawyer then it is less likely that  she  could  be
    traced, albeit that subjectively she would fear that.

25. Would it then be unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to  give  up
    practising as a lawyer to avoid the risk to her?

26. I conclude that it would. While it was submitted that the appellant may
    be able to get some other form of employment in the legal sector,  that
    is speculative.  It is not at all clear how she could, for example, get
    a job within the administration of justice or judicial  system  at  her
    age, and I note the evidence that  unemployment  in  Algeria  is  high.
    Further, it is also speculative that she would then  be  able  to  earn
    enough to rent a place to live and, pay  for  childcare  otherwise  she
    would not be able to work given the age of her child and the absence of
    anyone else to care for him. There is also  the  difficulty  she  would
    have in gaining employment once it was known that she had a  child  and
    had not been married; that is not something she could  conceal.   There
    is also significant discrimination towards children born out of wedlock
    - see appellant's bundle at pages 12 -  14;  and,  they  face  problems
    throughout their lifetimes.

27. There is no real prospect of the appellant being able to rely on family
    for support without putting  herself  at  risk;  none  of  the  distant
    relatives with whom she  stayed  in  Algeria  knew  she  was  pregnant.
    Equally, there is little prospect of her being able to stay in a refuge
    as a long-term solution. There are said to be  insufficient  in  number
    (refusal letter at [20]), and there is then still the difficulty of the
    appellant being able to support herself and her child.

28. I accept that, as Dr Seddon opines, it is likely that the only work the
    appellant  could  get  other  than  as  a  lawyer  would  dangerous  or
    degrading.  It  is  unlikely  that  this  would  allow  her  to  obtain
    accommodation  where  she  and  the  child  would   be   safe   (poorer
    neighbourhoods presenting a greater danger to single  women  and  those
    with illegitimate children), given the difficulty and  higher  cost  in
    obtaining rented accommodation; or, that she could get child care.

29. Taking all of these factors into account, I conclude that it would  not
    be reasonable for the appellant to relocate within  Algeria  given  the
    discrimination she and her child face making it difficult for  to  find
    accommodation in a safe are  and/or  work  to  support  them  to  avoid
    indigency, or otherwise face the real risk of violence from her brother
    should she practise as a lawyer.

30. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the  appellant  is  at  risk  on
    return  to  Algeria  of  harm  of  sufficient  severity  to  constitute
    persecution or engage Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.   I  am
    satisfied that the reason she faces such harm  is  on  account  of  her
    gender and/or as a woman who has had an illegitimate  child.  There  is
    sufficient material to show that women in  Algeria  are  treated  as  a
    particular social group, and face discrimination on that  account.  The
    same can be said about women who  have  transgressed  social  mores  by
    having  sex  or  a  child  outside  marriage.   These   are   immutable
    characteristics, and are seen as having a distinct identity.  Thus,  on
    either basis, the appellant is a member of a particular social group. I
    am satisfied also that the failure to provide protection flows in  part
    from this, as does the threat from her brother. There is on that  basis
    a sufficient nexus with the Refugee Convention.

31. For these reasons, I allow the appeal on Refugee Convention  and  Human
    Rights Convention grounds.

    Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on  Refugee  Convention  and
    Human Rights Convention grounds.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008




    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  15 October 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

