








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03977/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 4 October 2018                |On: 20 November 2018                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [H R]

                          anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss R Popal, counsel, instructed by Hunter Stone
Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, born on [~] 1990.  His  appeal
      against the secretary of state's decision refusing his application for
      asylum and humanitarian protection was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge P Tsamados, in a decision promulgated on 10 July 2018.


   3. On  31  July  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to  appeal  against  that  decision.  He
      found that  it  was  arguable  that  the  findings  were  inadequately
      reasoned  and  the  internal  relocation  option   was   "inadequately
      explored." All grounds may be argued.


            The decision appealed against


   4. Judge Tsamados noted that the claimant arrived in the UK  on  11  June
      2011 on a Tier 4 (General) student visa. This was extended on a number
      of occasions until December 2013. His application for further leave to
      remain was refused on 27 July 2015 on the basis that he had  submitted
      false documents. The appellant was arrested on 9 July 2017. On 10 July
      2017 he was served with an RED.001 for overstaying his visa.  He  then
      claimed asylum on 8 December 2017 [4].


   5. He accepted at [41] that he is a  Christian,  and  has  had  a  sexual
      relationship out of marriage with a Muslim "girl", Ms [B]. He told his
      brother of the relationship when he was  departing  Pakistan  but  his
      parents were unaware of it. He then left Pakistan to come to study  in
      the UK and was unaware for many years that Ms [B] had become pregnant.
      She then contacted the claimant's father to arrange an abortion. After
      she had married, the fact of the relationship and  the  abortion,  but
      not the claimant's father's involvement, came to light. His father and
      brother were beaten by Ms [B]'s parents and in laws. An FIR  was  made
      against him alleging serious but  untrue  and  impossible  complaints,
      given the claimant's absence from the country at the time [41]


   6. His father had kept this state of  affairs  from  the  claimant  on  a
      previous occasion when his mother became ill and had lied  to  him  by
      stating that  his  mother  had  recovered,  to  prevent  the  claimant
      travelling to Pakistan. He only became aware  of  the  true  state  of
      affairs after his arrest in the UK when  he  had  volunteered  to  the
      secretary of state to return to Pakistan and approached his father  to
      purchase the air ticket. His father then told him  what  had  happened
      regarding Ms [B] and her family. He told him not to  come  to  the  UK
      (sic) because his life and liberty were at risk.


   7. Judge Tsamados accepted that the claimant  would  be  likely  to  face
      arrest on return given the arrangement reached between the family  and
      with the  intervention  of  the  claimant's  father's  church.  It  is
      reasonably likely that the claimant would be detained on the basis  of
      what were very serious charges in Pakistan, but  he  did  not  believe
      there is a serious possibility  that  this  could  include  blasphemy,
      punishable by death [41]


   8. He accepted that it is more possible  that  if  he  were  released  or
      accessible he would face the possibility of injury or death by  virtue
      of an honour crime or killing, wherever he lived  in  Pakistan,  given
      that Ms [B]'s family  are  Pashtun,  her  uncle  is  a  major  in  the
      Pakistani army and the family have political connections. He  did  not
      accept that the matter could escalate into  a  religious  conflict  or
      battle as suggested by the claimant's father [41].


   9. With regard to the secretary of state's submissions under s.8  of  the
      2004 Act, he accepted that the claimant's father did not tell his  son
      of the situation until it was clear  that  the  claimant  intended  to
      return to Pakistan and that he had no choice [43]. He  had  previously
      lied to the claimant to stop him returning at the time of his mothers'
      ill health. He  took  account  of  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had
      volunteered to leave the UK and return to Pakistan after his arrest.


  10. In the circumstances, he did not accept that the delay and  timing  in
      applying for asylum affected his credibility [43].


  11. He found that the appellant fell within the  1951  Refugee  Convention
      and the secretary of state was wrong to state otherwise. He had regard
      to the Home Office Country Information and Guidance (Pakistan):  Women
      Fearing Gender Based Violence, February  2016,  which  indicates  that
      honour killings are committed against men and women accused of  sexual
      infidelity or  indiscretion  where  the  killers,  often  male  family
      members, seek to avenge the dishonour brought against the family [45].


  12. He took into account that  the  claimant's  father  and  brother  have
      already been attacked by members of Ms [B]'s family  as  well  as  her
      husband's family. A false FIR has been  laid  and  through  Jirga,  an
      arrangement whereby the claimant's father has to inform her family  of
      the appellant's return to Pakistan has been reached.


  13. He also had regard to the Country Information and Guidance (Pakistan):
      Prison Conditions, June 2016. On detention, the claimant would face  a
      period of time in prison awaiting questioning, conviction or worse. He
      had regard to the prison conditions and  the  treatment  of  religious
      minorities and to crimes carrying the death penalty,  including  Zina,
      abduction and blasphemy.


  14. It is likely that the deficiencies in the FIR would be revealed  quite
      quickly. He found  that  there  is  a  serious  possibility  that  the
      claimant has more to fear from the actions of Ms [B]'s family and  in-
      laws 'by why (sic) of honour crimes/killing' [47].


  15. He also found in any event that the claimant qualifies for a grant  of
      humanitarian protection for the same  reasons.  It  would  also  be  a
      breach of Article 2 for the same reasons.








            Submissions


  16. Ms Pal referred to the secretary of state's grounds seeking permission
      to appeal. Prior to his asylum application, the appellant had  applied
      to remain in the UK. This was refused  on  27  July  2015  as  he  had
      attempted to gain leave by deception. He was arrested on 9 July  2017.
      He then had no basis to remain in  the  UK.  He  subsequently  claimed
      asylum in September 2017 on the basis that he had a relationship  with
      a woman with whom he had regular  sexual  encounters  before  he  left
      Pakistan in 2011.


  17. She submitted that a number of credibility issues were raised  in  the
      refusal letter. The  Judge  has  not  adequately  considered  how  the
      claimant rebutted those issues. She referred to the decision in Malaba
      v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 820. Dyson LJ stated that it was imperative for
      the adjudicator to explain how she reached her main  conclusion  that,
      having regard to the response statement,  the  discrepancies  did  not
      completely undermine the core of the claim.


  18. Ms Pal submitted that the claimant's deceit is  clearly  an  indicator
      that he is capable of lacking honesty. That fact was clearly  relevant
      in  assessing  his  credibility.  She  noted  that  the   Judge   also
      acknowledged that there were  some  gaps  or  inconsistencies  in  his
      evidence [40]. He found however that this did not diminish his overall
      credibility.


  19. She submitted that there was no reasoning given as to why he  came  to
      that conclusion. Without sufficient analysis and factoring in  of  the
      claimant's  previous  dishonesty,  the  Judge   simply   accepts   the
      claimant's account without more. He did not  however  clarify  how  he
      came to the conclusions referred to at [31] of the decision.


  20. The claimant had provided an FIR document at page 47  of  his  bundle,
      which stated that the offence is said to have occurred  at  5pm  on  7
      December 2015.


  21. It was reported at 10.30pm. The name of the complainant is Major [AK].
      It is asserted that he named the claimant, resident of [~], Islamabad.
      The claimant has called his daughter on her cellphone  various  times.
      He enticed her against her family. He inveigled her and  took  her  to
      Murree. His son saw the claimant and his daughter  in  a  local  hotel
      having lunch at 5pm. When his son  reached  them  in  the  hotel,  the
      claimant saw his son, the brother  of  [S].  He  ran  away  "from  the
      occurrence." His son brought his sister home safely. His daughter told
      them that the claimant used to call her on her phone  and  he  enticed
      her against her family and said to  him  "let's  run  away  from  home
      together."


  22. He requested that strict legal action be taken against  the  claimant.
      After enquiry, the offence was found under section 506/25 -DPPC.  This
      was made out.


  23. Ms Pal submitted that it is not clear how the  claimant  was  able  to
      obtain this document. A serious anomaly is that the FIR refers  to  an
      incident which allegedly occurred in 2015. The claimant was in the  UK
      at the time. The Judge did not even contemplate applying  the  Tanveer
      Ahmed principles to this document. Even if the document was a reliable
      one, the claimant would very easily be able to prove that the incident
      did not happen as he was in the UK.


  24. She further submitted that Pakistan  has  a  population  of  over  200
      million. It has an area equating to the combined area  of  France  and
      the UK. The Judge did not consider internal relocation. There was only
      a reference to the claimant's cross examination when he asserted  that
      he could not relocate to another city such as Karachi, because  sooner
      or later someone, even a friend, would tell Ms [B]'s family  where  he
      was. He would be living in constant fear [28.5].


  25. There is thus no adequate reasoning as to why the Judge  accepted  the
      claimant's assertion that he gave under cross examination.


  26. On behalf of the claimant, Ms  Popal,  who  represented  the  claimant
      before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  submitted  that  there  were  three
      issues. The first was the allegation of deceit.  The  second  was  the
      FIR.  The third was internal relocation.


  27. As to the allegation of deceit, there was  a  reference  at  paragraph
      12(c) in the secretary of state's reasons for refusal letter, that  he
      had submitted false documents. It was also  referred  to  in  the  s.8
      considerations at paragraph 38-39.


  28. However, apart from assertion, no  evidence  was  ever  'submitted  or
      seen' to substantiate  it.  She  referred  to  the  claimant's  asylum
      interview at B32, Questions Q100-101.  He  was  asked  why,  when  his
      application for leave to remain as a student was refused in July 2015,
      he did not leave the UK at the time. He stated that he did not receive
      any letter from the Home Office that he had been refused.


  29. It was in fact put to him at the interview that the letters were  sent
      but that they were returned as there was a problem with  his  address.
      He was asked why he did not actively try to find out the result of his
      application rather than staying in the country illegally.  He  replied
      that he was not sure that he had any immigration problem. He said that
      he called the Home Office many times for his 60 day letter  and  fees.
      In the end they said they will send him the  letter  but  he  did  not
      receive any letter and he does not know why they "post it back."


  30. Ms Popal referred to the claimant's statement at C36 in support of his
      asylum application. There he set out his claim in full and stated that
      in early 2014 he received a letter from the Home Office  stating  that
      he was being refunded his  application  fee.  He  contacted  the  Home
      Office and they advised him that it was a mistake. He was told to send
      a banker's draft to a PO box number. However, the college to which  he
      had applied lost the sponsor licence and he therefore did not send the
      banker's draft. He was advised to wait for the 60 day letter in  order
      to find a new college and then make a new  application.  He  contacted
      the Home Office and they informed him that they were  unable  to  tell
      him exactly what he  would  be  issued,  but  that  he  would  receive
      "something in the post". He  waited  and  waited  but  never  received
      anything from the Home Office.


  31. The claimant also asserted that he never received the  ETS  "deception
      letter". He was not aware that he was an overstayer. He is still to be
      served.


  32. She submitted that the burden of proof was on the Home Office  but  it
      has not been discharged.


  33. Ms Popal also referred to paragraph 24(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      Rules 2014. She submitted that the respondent was obliged  to  provide
      the Tribunal with any other unpublished document which is referred  to
      in the document mentioned in sub- paragraph (a) or relied  on  by  the
      respondent. The notice of decision was such a document as mentioned in
      sub-paragraph (a) and  was  relied  on  by  the  secretary  of  state.
      Accordingly, there was no attempt to rely on it before the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


  34. Ms Popal noted that no questions were asked of  the  claimant  at  the
      hearing about the ETS or deception. There was in fact no reference  to
      the ETS or deception when the Home Office Presenting Officer made  his
      submissions.


  35. Accordingly, even though the allegation of deception was  referred  to
      in the reasons for refusal, it was never substantiated or relied on.


  36. Ms Popal referred to decisions relating to ETS case law, including the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Shehzad and  Another  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 615.


  37. On the evidence provided, the secretary of state did not discharge the
      burden of proof at the hearing. She repeated that  no  documents  were
      produced at all. Apart from  assertion  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter, there was no further reference to the alleged deceit.


  38. She also submitted that the Judge dealt with the s.8 issue  where  the
      secretary of state in the refusal letter again referred to the alleged
      deception. The Judge dealt adequately with that issue at [42-43].  The
      delay did  not  affect  the  appellant's  credibility.  There  was  no
      evidence upon which the Judge  could  deal  with  in  the  absence  of
      evidence substantiating the delay. In the absence of any evidence, the
      decision in that respect would have been resolved  in  the  claimant's
      favour.


  39. With regard to paragraph 5 of the reasons for appealing, she submitted
      that the secretary of state 'did not understand the claimant's  case'.
      The First-tier Tribunal Judge was aware that the claimant was  not  in
      Pakistan at the time. In fact the FIR was made on  an  entirely  false
      basis. She referred to [25-26] of the Judge's decision in which he set
      out the claimant's case at the hearing. At [29.2] he  noted  that  the
      claimant himself in re-examination asserted that Ms [B]'s family  made
      a false report against him as  it  refers  to  an  incident  which  is
      alleged to have occurred in 2015 when he was in Pakistan. The claimant
      repeated this when the Judge himself asked questions, as  set  out  at
      [30].


  40.  Accordingly  this  was  dealt  with  extensively  by  way  of   cross
      examination, in re-examination and by questions from the Judge.


  41. The Judge set out the claimant's case at [32.16]. This dealt with  the
      claimant's father's statement. He is concerned that  if  the  claimant
      returns to Pakistan, he will have to hand himself over to  the  police
      as agreed with the girl's family. They have filed an FIR  against  the
      claimant alleging the instigation of sexual encounters with the  girl.
      If put in detention, he fears that his son will  be  killed.  Even  if
      not, he is likely to be killed by the girl's family.


  42. If he does not comply with the agreement with the girl's  family,  the
      matter could escalate into a religious issue.  Further,  it  would  be
      impossible for his son to live in any other  part  of  Pakistan  given
      that there is an FIR against him which has been lodged with the police
      [32.17].


  43. Ms Popal referred to her submission in this respect which was set  out
      in her skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal: Although  the
      majority of victims were women, men were also affected by violence  in
      accordance with the  Home  Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance
      document.  She  referred  to  paragraph  10  to  the  Policy  Guidance
      published in February 2016, which noted that there are  some  reported
      incidents of "honour" crimes against men - paragraph 2.4.13.


  44. In addition, she also placed before the Tribunal a document  from  the
      Research Directorate, Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Ottowa,
      in respect of honour killings targeting men and women in Pakistan. The
      treatment of males is set out from paragraph 5.


  45. I addition, she relied before the First-tier Tribunal on  the  Country
      Information and Guidance, Pakistan: Prison Conditions, a  Home  Office
      report dated  2016.  She  set  out  in  her  skeleton  the  applicable
      paragraphs, namely 5.6.1 to 6.3 and 6.4. She also referred to the Home
      Office guidance relating to sexual crimes at page 16 of the document.


  46.  She  had  also  referred  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  Country
      Information and Guidance dated February 2016, at tab 3 of her skeleton
      with respect to internal relocation: Paragraphs 2.5.1 to 2.5.4.  Where
      the person's fear is of ill treatment or persecution at the  hands  of
      the State, they will not be able to relocate to escape that risk.


  47. She referred the First-tier Tribunal to the section in the Guidance on
      adultery and extra-marital relations: At paragraph 9.1.3 it  is  noted
      that honour killings are committed against men and  women  accused  of
      sexual infidelity or  indiscretion,  where  the  killers,  often  male
      family members, seek to avenge the dishonour brought upon the  family.
      A mere allegation of sexual misconduct is enough to perpetrate such an
      honour crime.


  48. She submitted that the Judge did have regard to all this  evidence  in
      considering the arrangements made by the family.


  49. She had also referred to  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  note
      relating to Pakistan, including internal relocation, dated June  2017.
      She submitted that the Judge dealt with the background  evidence  from
      [45-48]. He was expressly aware  that  a  false  FIR  has  been  laid.
      Further, through Jirga, an arrangement has been  reached  whereby  the
      claimant's father has to inform her family of his return to Pakistan.


  50. She submitted that the grounds relied on by  the  secretary  of  state
      amount to a disagreement with the Judge's findings. Further, the Judge
      cannot be criticised for not dealing with an issue that had  not  been
      properly raised, let alone particularised.






      Assessment


  51. I have detailed the secretary  of  state's  submissions.  The  primary
      assertion is that the ETS deception is clearly an indicator  that  the
      claimant is capable of "lacking honesty," which should  have  informed
      his approach to the claimant's credibility.


  52. However, although asserting that the claimant was guilty of deception,
      in that he had submitted a false ETS language document, no evidence at
      all was produced in support. Accordingly,  that  assertion  was  never
      proved.


  53. The grounds seeking permission to appeal further  contend  that  there
      was a serious anomaly regarding the FIR. However, the Judge has  dealt
      with that issue in some detail. He was fully aware that the assertions
      in the FIR related to an incident which occurred when the claimant was
      in the UK at  the  time.  However,  this  did  not  detract  from  its
      potential use.


  54. The Judge has had proper regard to the Home Office Country Information
      and Guidance relating to Pakistan, in terms of gender  based  violence
      and through Jirga, an arrangement was reached whereby  the  claimant's
      father had to inform Ms [B]'s family of his return to Pakistan.


  55. He noted that the Pakistan  authorities  are  able  but  unwilling  to
      provide effective protection to those at risk  of  honour  crimes.  He
      also considered the evidence relating to internal relocation at [46].


  56. Having properly directed himself, he concluded that there is a serious
      possibility that the claimant has more to fear from the actions of  Ms
      [B]'s family and in laws by way of honour crimes/killing.


  57. I am satisfied that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Tsamados  has  given  a
      detailed assessment of the evidence and has given sustainable  reasons
      for the conclusions he arrived at.






      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction continued.














      Signed           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


      Dated: 17 October 2018





