
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/03885/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st June, 2017 and Given extempore     |6th June 2017                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                Bushra Zahid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MAde)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms N Maltice of Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan,  who  was  born  on  9th  July,
    1975.  Initially the appellant came to the United Kingdom as a  student
    and after two unsuccessful applications, was granted a visa to enter as
    a student on 17th March, 2011, valid from  28th  March,  2011  to  24th
    April, 2012.  She arrived on 16th April, 2011 using  her  own  passport
    and then applied for her leave to be extended, but  on  6th  September,
    2013 it was refused.  On 3rd July, 2015 she rang  the  Asylum  Unit  to
    claim asylum.  Following an interview her application  was  refused  on
    11th April, 2016.  She appealed against that decision by  notice  dated
    20th April, 2016 and her appeal was heard at Sheldon Court,  Birmingham
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi on 24th October, 2016.

2.   At paragraph 26 of the judge's determination she stated:

              "In the absence of any evidence that Asif Rashid exists, I  am
             bound to find that the appellant has fabricated her account"

     but in  paragraph  13  of  the  determination,  the  judge  noted  that
    although she had decided that she would not adjourn the  hearing  part-
    heard to enable the appellant to produce  further  evidence  about  the
    existence of Asif Rashid, she would grant the appellant a  further  ten
    days in which to serve further evidence.  She  added  that  if  in  the
    light of that evidence there was a need  to  hear  further  submissions
    from either party then she would reconvene the hearing.

3.   The appellant's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal with further  evidence
    on 3rd November, 2016 and the letter from them was  stamped  as  having
    been received by the Tribunal on the same date.  This  was  within  the
    ten day period allowed by the judge.  It is unfortunate that the  judge
    allowed further time for submitting further evidence.   It  would  have
    been far preferable, in my view, had she adjourned part-heard.

4.   The letter from the  appellant's  solicitors  is  date-stamped  by  the
    Tribunal on 3rd November, 2016 and had been faxed to  the  Tribunal  at
    16.38 that day.  Attached to the letter were two witness statements and
    further photographs.  Further photographs appeared to have  been  faxed
    to the Tribunal at 16.49. that day.

5.   As a  result,  it  appears  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    mistaken when she said at paragraph 24:

              "Whilst I gave permission for the appellant to file additional
             evidence and I have delayed writing  this  decision,  no  such
             evidence has been provided by her."

     The evidence was not of course considered by the judge and should  have
    been.  Unfortunately, the evidence was in the form of a facsimile.  The
    original statement and the original photographs  have  still  not  been
    provided to the Tribunal.  That is relevant, because the  statement  is
    not at all legible and the photographs are  not  clear  either,  having
    been sent by facsimile.

6.   I have concluded that the appellant has been denied a fair hearing  and
    at the  hearing  before  me  today  Mr  Wilding,  in  fairness  to  the
    appellant, agreed that the matter should be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal so that the appellant's appeal can be heard afresh.

7.   I hope that those instructed by Counsel  will  ensure  that  all  their
    evidence is supplied to the First-tier Tribunal well in advance of  the
    renewed hearing date and that the evidence is  clear  and  legible.   I
    believe that two hours should be set  aside  for  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal and an Urdu interpreter should be made available.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for hearing afresh  by  a
judge other than First Tier Tribunal Judge Obhi.

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard  Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard  Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
