
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03760/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Thursday 5 March 2020             |On Thursday 23 April 2020            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     H S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge,  the  appeal  involves  a  protection  claim  and  a   minor   child.
Accordingly, it is appropriate to make an anonymity  direction.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, Counsel instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan

For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. By a decision promulgated on 13 August 2019, I found an error of
         law in the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan itself
         promulgated on 3 June 2019 dismissing the Appellant's appeal
         against the Secretary of State's decision dated 9 January 2018
         refusing his protection claim.  I therefore set aside Judge
         O'Hagan's decision and gave directions for the re-making of the
         decision.  In particular, I indicated that I would not decide this
         appeal until after the handing down of the decision in the pending
         country guidance case of SMO and others, which delay would enable
         the gathering of updated medical evidence in relation to, in
         particular, the Appellant's son [O].  My error of law decision is
         appended to this decision for ease of reference.

      2. The decision in the country guidance case is now reported as SMO,
         KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT
         00400 (IAC) ("SMO and Others").  I refer to the guidance given in
         that decision so far as relevant below.

      3. The factual background in this appeal is set out in my error of law
         decision and I do not need to repeat it.  As I pointed out at [1]
         of my earlier decision, the   Appellant and his family have been
         granted discretionary leave to remain based on their Article 8
         rights, and so the only issue which remains is his appeal on
         protection grounds.

    LEGAL BACKGROUND AND ISSUES

      4. The Appellant does not contend that he is entitled to refugee
         status.  As such, the legal position is confined to Article 15(c)
         of the Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
         (Qualification) Regulations 2006 ("the Qualification Directive")
         and humanitarian protection pursuant to Article 15(b) of that
         directive.  The Appellant also contends that his removal would
         breach Article 3 ECHR.

      5. Article 15 of the Qualification Directive provides as follows:

             "Serious harm consists of

          a) Death penalty or execution

          b) Torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of an
             applicant in the country of origin

          c) Serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person
             by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of
             international or internal armed conflict"

         As is evident from that definition, Article 15(b) overlaps with
         Article 3 ECHR.

      6. It is for the Appellant to establish that there are substantial
         grounds for believing that he will face treatment contrary to
         either Article 15 of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 ECHR
         on return.

      7. I emphasise that it remains open to the Appellant to seek to make
         out his case on those grounds notwithstanding that removal is not
         at this stage threatened because he and his family have been
         granted leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

      8. As to the way in which the law applies to this case, I set out the
         issues which I have to re-determine at [19] of my earlier decision.
          Those issues were re-organised and refined following initial
         discussions at the hearing (to which I refer below) as follows:

             Issue One: Whether the Appellant and his family would have, or
             within a reasonable time would be able to obtain a Civil
             Status Identity Document ("CSID");

             Issue Two: Where in Iraq the Appellant and his family would be
             able to live;

             Issue Three: Whether removal to the Appellant's home area
             would breach Article 3 ECHR;

             Issue Four: Whether, if internal relocation were required to
             avoid risk in home area, it would be unduly harsh for the
             Appellant and his family to relocate to IKR.

      9. The most recent country guidance which applies is that given in SMO
         and Others which reads as follows so far as relevant to this
         appeal:

             "A.  INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF  THE
             QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

             1.   There continues to  be  an  internal  armed  conflict  in
             certain parts of Iraq, involving  government  forces,  various
             militia and the remnants  of  ISIL.   Following  the  military
             defeat of ISIL at the end of 2017 and the resulting  reduction
             in levels  of  direct  and  indirect  violence,  however,  the
             intensity of that conflict is not  such  that,  as  a  general
             matter, there are substantial grounds for believing  that  any
             civilian returned to Iraq, solely on account of  his  presence
             there, faces a real risk of being subjected to  indiscriminate
             violence amounting to serious harm within the scope of Article
             15(c) QD.

             2.   ...

             3.   The  situation  in  the  Formerly  Contested  Areas  (the
             governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and  Salah  Al-
             Din) is  complex,   encompassing   ethnic,   political   and
             humanitarian issues  which  differ  by  region.   Whether  the
             return of an individual to such an area would be  contrary  to
             Article  15(c)  requires  a  fact-sensitive,  "sliding  scale"
             assessment to which the following matters are relevant.

             4.   Those with an actual or perceived association  with  ISIL
             are likely to be at enhanced risk throughout  Iraq.  In  those
             areas in which ISIL retains an active presence, those who have
             a  current  personal  association  with  local   or   national
             government or the security  apparatus  are  likely  to  be  at
             enhanced risk.

             5.   The impact of any of the personal characteristics  listed
             immediately below  must  be  carefully  assessed  against  the
             situation in the area to which return  is  contemplated,  with
             particular reference to the extent of  ongoing  ISIL  activity
             and the behaviour of the security actors in  control  of  that
             area.  Within the framework of such  an  analysis,  the  other
             personal characteristics which are capable of being  relevant,
             individually and cumulatively, to the sliding  scale  analysis
             required by Article 15(c) are as follows:

                . Opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the  KRG  or  local
                  security actors;

                . Membership of a national, ethnic or religious group  which
                  is either in the minority in the area in question, or  not
                  in de facto control of that area;

                . LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to  Islamic  mores
                  and wealthy or Westernised individuals;

                . Humanitarian or medical staff and  those  associated  with
                  Western organisations or security forces;

                . Women and children without genuine family support; and

                . Individuals with disabilities.

             6.   The living conditions in Iraq as a whole,  including  the
             Formerly Contested Areas, are  unlikely  to  give  rise  to  a
             breach  of  Article  3  ECHR  or  (therefore)  to  necessitate
             subsidiary protection under Article  15(b)  QD.  Where  it  is
             asserted that return to a particular part of Iraq  would  give
             rise to such a breach, however, it is to be recalled that  the
             minimum level of severity required is relative,  according  to
             the personal circumstances of the individual  concerned.   Any
             such circumstances require individualised  assessment  in  the
             context of the conditions of the area in question.

             B.   DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)

             7.   Return of former residents of the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region
             (IKR) will be to the IKR and  all  other  Iraqis  will  be  to
             Baghdad. The Iraqi authorities will allow  an  Iraqi  national
             (P) in the United Kingdom to  enter  Iraq  only  if  P  is  in
             possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating  to
             P, or a Laissez Passer.

             8.   No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in
             possession of one of these documents.

             9.   In the light of the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  HF
             (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection  claim  made
             by P cannot succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm
             arising from an absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport
             or a Laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is
             not currently feasible on account of a lack of  any  of  those
             documents.

             10.  Where P is returned  to  Iraq  on  a  Laissez  Passer  or
             expired passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at  the
             point of return by reason of not having a current passport.

             C.   CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION

             11.  The CSID is being replaced with  a  new  biometric  Iraqi
             National Identity Card - the INID. As a general matter, it  is
             necessary for an individual to have one of these two documents
             in order to live and travel within Iraq  without  encountering
             treatment or conditions which are contrary to Article 3  ECHR.
             Many of the checkpoints in the  country  are  manned  by  Shia
             militia who are not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely  to
             permit an individual without a CSID or  an  INID  to  pass.  A
             valid Iraqi passport is not recognised as acceptable proof  of
             identity for internal travel.

             12.  A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the  absence
             of a CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon  arrival  and  is
             not, in any event, a recognised identity  document.  There  is
             insufficient evidence to show that returnees are issued with a
             'certification letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any
             such document would be  recognised  internally  as  acceptable
             proof of identity.

             13.  Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID  within
             Iraq,  replacement  CSIDs  remain  available   through   Iraqi
             Consular facilities. Whether an individual  will  be  able  to
             obtain a replacement CSID whilst in  the  UK  depends  on  the
             documents available and, critically, the availability  of  the
             volume and page reference of the entry in the Family  Book  in
             Iraq, which system continues  to  underpin  the  Civil  Status
             Identity process. Given the importance  of  that  information,
             most Iraqi citizens will recall it. That information may  also
             be obtained from family members, although it is  necessary  to
             consider whether such relatives are on  the  father's  or  the
             mother's side because the registration system is patrilineal.

             14.  ...

             15.  An individual returnee who is not  from  Baghdad  is  not
             likely to be able to obtain a replacement document there,  and
             certainly not within a reasonable time.  Neither  the  Central
             Archive nor the assistance facilities for IDPs are  likely  to
             render documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee.

             16.  ...

             D.   INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN GOI-CONTROLLED IRAQ

             17.  Where internal relocation is raised in the Iraqi context,
             it  is  necessary  to  consider  not  only  the   safety   and
             reasonableness of relocation but also the feasibility of  that
             course, in light of sponsorship and residency requirements  in
             operation in various parts of  the  country.  Individuals  who
             seek to relocate within the country may not be admitted  to  a
             potential safe haven or may not be permitted to remain there.

             18.  Relocation within the Formerly Contested Areas. With  the
             exception of the small  area  identified  in  section  A,  the
             general conditions within the Formerly Contested Areas do  not
             engage  Article  15  QD(b)  or  (c)  or  Article  3  ECHR  and
             relocation within the Formerly Contested Areas may obviate a
             risk  which  exists  in  an  individual's  home  area.   Where
             relocation  within  the Formerly  Contested  Areas is  under
             contemplation, however, the ethnic and  political  composition
             of  the  home  area  and  the  place  of  relocation  will  be
             particularly relevant. In particular, an individual who  lived
             in a former ISIL stronghold  for  some  time  may  fall  under
             suspicion  in  a  place  of  relocation.  Tribal  and   ethnic
             differences  may   preclude   such   relocation,   given   the
             significant presence and control of largely  Shia  militia  in
             these areas. Even where  it  is  safe  for  an  individual  to
             relocate within the Formerly Contested Areas, however,  it  is
             unlikely to be either feasible or reasonable without  a  prior
             connection to, and a support structure  within,  the  area  in
             question.

             19.  Relocation to Baghdad. ...

             E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION

             20.  There are regular direct flights from the UK to the Iraqi
             Kurdish Region and returns might be  to  Baghdad  or  to  that
             region.  It is for the respondent to state whether she intends
             to remove to Baghdad, Erbil or Sulaymaniyah.

             Kurds

             21.  For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  National  Identity  Card
             (INID), the journey  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR  by  land  is
             affordable and practical and can be made without a  real  risk
             of P suffering persecution, serious harm,  or  Article  3  ill
             treatment nor would  any  difficulties  on  the  journey  make
             relocation unduly harsh.

             22.  P is unable to board a domestic  flight  between  Baghdad
             and the IKR  without  either  a  CSID,  an  INID  or  a  valid
             passport.  If P has one of those documents, the  journey  from
             Baghdad to the IKR by land is affordable and practical and can
             be made without  a  real  risk  of  P  suffering  persecution,
             serious harm,  or  Article  3  ill  treatment  nor  would  any
             difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.

             23.  P will face considerable difficulty in making the journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or an INID.
             There  are  numerous  checkpoints  en  route,  including   two
             checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the  airport.   If  P
             has neither a CSID nor an INID there is a real risk of P being
             detained at a checkpoint  until  such  time  as  the  security
             personnel  are  able  to  verify  P's  identity.   It  is  not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.

             24.  Once at the IKR border (land or air) P would normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.  There   are   no   sponsorship
             requirements for entry or residence in any of  the  three  IKR
             Governorates for Kurds.

             25.  ...

             26.  ...

             27.  For Kurds without the assistance of family in the IKR the
             accommodation options are limited:

                  (i)  Absent special circumstances  it  is  not  reasonably
                  likely that P will be able to gain access to  one  of  the
                  refugee  camps  in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are   already
                  extremely overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64%  of
                  IDPs are accommodated in private settings  with  the  vast
                  majority living with family members;

                  (ii) If P cannot live with a family member, apartments  in
                  a modern block in a new neighbourhood  are  available  for
                  rent at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;

                  (iii)     P  could   resort   to   a   'critical   shelter
                  arrangement',  living  in  an  unfinished   or   abandoned
                  structure, makeshift  shelter,  tent,  mosque,  church  or
                  squatting in a government building.  It  would  be  unduly
                  harsh to require P to relocate to the IKR if P  will  live
                  in a critical housing  shelter  without  access  to  basic
                  necessities such as food, clean water and clothing;

                  (iv) In considering whether P  would  be  able  to  access
                  basic necessities, account must be taken of the fact  that
                  failed asylum seekers are entitled to apply  for  a  grant
                  under the Voluntary Returns Scheme,  which  could  give  P
                  access to �1500. Consideration should  also  be  given  to
                  whether P can obtain financial support from other  sources
                  such as (a) employment,  (b)  remittances  from  relatives
                  abroad, (c) the availability of ad hoc charity or by being
                  able to access PDS rations.

             28.  Whether P is able to secure employment must  be  assessed
             on a case-by-case basis  taking  the  following  matters  into
             account:

                  (i)  ...;

                  (ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs  living  in  the
                  IKR is 70%;

                  (iii)    P cannot work without a CSID or INID;

                  (iv) Patronage  and  nepotism  continue  to  be  important
                  factors in securing employment.  A  returnee  with  family
                  connections  to  the  region  will  have   a   significant
                  advantage in that he would ordinarily be able to call upon
                  those  contacts  to  make  introductions  to   prospective
                  employers and to vouch for him;

                  (v)  Skills, education and experience.  Unskilled  workers
                  are at the greatest disadvantage, with the decline in  the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;

                  (vi) If P is from an area with a marked  association  with
                  ISIL, that may deter prospective employers.

             Non-Kurdish Returnees

             29.  ...

             F.   EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS

             30.  This decision replaces all existing country  guidance  on
             Iraq."

     10. I was also referred to the Tribunal's decision in AA (Article
         15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) ("AA (Iraq)").  Although SMO
         and Others replaces all existing country guidance, the Tribunal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) underpins some of the Tribunal's decision in
         SMO and Others and is relevant to it.

    SUBMISSIONS AND EVIDENCE

     11. In accordance with the directions given in my earlier decision, on
         17 January 2020, the Appellant filed a position statement setting
         out his position on the issues which I outlined at [19] of my
         previous decision.  Mr Kotas apologised at the outset for the
         Respondent's failure to comply with directions which was due to
         administrative oversight.  Mr Kotas therefore outlined the
         Respondent's position orally at the outset and Mr Jones also
         replied in summary.

     12. In essence, the Respondent says that the Appellant and his family
         would be returned to Baghdad and that he would be able to obtain a
         CSID before he returns.  Using that, the Appellant and his family
         would be able to return to their home area within the Kirkuk
         governorate or the IKR.  So far as the Respondent is concerned, the
         question is therefore whether there is an enhanced risk under
         Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive in the Appellant's
         home area and/or whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant
         and his family to relocate to the IKR.

     13. Mr Kotas helpfully indicated that the medical evidence was not
         disputed and that it was also accepted by the Respondent that the
         Appellant's family had left Iraq.  The only evidential issue
         related to the Appellant's ability to obtain a CSID.  In that
         regard, Mr Jones pointed out that the Appellant had dealt with this
         issue in his witness statement (to which I come below) - he has
         asked for one, but the Iraqi authorities have declined to issue one
         because the Appellant is unable to provide sufficient documentation
         to identify himself as an Iraqi.

     14. Mr Kotas also submitted that the Appellant would be able to work on
         return as he has in the past.  His family had a business in Iraq.
         Mr Jones pointed out that the Appellant's ability to work in the
         future was hampered by the Appellant's medical condition and that
         of his son.

     15. Following that exchange, it was agreed by both parties that the
         hearing could proceed on submissions alone and without hearing oral
         evidence.  Insofar as it is necessary for me to refer to the
         written evidence, I have before me a consolidated bundle from the
         Appellant (filed on 10 January 2020) to which I refer as [AB/xx], a
         supplementary bundle filed in accordance with my earlier decision
         to which I refer as [ABS/xx] and a bundle of case-law and country
         evidence filed by the Appellant to which I refer as [ABC/xx].

    Issue One

     16. Mr Kotas drew my attention to [383] of the decision in SMO and
         others, dealing with the obtaining of a CSID from the UK.  That
         endorses the position set out at [173] to [177] of the guidance in
         AA (Iraq).  The factual position is summarised at [177] of that
         decision as follows:

             "In summary, we conclude that it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
             national living in  the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID  through  the
             consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in  London,  if  such  a
             person is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or
             the  book  and  page  number  for  their  family  registration
             details.  For persons without such  a  passport,  or  who  are
             unable to produce the relevant family registration details,  a
             power of attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq  who  can
             thereafter undertake the process of  obtaining  the  CSID  for
             such person from the Civil Status Affairs Office in their home
             governorate.   For  reasons  identified  in  the  second  that
             follows below, at the present time the process of obtaining  a
             CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the person
             wishing to obtain the CSID is from an area where Article 15(c)
             serious harm is occurring."

     17. Mr Kotas accepted that there is some tension between that summary
         and what is said at [173] as follows:

             "173.    As regards those who have an expired or current Iraqi
             passport but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report
             that a CSID may be obtained through the "Consular section  of
             the Iraqi Embassy in London", which will send a request for a
             replacement or renewed CSID to  the  General  Directorate  for
             Travel and  Nationality  -  Directorate  of  Civil  Status.  A
             request for a replacement  CSID  must  be  accompanied, inter
             alia, by "any form of official document  in  support  of  the
             applicant's identity" and the application form must be signed
             by "the  head  of  the  family,  or  the  legal  guardian  or
             representative to verify the truth of its contents." He  also
             added that an applicant must also authorise a person  in  Iraq
             to  act  as  his  representative  in  order  for  that  person
             to "follow up on the progress of the application."

     18. In relation to whether the Appellant could be expected to know his
         volume and page reference in order to provide those, Mr Kotas
         directed my attention to [391] and [392] of SMO and Others as
         follows:

             "391.    We consider the number of individuals who do not know
             and could not ascertain their volume and page reference  would
             be quite small, however.  It is impossible  to  overstate  the
             importance of an individual's volume and page reference in the
             civil register.  These details  appear  on  numerous  official
             documents, including an Iraqi  passport,  wedding  certificate
             and  birth  certificate,  as  well  as  the  CSID.     It  was
             suggested in a report from the  British  Embassy  in  Baghdad,
             quoted at 6.1.9 of the Internal Relocation  CPIN  of  February
             2019, that "[a]ll Iraqi nationals will  know  or  be  able  to
             easily obtain this information".  We find the former assertion
             entirely unsurprising.  The volume and page reference  in  the
             civil  register  is  a  piece  of  information  which  is   of
             significance to the  individual  and  their  family  from  the
             moment of their birth.  It is entered on various documents and
             is ever present in that person's life.  We do not  lose  sight
             of the fact that there remain a significant number  of  people
             in Iraq who are undocumented.  We do not consider that problem
             to be attributable to a difficulty with recalling the relevant
             information.  It is instead  attributable  to  the  closure  -
             until comparatively recently - of the  local  CSA  offices  at
             which people were required to obtain replacement documents and
             to their reluctance to return to those areas from a  place  of
             relocation.

             392. There will of course be those who can plausibly claim not
             to know these details.  Those who left Iraq at a  particularly
             young age, those who are mentally unwell and  those  who  have
             issues with literacy or numeracy may all be able to make  such
             a claim plausibly but we consider that it will  be  very  much
             the exception that an individual would be unaware of a  matter
             so fundamental  to  their  own  identity  and  that  of  their
             family.  The letter from the Embassy also suggested that  most
             Iraqis would  be  able  to  obtain  this  information  easily.
             Again, that assertion  is  unsurprising  when  viewed  in  its
             proper context.   As  is  clear  from AAH(Iraq),  Iraq  is  a
             collectivist society in which the family is all important.  It
             is also a country with a high prevalence of  mobile  telephone
             usage amongst the adult population.  Even when we bear in mind
             the years of conflict  and  displacement  in  Iraq,  we  would
             expect there to be only a small number of cases  in  which  an
             individual  could  plausibly  claim  to  have  no   means   of
             contacting a family member from whom the relevant  volume  and
             page reference could be obtained or traced back."

     19. On the facts of this case, as Mr Kotas pointed out, the Appellant
         returned to Iraq and has worked there.  It was not suggested that
         he worked in the black economy and must therefore have been there
         working legally and have been documented. He was also married in
         Iraq and would probably have a marriage certificate containing some
         if not all of the relevant details.

     20. Mr Kotas also made the point that the Appellant would be returned
         on a laissez passer.  He drew my attention to what is said about
         the status of a laissez passer at [375] of SMO and Others as
         follows:

             "... an individual must simply  be  able  to  establish  their
             nationality in order to  obtain  a  Laissez  Passer.   In  the
             absence of documentation, an Iraqi national can request family
             members in Iraq  to  present  documents  to  the  Ministry  of
             Foreign Affairs to  prove  the  individual's  nationality  or,
             failing that 'legal procedures will then be started  to  prove
             the Iraqi nationality of the failed asylum  seeker  through  a
             list of questions in relation to their life in  Iraq'.   These
             details are checked against Iraqi records, and  once  verified
             the individual will be issued with  a  document  enabling  the
             individual to return to Iraq.  Dr Fatah goes on  to  state  in
             his report that the website of the Iraqi Ministry  of  Foreign
             Affairs states that the resulting document is  valid  for  six
             months and that it 'permits a single entry into Iraq'."

         On the basis of that evidence, even if the Appellant had no
         official document, the Iraqi authorities in the UK would interview
         him and it could be expected that he would be given a laissez
         passer.  With that and knowledge of his family details, he would be
         able to get a CSID.  It would, said Mr Kotas, be incongruent if the
         authorities would issue a laissez passer to enable the Appellant to
         enter Iraq as one of its nationals and yet deny him a CSID in that
         identity.

     21. In response, Mr Jones relied heavily on the tension between the
         evidence recounted at [173] of AA (Iraq) and the summary of the
         overall evidence at [177].  As he pointed out, Dr Fatah's evidence
         as set out at [173] was broadly accepted and preferred to that of
         the Respondent.  He drew my attention in particular to [176] of AA
         (Iraq) which states as follows:

             "There is a consensus between  Dr  Fatah's  evidence  and  the
             following more general  evidence  provided  by  UNHCR-Iraq  in
             April 2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from abroad.

                  'In principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed any Iraqi
                  citizen abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents through  Iraqi
                  embassies   and   consulates.    There   is   a    special
                  authorization granted to these bodies to provide documents
                  for Iraqis abroad on the condition that the  beneficiaries
                  should have any available  documents  in  order  to  prove
                  their nationality.'"

         He also pointed out that the ambiguity created by the words
         "and/or" in [177] of AA (Iraq) was removed by the guidance in SMO
         and Others (see [13] of the headnote cited at [9] above).

     22. As such, said Mr Jones, the Appellant faces the following obstacles
         to the obtaining of a CSID from within the UK.  First, he has no
         passport or other form of identity document. Second, he requires
         the signature of the head of family or another representative to
         verify the truth of the application, but he has no family in Iraq
         as the Respondent accepts.  He has no person who can act as proxy
         in Iraq.

     23. Mr Jones submitted that the position was aggravated by the fact
         that the Appellant comes from one of the former contested areas
         (Kirkuk) and documentation would continue to be a problem due to
         general instability in such areas.

     24. Mr Jones also pointed out that the Appellant would not be able to
         obtain a passport from the Iraqi authorities in London to enable
         him to obtain a CSID.  The Appellant's solicitor, Ms Tori Sicher,
         has provided a witness statement at [AB/29] onwards which deals
         with this.   She deals in her statement with the position of other
         Iraqi nationals who she has represented.  I do not need to refer to
         their details.  Of relevance to the point at issue here, she says
         this:

             "46. ... a number  of  my  clients  have  attended  the  Iraqi
             Embassy in London to try and redocument themselves.  They have
             all been  told  that  without  any  Iraqi  documentation  this
             Embassy cannot assist.  Most were not provided  with  anything
             in writing confirming this.  However, one of  my  clients  was
             and I exhibit it to my statement."

     25. The exhibit is a document dated 6 August 2019 issued by the Embassy
         of the Republic of Iraq, London which is unsigned but bears an
         official stamp.  It reads as follows:

             "Instructions on who to apply for Iraqi passport series A:

             1 - Iraqi Civil Card ..., has to be less than 15 years old.

             2 - Iraqi Nationality Card ...

             3 - Photographs (2)

             4 - Attendance in person when applying and receiving the
             passport at the Iraqi Consulate in London.

             Without these requirements an application for an Iraqi
             passport cannot be made..."

         The Appellant has also now produced a letter from the Iraqi Embassy
         in relation to the Appellant which confirms the above.

     26. Those documents only indicate the position as to the obtaining of a
         passport and not a CSID.  Mr Jones submitted though that there was
         no indication that the Iraqi authorities would be any more flexible
         in relation to the issuing of a CSID.

     27. The Appellant's evidence surrounding the documentation issue is set
         out at [26] of his statement dated 10 October 2018 as follows
         ([AB/14]):

             "26. Since we got leave I had a letter from the Home Office
             saying if you want to have a passport you have to go to the
             Iraqi Authorities in London to ask for a passport as we won't
             give you a travel document.  If you have a reason you have to
             put it in why you cannot get a travel document.  I went to the
             Embassy.  I asked about applying for an Iraqi passport, but
             they told me that I had to have Iraqi documents, the National
             Identity document, and the other is Iraqi Naturalisation
             identity document.  I told them that I did not have them.
             They said they cannot issue any passport to people who do not
             have these.  They said that is the only way.  I asked for a
             letter to confirm they could not issue me with a passport but
             they refused to do it.  They said they can't as they do not
             know who I am.  I showed them the BRP but they said only if I
             have an Iraqi identity card could they issue me with a letter
             or an Iraqi passport."

         The Iraqi authorities in the UK have since provided the Appellant
         with a letter in the same form as that to which I have already
         referred.

     28. In relation to Mr Kotas' submission regarding the analogy between
         the issue of a laissez passer and a CSID, Mr Jones said that this
         was unsustainable.  He pointed out that if the Iraqi authorities
         were generally willing and able to issue a CSID to anyone issued a
         laissez passer then there would be evidence that they do so (as the
         obtaining of a CSID tends to be a sticking point in many such
         appeals).  There is no evidence that they are willing to do so.
         The evidence is that the laissez passer is a document of an
         entirely different order (see in particular what is said at [12] of
         the guidance in SMO and Others).  A laissez passer is worthless
         other than as a document to permit return to Iraq.

     29. Mr Jones accepted that the position might be different if the
         Appellant had an official document establishing his identity.  Even
         then, though, as Mr Jones pointed out, what is said in AA (Iraq)
         indicates that the consular authorities in the UK have to make
         contact with the authorities in Iraq and the Appellant has no
         family there to act as a proxy to "follow up on the progress of the
         application".

     30. For those reasons, Mr Jones submitted that I could not be satisfied
         that the Appellant would be documented on return to Iraq.  He would
         return without a CSID.  It is not suggested that he and his family
         could relocate to live in Baghdad.  They would be vulnerable from
         the point of leaving the airport.  In the absence of proper
         documentation, the family would be detained by the authorities and
         held until a family member could turn up with an official document.
          Since the Appellant is accepted not to have any family members in
         Iraq, that could not happen.   Neither could the Appellant and his
         family travel onwards to the IKR without a CSID. Accordingly, the
         Appellant and his family would be at risk on return to Iraq.

    Issues Two and Three

     31. In light of the way in which these two issues were argued, it is
         appropriate to take them together.

     32. Based on what is said at [30] to [32] of SMO and Others, Mr Kotas
         submitted that the Appellant can return to Kirkuk.   The evidence
         about the humanitarian problems in Kirkuk is set out at [155] of
         that decision.  My attention was also drawn to what is said at
         [251] to [257] of SMO and Others about developments in that area.

     33. As Mr Kotas pointed out, it is not clear whether the Appellant's
         wife and children are dependents in this appeal.  If they are not,
         then I have to consider the position of the Appellant returning
         alone.  However, whether they are or not, the issue is whether any
         of the enhanced risk factors set out in SMO and Others apply.
         Those factors which the appellants in those cases suggested should
         apply as set out at [293] of the decision were condensed by the
         Tribunal at [313] and [314] of the decision (as encapsulated at [4]
         and [5] of the headnote).

     34. Mr Kotas submitted that Westernisation could not be said to be a
         general risk factor (based on what is said at [310] and [311] of
         SMO and Others).  In any event, there was no evidence as to the
         extent of the Appellant's Westernisation.  It was confirmed that
         the Appellant's daughter is aged nineteen but there are no
         statements from the Appellant's wife or children which suggest that
         they are at particular risk on this account.

     35. Turning then to the medical conditions of the Appellant and his
         son, Mr Kotas accepted that disability was a factor relevant to
         return ([312] to [315] of SMO and Others).  However, he submitted
         that their health issues were controlled with medication.  [O]'s
         condition could not be said to be so chronic as to amount to a
         disability.

     36. As such, Mr Kotas submitted that the Appellant had not shown that
         Article 15(c) is satisfied.  Insofar as the Appellant relies on
         Article 3 ECHR in relation to conditions on return, Mr Kotas
         pointed out that N v United Kingdom (2008) 49 EHRR 39 remains
         binding authority on this issue (see also [322] of SMO and Others
         confirming that position). If I reach the point of considering this
         issue, it would be on the basis that the Appellant could obtain a
         CSID and therefore would be documented.  On that basis, Mr Kotas
         submitted that the Appellant could obtain medical treatment and
         could work.  Mr Kotas drew my attention to [331] and [332] of SMO
         and Others which reads as follows:

             "331.    Nevertheless, we remind ourselves that the  threshold
             is that in N v UK and we accept the respondent's  submission
             that  the  cumulative  difficulties  faced   by   a   healthy,
             documented male returning to their  place  of  origin  in  the
             formerly contested areas do not cross that threshold.  Such an
             individual would be able to access food  through  the  PDS  or
             other humanitarian assistance  programmes.   They  would  have
             access to the limited employment options available.  There  is
             some primary healthcare available there.  The  risks  of  food
             insecurity and water scarcity, together with  the  risks  from
             disease and unexploded ordnance, even in  the  worst  affected
             areas and even in respect of those who would  be  required  to
             live in a critical shelter arrangement, do not reach the  high
             threshold required for us to conclude that there is a  general
             risk of conditions which breach  Article  3  ECHR,  or  engage
             Article 15(b) QD.  A healthy, documented male returning  to  a
             home area in the formerly contested areas, therefore, will not
             generally  be  able  to  establish  that  theirs  is  a   very
             exceptional  case  where  the  humanitarian  grounds   against
             removal  are   sufficiently   compelling   to   require   such
             protection.

             332. It is imperative to recall  that  the  minimum  level  of
             severity required by Article 3 is relative and depends on  all
             the circumstances of the case, including the duration  of  the
             treatment, its physical and mental effects and  the  sex,  age
             and state of health  of  the  individual  concerned: Saadi  v
             Italy (2009) 49 EHRR 30.  Although it is clear to us  that  a
             documented, healthy male would not, on return to a  home  area
             in the  formerly  contested  areas,  encounter  conditions  in
             breach of Article 3 ECHR, additional vulnerabilities including
             those considered under the 'sliding scale'  of  Article  15(c)
             might conceivably combine to cross the N v UK threshold.  In
             considering  any  such  submission,   decision   makers   will
             nevertheless wish to  recall  that  that  the  combination  of
             factors in Said, including mental health problems and a  lack
             of family support, offset by clan support and remittances from
             the UK, were held by the Court of Appeal to  be  so  short  of
             the N v UK threshold that remittal to the Upper Tribunal would
             serve no purpose: [32]-[33] refers."

     37. Mr Jones accepted that the position on return in Kirkuk based on
         the decision in SMO and Others had been fairly summarised by Mr
         Kotas but drew my attention also to Dr Fatah's evidence as
         summarised at [26] of the decision which makes clear that it is the
         Iraqi authorities who are presently in control of Kirkuk and that
         it is being managed by the Shia Militia.   That is relevant to how
         the Appellant would fare in that area as an Iraqi Kurd.  The
         process of Arabisation of Kurdish areas is he says confirmed by the
         article at [ABC/223-224].

     38. Based on what is recorded at [251] to [257] of SMO and Others,
         although Mr Jones did not submit that there was a risk from ISIL in
         Kirkuk itself, he said that there was still a general risk in the
         area.

     39. As to Westernisation, although Mr Jones accepted that, based on
         [311] of SMO and Others, he could not say that there was a general
         risk on this account, that had to be read in the context of [309]
         of SMO and Others which draws attention to the risk of kidnapping
         of those returning from the West who might be perceived as wealthy.
           He submitted that there remained some risk particularly where a
         person had been absent for a protracted period.  The risk was not
         based on presentation but vulnerability.  He also submitted, in any
         event, that disability was a relevant factor and that all factors
         had to be considered in the round.

     40. As to the Appellant's ability to work and support himself and his
         family, that would turn to some extent on whether his medical
         condition amounts to a disability.  The Respondent has accepted the
         medical evidence.  The severity of the Appellant's medical
         condition is not therefore contested.   The nature and extent of
         the Appellant's condition is set out at [15] to [20] of his
         statement dated 10 October 2018 ([AB/11-12]).  He suffers from
         chronic cluster headaches.  He gets those headaches between four
         and seven times per day.   He says his medication is frequently
         changed in order to find one which works.  He takes nearly thirty
         tablets a day and sometimes has to take "oxygen in a cylinder" (by
         which he may mean an inhaler based on the description).   He
         sometimes needs an injection.   He is regularly monitored by a team
         of doctors for side effects based on his medication.

     41. As Mr Jones submitted, and I accept, what is there described is a
         severe neurological problem for which the Appellant is receiving
         extensive and experimental treatment.   Mr Jones also pointed out
         that the Appellant's doctor in the UK had to petition the UK
         Government to enable him to prescribe the medication in the UK due
         to its cost.  Accordingly, he would not be able to obtain the
         medication on return to Iraq (and see on this point the
         Respondent's Country Policy and Information Note entitled "Iraq:
         Medical and healthcare issues (May 2019)" at [ABC/208] - "the
         CPIN").

     42. In relation to Article 3 ECHR, Mr Jones accepted that N v United
         Kingdom is binding on me in this regard and sets a high threshold.
          In this case, it is accepted that the Appellant lacks family
         support and that support would be critical for accommodation and
         support if the Appellant is unable to work. That was particularly
         so given that the Appellant would not be returning alone and that
         one of his children also has vulnerabilities.

     43. In this regard, my attention was drawn to a letter dated 4 November
         2019 at [AB/47] which confirms that [O] has been diagnosed with
         autism spectrum disorder and one dated 29 August 2019 which
         indicates that he has a "recurrent reflux".   [O] is the subject of
         a care plan ([AB/64-69]) and is receiving speech therapy.  The
         evidence indicates that [O] is currently operating at a level about
         two years below his age.  The Appellant's witness statement
         indicates that [O] has a lack of awareness of risk and has to be
         constantly monitored even within the relatively safe confines of
         the UK.  The position would be far worse in Iraq.

     44. Mr Jones also drew my attention to what is said in the CPIN at
         [ABC/197] concerning the cost of psycho-social support services
         including autism and an article at [AB/172] which indicates that
         there is only one centre in Erbil for treatment of children with
         autism which can currently care for only 32 children whereas there
         are 1,000 children in that area with the condition. There was no
         evidence that the position was any better in Kirkuk.

     45. In short summary, Mr Jones submitted that based on the combination
         of the foregoing factors, there was an enhanced risk on return
         meeting the relevant threshold and/or that return to that area
         would breach Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive/ Article
         3 ECHR.







    Issue Four

     46. As Mr Jones pointed out, if I conclude that the Appellant is able
         to reach Kirkuk and that he is not at enhanced risk in that area,
         then relocation to IKR is not relevant.  If, however, the issue
         does arise for determination, Mr Jones submitted that it would be
         unduly harsh for the Appellant and his family to relocate to IKR.
         He drew my attention to Section E of the headnote in SMO and
         Others.  He pointed out that the Appellant would have no family
         support on return and has no ties in IKR.  His residence there is
         historic (dating back to 1995 to 2003) although I note from the
         other evidence that his wife is from Erbil.  He also submitted that
         the authorities in IKR might not admit the Appellant (based on
         another of the Respondent's CPINs dated February 2019 at
         [ABC/164]).

     47. Mr Kotas drew my attention in particular to [23] of the headnote in
         SMO and Others.  He accepted that, since the Appellant has no
         family in Iraq, his accommodation options in IKR would be limited.
         However, he would be able to rent.  He pointed out that the
         Appellant would be entitled to �1500 as part of the assisted
         voluntary returns programme.  The evidence is that unemployment in
         this area stands at 70%.  Mr Kotas accepted of course that the
         Appellant would not be able to work without a CSID but if I reach
         the point of having to decide this issue, the assumption is that
         the Appellant would be documented.  He accepted that the Appellant
         might need to earn more if returning with his family.  However, the
         Appellant has worked in the past and has experience from the UK.
         His medical condition is controlled in the UK.  Even though there
         would be a cost associated with that medication, the Appellant had
         not shown that it was not available.

     48. Mr Kotas submitted that it was not unreasonable or unduly harsh for
         the Appellant to relocate to the IKR.  However, he accepted that if
         I were to find that the Appellant would not find work and therefore
         accommodation in the IKR, it would be unduly harsh for him to
         relocate.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     49. In relation to the first issue, I accept that there is a tension
         between [173] and [177] of the decision in AA (Iraq).  The latter
         suggests that it is possible to obtain a CSID from within the UK
         using only the details of the book and page number for an
         applicant's family registration details.  I accept that if this
         were the only requirement, the Appellant would not be able to show
         that he could not meet that requirement.  As Mr Kotas submitted and
         I accept, it is not likely that the Appellant does not know that
         information.  After all, he returned to Iraq in 2005 and lived
         there again for three years.  He was married in Iraq and would have
         needed details for the marriage.  As Dr Fatah told the Tribunal in
         AA (Iraq), "having a marriage certificate may be useful as it would
         contain data found in the family records" ([175]).

     50. However, the Tribunal in AA (Iraq) did not reject Dr Fatah's
         evidence about the process and requirements for the obtaining of a
         CSID in the UK as set out at [173] of the decision.  As Mr Jones
         pointed out, and I accept, the Tribunal in SMO and Others did not
         repeat the "and/or" formulation which appears in the summary at
         [177] of AA (Iraq); it indicated that whether a person could obtain
         a replacement CSID "depends on the documentation available and,
         critically, the availability of the volume and page reference of
         the entry in the Family Book in Iraq" [my emphasis] ([13] of the
         headnote).   According to Dr Fatah's evidence in AA (Iraq), the
         documentation which is required is "an expired or current Iraqi
         passport".  The Appellant has neither.

     51. I also accept on the evidence produced by the Appellant that he is
         unable to obtain a passport from the Iraqi authorities in the UK.
         In order to obtain a passport, he would need either a civil card or
         a nationality card.  He obviously does not have a civil card and
         there is no evidence to show that he has any other nationality
         card.  His evidence about his attempts to obtain a passport is not
         challenged.

     52. Although I can see a certain amount of sense in Mr Kotas'
         submission that the Iraqi authorities ought to issue a CSID if they
         are sufficiently satisfied that an individual is Iraqi in order to
         issue a laissez passer, there is, as Mr Jones pointed out, no
         evidence that the Iraqi authorities are willing to be flexible when
         it comes to the issue of a CSID. The evidence indicates that they
         are not particularly flexible about the issue of a passport and
         that lack of flexibility may well be indicative of their
         unwillingness to issue a CSID.  There is no evidence that the
         process as outlined by Dr Fatah in AA (Iraq) has changed in any
         way.

     53. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Appellant is unable to
         obtain a CSID before returning to Iraq.  Mr Kotas did not submit
         that he would be able to obtain one within a reasonable time of
         return to Iraq.  Mr Kotas accepted that, if I were to find that the
         Appellant is unable to obtain a CSID prior to return then the
         Appellant is entitled to succeed.  In that regard, I record what is
         said at [317] of SMO and Others:

             "The starting  point  for  our  consideration  [of  Article  3
             ECHR/Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive] must be the
             respondent's repetition, at [150] of her closing  submissions,
             of her concession in  previous  cases  that  'it  remains  the
             position that a person returning to Iraq without either family
             connections able to assist him, or the means to obtain a CSID,
             may be at risk of enduring conditions contrary  to  Article  3
             ECHR'..."

     54. In light of that conclusion, I do not strictly need to deal with
         the other three issues.  However, I make some observations about
         those for completeness. In so doing, I make an assumption, contrary
         to my conclusion in relation to the first issue, that the Appellant
         would be able to obtain a CSID before his return as otherwise he
         would not be able to return at all.

     55. Dealing first with the position on return to Kirkuk, I would not
         have accepted that the Appellant is at enhanced risk on return to
         that area.  It is not suggested that he has or ever had any
         association with ISIL.  Kirkuk is not an area in which there is any
         active ISIS presence and in any event the Appellant is not said to
         fall into any of the risk categories set out at [4] of the headnote
         in SMO and Others.

     56. In relation to the other personal characteristics relevant to the
         Article 15(c) issue, I do not accept that there is any enhanced
         risk based on the Appellant's Westernisation.  I have no evidence
         as to the nature and extent to which he has adapted to Western
         culture.  There is no evidence to show that he is wealthy and would
         be at risk of kidnapping on that account.  I do not accept that he
         is vulnerable for that reason.

     57. The issue of whether the Appellant would be at enhanced risk due to
         a disability has to be assessed in light of what the Tribunal says
         in SMO and Others about the source of that risk at [312] as
         follows:

             "The inclusion of category (xvi) - persons with disabilities -
             is justifiably premised on a section of the EASO report  which
             records  that  there  is  sadly   discrimination,   inadequate
             provision of health  care  and  a  higher  risk  of  violence,
             particularly against those with mental illness."

     58. Whilst the medical condition of the Appellant and his son falls for
         consideration in the context of humanitarian protection, I do not
         accept that what is said at [312] applies to either of their
         conditions.

     59. For those reasons, I would not have found in the Appellant's favour
         on the Article 15(c) issue. I conclude that the Appellant is not at
         enhanced risk in his home area.

     60. Turning then to the position in relation to humanitarian
         protection, I have regard to what is said by the Tribunal at [6] of
         its headnote in SMO and Others.  In general, the conditions are not
         of a sufficient severity to reach the high threshold of Article 3
         ECHR or to necessitate subsidiary protection under Article 15(b) of
         the Qualification Directive.  However, whether the threshold is met
         depends on the personal circumstances of the individual concerned.

     61. As I have already noted, the Respondent's position if the Appellant
         does not have a CSID or the possibility of obtaining one within a
         reasonable time (as I have concluded is the position here) is that
         return would breach Article 3 ECHR.  I therefore emphasise that in
         my consideration of Article 3 ECHR at this stage, I am assuming
         that the Appellant could obtain a CSID contrary to that conclusion
         and would therefore be documented.

     62. The Tribunal in SMO and Others indicated at [321] of its decision
         that if a person has or is able to obtain a CSID "and has family
         upon whom he can rely for meaningful support", it would be
         "generally unlikely" that the conditions on return would breach
         either Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive or Article 3
         ECHR.  Of course, in this case, it is accepted by the Respondent
         that the Appellant does not have family in Iraq to provide any
         support.

     63. Although the Tribunal in SMO and Others did not conclude that the
         humanitarian situation is so severe as to generally meet the
         relevant thresholds, there is no doubt, having regard in particular
         to what is said at [325] to [327] of the decision that the
         conditions are very difficult and challenging.

     64. Turning then to what is said at [331] and [332] of the decision,
         the primary position is that of a "healthy, documented male".  For
         these purposes, assuming that the Appellant would be documented, it
         cannot be said that the Appellant is healthy; far from it.  The
         evidence shows that he has a serious condition which requires a
         great deal of medication and monitoring.

     65. As the Tribunal goes on to say at [332] of SMO and Others, it is
         therefore necessary to consider "additional vulnerabilities" which
         include those listed as relevant to Article 15(c) of the
         Qualification Directive.  As I have already concluded, those
         factors do not apply here.  The additional considerations in this
         case are the Appellant's own medical condition, that of his young
         son, [O], the fact that the Appellant would be returning with his
         family and that he and his family would have no support from other
         family members in order to provide for their accommodation or
         upkeep.

     66. The Appellant is not registered disabled.  He is able to work in
         the UK (see [14] of his statement at [AB/11]). I recognise that
         this is with the benefit of medication which, even if available, is
         likely to be very costly in Iraq.  The medical evidence does not
         indicate what are the underlying causes of the Appellant's
         condition nor what would happen if he was not receiving the
         medication which is currently prescribed.  Although there is no
         evidence that the medication is not available, the evidence is that
         the medication is very expensive even in the UK (to the extent that
         those treating the Appellant have had to petition the government to
         authorise prescription of it).  The Appellant's treatment is also
         experimental.  The Appellant's evidence is that he gets
         debilitating headaches if the medication is not working and I
         accept that this would be likely to affect his ability to work.
         That would be likely to impact in turn on his ability to
         accommodate, support and maintain himself and his family.

     67. I also accept that [O]'s progress is likely to be impacted if he
         were removed to Iraq.  The evidence is that he was on a care plan
         between July 2018 and May 2019.  He is said to have "severe
         language and communication difficulties which affect his expressive
         and receptive language and his ability to communicate effectively".
         The indication in the most recent evidence about this (4 November
         2019 at [AB/47]) is that [O] is likely to need speech and language
         therapy until he is at least aged seven.  He is currently aged five
         years.

     68. Taking that medical evidence into account, alongside the evidence
         that the Appellant would be unlikely to be able to work to
         accommodate and support his family if the medication and monitoring
         which he currently receives were removed and in the absence of any
         form of support from other family members, I conclude that removal
         would breach Article 3 ECHR.

     69. Having reached those conclusions, on the second and third issue, I
         do not need to deal with the fourth issue of relocation. My
         conclusion regarding return to the Appellant's home area is based
         not on any enhanced risk there but on the conditions which the
         Appellant and his family would face. The situation would be, if
         anything, worse if the Appellant and his family were to go to IKR
         rather than their home area.  They have no ties to that area save
         for historic ties based on the Appellant's residence (and that the
         Appellant's wife comes from Erbil but no longer has family there).
         I do not accept, based on what is said in SMO and Others, that the
         Appellant and his family would be turned away from the IKR.
         However, the conditions would not be any better given my conclusion
         that the Appellant would be unable to work to any meaningful extent
         in order to accommodate and support his family given his medical
         condition and in the absence of the medication which he currently
         receives which, even in the UK, is costly.

     70. In summary, therefore, I accept that removal of the Appellant to
         Iraq would breach Article 3 ECHR based on his lack of a CSID and
         inability to obtain one within a reasonable period following
         return.  I also accept that due to the Appellant's medical
         condition, inability to work if not medicated and therefore
         inability to accommodate and support his family, coupled with the
         lack of support from other quarters as well as the medical
         condition of his son, removal to the Appellant's home area, even if
         he were documented, would be contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  I do not
         however accept that the Appellant would be at enhanced risk on
         return to his home area of Kirkuk.

    DECISION

    Removal of the Appellant to Iraq would breach his human rights (Article
    3 ECHR).  I therefore allow the appeal.


    Signed   [pic]    Dated: 2 April 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03760/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Thursday 8 August 2019            |                                     |
|                                     |......13 August 2019 ............... |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     H S
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge,  the  appeal  involves  a  protection  claim  and  a   minor   child.
Accordingly, it is appropriate to make an anonymity  direction.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Royston, Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal
         Judge O'Hagan promulgated on 3 June 2019 ("the Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's
         decision dated 9 January 2018 refusing his protection claim.  The
         Appellant and his family have been granted discretionary leave to
         remain based on their Article 8 rights, but he remains entitled to
         appeal against the decision refusing his protection claim.

      2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  He first
         came to the UK on 3 February 2005 and claimed asylum.  His claim
         was refused, and he appealed.  His appeal was on that occasion
         dismissed by Immigration Judge Mrs CES Andrew.  The Appellant then
         returned to Iraq with his family but left again in May 2008.  He
         travelled to Sweden and it was established that he had previously
         claimed asylum in the UK and he and his family were returned to the
         UK on 4 September 2008 whereupon he claimed asylum again.  His
         claim was again refused and his appeal on that occasion came before
         Immigration Judge Astle who again dismissed it.

      3. Judge O'Hagan followed the previous asylum decisions in relation to
         the specific threat which the Appellant claimed, as the Judge was
         bound to do in the absence of any change in circumstances or
         evidence (see [48] to [52] of the Decision).  Those paragraphs are
         not challenged.  The issues which Judge O'Hagan had to determine
         were to where the Appellant and his family could return (on the
         hypothesis that they would be returned) and whether the Appellant
         and his family possess or could obtain CSIDs to enable them to
         return.  Insofar as the destination of return was not the place
         from where they emanated, the Judge also had to consider the option
         of internal relocation and whether it would be unduly harsh for the
         Appellant and his family to relocate.  Since the Appellant's
         grounds to a large extent focus on findings which it is said that
         the Judge failed to make, it is appropriate to deal with the
         Judge's reasoning when I come to the detail below rather than to
         attempt to summarise what the Judge found.

      4. The Appellant raises four grounds.  First, he says that the Judge
         failed to apply the country guidance set out in AA (Iraq) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944 ("AA
         (Iraq)") in relation to whether Kirkuk is a contested area to which
         Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive applies.  Second, he
         says that the Judge has failed to make findings in relation to
         whether the Appellant has or could obtain a CSID within a
         reasonable time.  Third, he says that the Judge has failed to take
         into account the medical condition, in particular of the
         Appellant's son [O] when considering whether it would be unduly
         harsh for the family to relocate within Iraq.  Fourth, it is argued
         that the Judge failed to make any finding on the Appellant's
         argument that he would not be permitted to reside in the IKR.

      5. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bibi on 4 July
         2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "...  2.   The  grounds  assert  in  summary  that  the  Judge
             materially erred in his findings.  It  was  incumbent  on  the
             Judge to arrive on a finding of the facts in  respect  of  the
             material matter.  Mindful of the gravamen of the  decision  of
             the Upper Tribunal in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 it was
             arguably incumbent on the Judge to come to a  finding  whether
             the appellant can procure  a  CSID  on  his  return  to  Iraq.
             Nowhere in the decision did the Judge address  this  issue  or
             make a finding of fact.

             3.   An arguable error of law that has been  identified  which
             merits further consideration.  There is a reasonable  prospect
             that a different Tribunal would reach a different decision."

      6. Although the grant relates to the second of the Appellant's
         grounds, Judge Bibi did not limit the grant of permission.
         Accordingly, all grounds are arguable.  The matter comes before me
         to decide whether the Decision contains a material error of law and
         if so either to re-make it or remit the appeal to the First-tier
         Tribunal for re-making.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

      7. Although the Respondent's Rule 24 response seeks to uphold the
         Decision in somewhat strident terms (describing the grounds as
         "opportunistic" and the grant of permission as "very generous to
         the appellant indeed"), having heard Mr Royston's oral submissions,
         Mr Walker conceded that the grounds did disclose an error of law in
         the Decision.  I accepted that concession and can therefore be
         somewhat briefer than otherwise in my consideration of the grounds.
          However, in light of the discussions at the hearing concerning
         next steps, it is nevertheless necessary for me to say more about
         the grounds which make out the error of law and the issues which
         need to be re-determined.

      8. Mr Royston's submissions were focussed on grounds two and three, in
         relation to the Judge's findings about the possibility of the
         Appellant obtaining a CSID and whether it would be unduly harsh for
         the family to relocate within Iraq. He did not however abandon the
         other two grounds.  I can though deal with those quite shortly.

      9. The first concerns the issue whether there remains an Article 15(c)
         risk in Kirkuk.  The guidance in AA (Iraq) remains extant.  There
         is a pending country guidance case in which judgment is awaited
         which may or may not alter the position (SMO, KSP and IM -
         PA/08722/2017, PA/09421/2017, PA/00142/2015: "SMO and others") but,
         as things stood before Judge O'Hagan, I accept that he was bound to
         follow AA (Iraq) absent cogent evidence of a change in the country
         conditions.  I accept that, when asserting at [60] of the Decision
         that the family could return to Kirkuk, the Judge has failed to
         identify the strong evidence permitting him to depart from the
         current country guidance.  The Judge has recorded the competing
         submissions on this point at [31] and [37] of the Decision but has
         failed to refer to any evidence on which his finding at [60] is
         based.

     10. I also accept that the Judge has not set out his reasoning behind
         the finding at [60] that the family could relocate to the IKR and
         has therefore failed to deal with the argument that the Appellant
         would not be permitted to reside in the IKR.  The Appellant has
         previously lived in Erbil, but the Judge has not dealt with the
         Appellant's argument that he would not be permitted to do so again
         in the future.

     11. For those reasons, grounds one and four are made out.

     12. In relation to ground two, the Judge sets out the evidence in
         relation to the availability of a CSID at [55] and [56] of the
         Decision.  The Appellant's case is that he does not have a CSID and
         has not been able to obtain one from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.

     13. There is no finding at [56] of the Decision whether it is accepted
         that the Appellant does not have a CSID.  Perhaps the closest one
         comes to a finding on that point is at [59(ii)] where the Judge
         indicates that his primary finding is that "the appellant has not
         established that his CSID is no longer available".  However, he
         does not provide any reason for rejecting the Appellant's evidence
         that he does not have a CSID.   Doubt is placed on the Appellant's
         credibility at [56(ii)] but that appears to be related to his
         account that he could not obtain any documents from the Iraqi
         Embassy in the UK.  As to that, the Judge says that he was
         unpersuaded by the Appellant's evidence that the Embassy staff were
         unhelpful.  The Judge remarks that "if it were the case that the
         Iraqi embassy adopted the unhelpful approach he describes as a
         matter of general practice, it might be expected that there would
         be objective evidence that this is what generally the embassy
         does."  The Judge goes on to say that he was not provided with such
         evidence.

     14. The Appellant's second ground directs attention to what is recorded
         at [27] of the decision in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)
         (CG) [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) ("AAH") concerning the evidence of Dr
         Fatah whose expertise was recognised at [91] of that decision.  He
         is recorded as saying that in the course of his "regular dealings"
         with staff of the Iraqi Embassy in the UK, he had found them to be
         "generally very unhelpful".  That tends to support the Appellant's
         account that he was unable to obtain a letter from that embassy
         confirming that he had attended there to try to get documents but
         that they were unable to assist.

     15. The further question is whether the Appellant could obtain a CSID
         within a reasonable time following return to Iraq.  In this regard,
         the Judge at [59(ii)] of the Decision accepts evidence annexed to
         the February 2019 CPIN in the form of a letter from the Iraqi
         authorities to the effect that all civil records from elsewhere in
         Iraq are backed up in Baghdad.  Based on that evidence, the Judge
         there concludes that "[i]t would not, therefore, be necessary for
         the appellant to return to his home town to obtain a new CSID if
         his old one is no longer available."

     16. Mr Royston submitted that the letter from the Iraqi authorities
         does not indicate whether the records may be searched by an
         individual or what use can be made of the archive.  He also
         directed my attention to the case of SS v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2019] EWHC 1402 (Admin) which is a decision on
         an application for judicial review, made by a Judge of the
         Administrative Court quashing the Secretary of State's decision
         that protection-based submissions did not amount to a fresh claim.
         I bear in mind that context which is very different to that of the
         Tribunal in an appeal where the Judge is considering all the
         evidence for himself.  Nevertheless, the High Court Judge's
         conclusions that the letter on which Judge O'Hagan relies does "not
         amount to clear cogent evidence amounting to strong grounds to say
         that a CSID is now 'easily obtainable' in Iraq by a returnee" lends
         some support to the Appellant's grounds.  As the Judge goes on to
         say, "[o]ne has to consider to what extent that could or should
         alter or amend the CG".  There is no such consideration in the
         Decision and, accordingly, what is said in that judgment, is
         supportive of the Appellant's ground that Judge O'Hagan could not
         simply rely on the letter as being the strong evidence needed to
         displace the country guidance in AAH on this point.

     17. For those reasons, ground two is made out.

     18. As to ground three, this relates to the medical condition of the
         Appellant and his son [O].  Judge O'Hagan sets out the medical
         evidence at [60] of the Decision.  However, the Judge fails to
         refer to the most serious of [O]'s conditions namely that [O] is a
         beta thalassemia carrier.  The effect of that condition is set out
         at [7] of the Appellant's witness statement at [AB/8].  The effect
         is a serious one which can be life threatening if not appropriately
         monitored.  Mr Royston also pointed out that the Judge has failed
         to refer to [O]'s best interests.  He accepted that best interests
         generally fall to be considered in the context of Article 8 which
         was not in play here but said that those interests remained
         relevant.  The issue whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the
         family to relocate within Iraq is a separate one to whether it is
         reasonable for them to return to Iraq which is, it appears, the
         basis on which discretionary leave was granted.  I accept that the
         Judge has failed to deal with [O]'s condition as a beta thalassemia
         carrier and has failed to have regard to the child's best
         interests.  For those reasons, ground three is also made out.

     19. For the above reasons, I accept that the Decision contains an error
         of law which is material and I set it aside.  The issues which I
         have to re-determine are whether it is safe for the Appellant and
         his family to return to Iraq and if so to what areas, to what place
         or places they would be permitted to return, whether they have or
         could obtain either in the UK or within a reasonable period
         following return a CSID and whether, if return would involve
         internal relocation, it would be unduly harsh for them to relocate.

     20. As I have already noted, the Appellant's case has been dealt with
         on appeal on two previous occasions and any specific risk to him
         has not been accepted.  It is not necessary for me to revisit those
         issues and for that reason, I preserve Judge O'Hagan's findings at
         [48] to [52] of the Decision.

    NEXT STEPS

     21. Mr Royston was content that the appeal should remain in this
         Tribunal for re-making.  In fact, he was keen that it should do so.
          As he pointed out, there has been some delay in the determination
         of this appeal (Judge O'Hagan describes the history of it at [4] of
         the Decision as "long and unfortunate").  Although Mr Royston
         accepted based on what is said at [9] to [12] of the Decision that
         the fault for the four adjournments lay on the Appellant's side,
         none of those was due to the Appellant himself.  Mr Royston was
         also keen that, if I could deal with the issues based only on the
         documentary evidence and without a further hearing, I should do so.
          He was particularly keen to avoid the Appellant having to attend
         to give evidence on a further occasion, the Appellant having now
         attended five hearings in all.

     22. I observed and have already referred to the fact that there is a
         pending country guidance decision regarding Iraq which is currently
         awaiting determination (SMO and others).  It has been heard.  Mr
         Royston indicated that he did not wish the re-determination of this
         appeal to be delayed by the promulgation of the decision in that
         case.  He was particularly anxious that this appeal should not be
         stayed for any lengthy period to await that determination.
         However, he accepted that this was a matter for me and that I
         should be permitted to make enquiries about the likely timing of
         the determination and the potential relevance of it.  Having done
         so, I am satisfied that the re-making of the decision in this case
         should await the outcome of that country guidance case.  The case
         concerned the current position in relation to contested areas in
         Iraq and the Tribunal was also presented with up-to-date evidence
         in relation to the availability of CSIDs which is now one of the
         central issues remaining in this case.

     23. I am also not satisfied that I have sufficient evidence in relation
         to [O]'s medical condition and treatment available in Iraq.  Mr
         Royston submitted that I did not need evidence in relation to
         treatment in Iraq because he said that it stood to reason that in
         an area only now emerging from occupation by enemy fighters, the
         medical facilities would be poor.  That may be so.  However, on the
         flip side, due to the fighting which has been going on until
         relatively recently, it may be that there are good facilities
         because such have been needed (particularly in areas near the
         fighting but unaffected by it).  Nor am I entirely clear from what
         is said in the Appellant's statement whether the access to medical
         facilities for [O] is to specialist facilities or to accident and
         emergency facilities only.

     24. I would be greatly assisted by medical evidence in relation to [O]
         and any other evidence as to what his best interests require.  At
         present, I only have the evidence in the Appellant's statements and
         some limited evidence from those treating [O] for his autism and
         other conditions, which evidence dates back to 2018.  I note that
         at an earlier stage, there was a much weightier bundle of evidence
         and it is possible therefore that some of the evidence on this
         issue has been withdrawn from the appeal bundles.  However, I would
         be assisted by up-to-date evidence, including if possible
         independent evidence about the nature and effects of beta-
         thalassemia.  That evidence can be gathered in the period before
         the decision in SMO and others is issued and a hearing can be
         arranged as soon as possible after the country guidance decision is
         promulgated, with provision for the parties to file further
         evidence and submissions.

     25. I do not propose to formally stay this appeal behind the country
         guidance case.  However, that decision is likely to be pertinent to
         the issues which remain in this case and I do not consider it
         appropriate or in the interests of justice to determine this appeal
         on a basis which might shortly thereafter be affected by more
         recent country guidance.  I have made provision for the hearing to
         be for half a day so that the Appellant may give oral evidence.
         Whilst I recognise that the Appellant may not wish to attend yet
         another hearing, I would find it helpful to be able to hear from
         him and, given the issue which remains about whether he has or
         could obtain a CSID and in relation to [O]s condition and
         treatment, I consider that oral evidence is likely to be required.






    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error  of  law.  I
    set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan promulgated
    on 3 June 2019. I preserve paragraphs [45] to [52] of the Decision.   I
    give the following directions for the re-making of the decision:




    DIRECTIONS

      1. The appeal  will  be  re-listed  before  UTJ  Smith  on  the  first
         available date after 28 days  following  the  promulgation  of  the
         decision  in  SMO   and   others   (PA/08722/2017,   PA/09241/2017,
         PA/00142/2015). Time estimate for that hearing is three hours.

      2. Within 14 days from the date when the decision in SMO and others is
         promulgated, the Appellant shall file with the Tribunal  and  serve
         on the Respondent a bundle  of  all  the  evidence,  including  any
         further evidence, on which he relies.

      3. Within 21 days from the date when the decision in SMO and others is
         promulgated, the parties shall file with the Tribunal and serve  on
         the other party submissions in writing setting out their  positions
         on the issues which remain for determination in this appeal.


    Signed   [pic]    Dated: 12 August 2019
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email
