
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03409/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 October 2016                 |On 3 November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     I K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid (Counsel) instructed by Wick & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, because the appellant is a minor.

2.   This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Ross promulgated on  22  August  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.   The Appellant was  born  on  1  January  2001  and  is  a  national  of
Afghanistan.

4.   On 22 March  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

5.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Ross ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6.   Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  22  September  2016  Judge  Astle
gave permission to appeal stating

    "1.  The appellant seeks permission  to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Ross)  promulgated  on  22
    August 2016 whereby it dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse his protection claim.

    2.   The grounds argue that the Judge erred in applying the standard of
    proof bearing in mind the appellant's age. The Judge failed to consider
    the corroborative evidence/objective material. Secondly the Judge erred
    in finding that the appellant could return  to  Kabul.  In  relying  on
    article 15c jurisprudence he adopted too narrow a construction. Thirdly
    he erred in refusing the appellant's human rights claim without  proper
    consideration. Whilst he  considered  article  3  ECHR,  he  failed  to
    consider articles 2 or 8.

    3.   I am satisfied that the Judge had proper regard to the appellant's
    age in considering his evidence. I refer to paragraph 14. The  internal
    inconsistencies were sufficient to damage the appellant's  credibility.
    The fact that children are taken by  the  Taleban  to  act  as  suicide
    bombers does not mean that it was reasonably likely to have occurred in
    this case. Although the Judge relied on AK Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00163(IAC) in respect of return to Kabul and I  conclude  that  he  was
    entitled to do so in the circumstances.  Given  that  the  claim  under
    article 3 was dismissed there cannot be any merit in a separate article
    2 claim. However, the Judge failed to consider  article  8  and  it  is
    arguable that he erred in so doing."

The Hearing

7.   For the appellant Ms Reid moved the grounds  of  appeal.  She  told  me
that the grant of permission to appeal  does  not  restrict  the  appeal  to
article 8 ECHR grounds only. She adopted the terms of her skeleton  argument
and argued that the grant of permission to  appeal  may  place  emphasis  on
consideration of article 8 ECHR, but it does not refuse leave to  appeal  on
the remaining grounds and  does  not  specifically  restrict  the  grant  of
permission to one ground only. Ms Reid relied on guidance note  2011  number
1 and Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UK UT00304 (IAC).

(b)   Ms  Reid  told  me  that  inadequate  account  of  was  taken  of  the
appellant's age by the Judge, and that the Judge had not adopted  a  liberal
application to the benefit of the doubt. She relied on KS  (benefit  of  the
doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552 (IAC), and argued that the Judge failed to  explain
why the appellant's young age does not account for  inconsistencies  in  the
evidence. She  argued  that  the  Judge  placed  inadequate  weight  on  the
objective background materials in reaching his conclusions.

(c)  Ms Reid argued that the Judge's findings on the viability of return  to
Kabul are flawed. She told me that the Judge finds that  the  appellant  can
return to Kabul where his family can meet him and look after him,  and  that
finding amounts to a finding that internal relocation  is  a  viable  option
for the appellant. She told me that the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to
undue hardship (Januzi (FC) v SSHD [2006] UKHL5) are  inadequate,  and  told
me that the Judge had conflated the test set out in  Januzi  with  the  test
for a breach of article 3 ECHR.

(d)  Ms Reid told me that  the  Judge  had  completely  failed  to  consider
article 8 ECHR. She told me that submissions had been made  in  relation  to
the appellant's private life. She conceded  that  the  appellant  could  not
succeed under the immigration rules but told me that she  herself  had  made
submissions that the circumstances of this  case  demonstrates  sufficiently
compelling circumstances to enable the Judge to consider article 8  out-with
the rules. the Judge has made neither findings nor conclusions on article  8
ECHR grounds.

(e)  Ms Reid urged me to allow the appeal and to set the decision aside.

8.(a)    For the respondent, Mr Nath told me that the  grant  of  permission
to appeal was limited to article 8 ECHR grounds only and that the  appellant
does not have leave to move the remaining grounds  of  appeal.  He  told  me
that the grant of permission to appeal dated 22 September 2016 is  in  clear
terms and carefully sets out the three  grounds  of  appeal  before  finding
that the first two grounds of appeal cannot be argued but the  third  ground
of appeal (article 8 ECHR) can.

(b)  Mr Nath took me to [14] of the decision where the Judge states (in  the
second sentence of that paragraph)

    "I make allowance for his age"

He told me that at [14] the Judge  clearly  identifies  the  fact  that  the
appellant is a minor, and then goes on to assess  the  appellant's  evidence
and every other source of evidence in the light  of  the  appellant's  young
age. He told me that there was no  merit  in  the  criticisms  made  of  the
Judge's decision nor is there merit  in  criticism  of  the  way  the  Judge
approached the evidence of a minor.

(c)  Mr Nath told me that the Judge carefully  &  correctly  considered  the
possibility of return to Kabul. He told me that at [19] and [20]  the  Judge
considered the correct country guidance and that  the  Judge's  findings  in
fact, viewed against that country guidance, lead to the correct conclusion.

(d)  Mr Nath told me that paragraphs 39 to 42 of  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter detail the respondent's rejection of the  appellants  claim  to  have
established private life in the  UK.  He  reminded  me  that  the  appellant
arrived in the UK in September 2015 and claimed asylum in November 2015.  He
told me that the appellant could not established a meaningful  private  life
in the short time since his arrival in the UK, and  that  in  any  event  is
there was a dearth of evidence to support  submissions  made  on  article  8
ECHR grounds

(e)  Mr Nath told me that the decision does not contain any errors  material
or otherwise. He asked me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision
promulgated on 22nd of August 2016 to stand.

Analysis

9.   The terms of the grant of permission to appeal are set out in  full  at
[6] above. In granting permission to appeal Judge Astle makes it clear  that
he considered all three grounds of  appeal  set  out  by  the  appellant  in
seeking permission to appeal. In the first sentence of [3] in the  grant  of
permission to appeal he says

    "I am satisfied that the Judge had proper regard to the appellant's age
    in considering his evidence."

That is a clear and unambiguous rejection of the first ground of appeal.

10.  The second  ground  is  that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
appellant can return to Kabul. Judge Astle considered the second  ground  of
appeal in the fourth sentence of [3] in the  grant  of  appeal  and  clearly
refuses permission to appeal on the ground.

11. It is in the final sentence of  the  grant  permission  to  appeal  that
permission is given. It is clear from the use of the word "However"  at  the
start of that sentence that Judge Astle treats the third  ground  of  appeal
differently to the first and  second.  The  construction  of  that  sentence
makes it clear that permission is granted on article 8 ECHR grounds only.

12.  In Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  00304(IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) In deciding an application for permission  to  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal a judge  should  consider  carefully  the  utility  of
granting permission only on limited grounds. In  practice,  such  a  limited
grant is unlikely to be as helpful as a general grant, which identifies  the
ground or grounds that are considered by the judge  to  have  the  strongest
prospect of success. (ii) Where the  judge  nevertheless  intends  to  grant
permission only in respect of certain of the applicant's grounds, the  judge
should make this abundantly plain, both  in  his  or  her  decision  and  by
ensuring that the  Tribunal's  administrative  staff  send  out  the  proper
notice, informing the applicant of the right to apply to the Upper  Tribunal
for permission to  appeal  on  grounds  on  which  the  applicant  has  been
unsuccessful in the application to the First-tier Tribunal; (iii) (3) If  an
applicant who has been granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
on limited grounds only applies to the Upper Tribunal on grounds in  respect
of which permission has been refused, the Upper Tribunal  judge  considering
that application should not regard his or her task as merely  some  form  of
review of the First-tier Tribunal's decision on  the  application;  (iv)  In
the IAC the overriding objective of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 is unlikely to be advanced by adopting a  procedure  whereby  new
grounds of appeal can be  advanced  without  the  permission  of  the  Upper
Tribunal under rule 5 of those Rules.

13.  The President of UTIAC, issued a Guidance Note on permission to  appeal
under paragraph 7 of Schedule 4 to the TCEA 2007. It  is  not  a  source  of
law, nor is it intended to be "an authoritative statement of  law"  but  "it
is intended  to  promote  consistent  and  high  standards  in  making  such
decisions".

14.  There is no ambiguity in the grant of permission to  appeal,  and  this
hearing is not an appeal against the grant of leave  to  appeal.  Permission
to appeal was granted on  one  ground  only.  The  only  competent  argument
placed before me relates to article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal.

15.  In any event there is no merit in the putative first ground of  appeal.
What is argued is that the wrong standard of proof was  applied  because  of
the appellant's young age.

16.  In KS (benefit  of  doubt)  2014  UKUT  00552  it  was  held  that  the
proposition in paragraph 219 of the UNHCR Handbook, that when assessing  the
evidence of minors there may need  to  be  a  "liberal  application  of  the
benefit of the doubt" is also not to be  regarded  as  a  rule  of  law  or,
indeed, a statement of universal application. As a reminder about  what  the
examiner should  bear  in  mind  at  the  end  point  of  an  assessment  of
credibility,  the  proposition  adds  nothing  of  substance  to  the  lower
standard of  proof.  If,  for  example,  an  applicant  possesses  the  same
maturity as an adult, it may not be  appropriate  to  resort  to  a  liberal
application of the burden of proof.

17.  The second putative grounds of  appeal  is  that  the  Judge  erred  in
finding that the appellant can return to Kabul because he took an  incorrect
approach to the concept of internal relocation and  relied  on  article  15c
jurisprudence.

18.  In AK Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  00163(IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that
whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article 15(c) in  which  the
respondent asserts that Kabul city would be  a  viable  internal  relocation
alternative, it is  necessary  to  take  into  account  (both  in  assessing
"safety" and reasonableness") not only the level of violence  in  that  city
but also the difficulties experienced by that city's poor and also the  many
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) living there, these considerations  will
not in general make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

19.  In granting permission to appeal judge Astle found that the  judge  was
correct to rely on the cases of AK and HK Afghanistan CG [2010]  UKUT  00378
(IAC). The Judge's decision is brief, but on the facts as he found  them  to
be he was correct to consider both AK and HK in assessing the  viability  of
return to Kabul. The way the second putative  ground  of  appeal  is  framed
makes it clear that it is little more than a disagreement with the facts  as
the Judge found them to be. It is no more than  an  attempt  to  re-litigate
the appellant's position on the  basis  of  objective  materials  which  the
Judge did not find persuasive in the light of the ratio  contained  in  both
AK and HK.

20.  The grounds  of  appeal  refer  to  JA(Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  in  which
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been given. Counsel  for  the
appellant candidly told me that that  case  still  awaits  listing.  In  his
decision, the Judge referred to the correct country guidance.

21.  I find that the  appellant  does  not  have  permission  to  appeal  in
relation to the asylum appeal or the  humanitarian  protection  appeal.  The
Judge's decision in relation to those two aspects of the appellant's  appeal
therefore stands. If I was to  consider  the  first  and  second  ground  of
appeal, for the reasons given above I would find that  they  have  no  merit
and would not succeed - so that the Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
asylum and humanitarian protection appeals stand.

22.  In the notice of decision the Judge states

    "The human rights appeal is dismissed"

Insofar as that notice  of  decision  relates  to  articles  2  and  3  ECHR
grounds, there is no error of law. It  is  true  that  the  Judge  does  not
specifically consider article 2 ECHR grounds, but as article 3 ECHR  grounds
cannot succeed, by analogy neither can article 2 ECHR grounds.

23.  I consider the skeleton  argument  prepared  for  the  appellant  which
formed the basis of argument before the First-tier. Article 2  ECHR  grounds
do not feature in that skeleton argument. At paragraph 34  of  the  skeleton
argument there is specific reference to article 3 grounds.  It  is  only  at
paragraph 11 of the argument that the words

    "and killed"

appear at the end of the sentence dealing with article 3 ECHR.  The  Judge's
record of proceedings  does  not  record  that  a  submission  was  made  in
relation to article 2 ECHR grounds.

24.  There is no error of law in the Judge's  treatment  of  the  article  3
ECHR appeal, nor in the conclusions that  the  Judge  reaches.  The  Judge's
failure to specifically mention article 2 ECHR  is  far  from  perfect,  but
makes no difference to the outcome and so cannot  be  a  material  error  of
law. As I have already indicated the finding that  article  3  ECHR  grounds
are not made out carries with it an implicit finding  that  article  2  ECHR
grounds are not made out.

25.  The Judge was, however, wrong to fail to consider the  article  8  ECHR
argument. That is an error but in the circumstances of  this  case  it  does
not amount to a material error of law for the following reasons.

26.  The  Judge  can  only  competently  make  findings  of  fact  and  draw
conclusions from the evidence placed before him. The evidence is  summarised
at [10] of the Judge's decision. The appellant's evidence in chief  was  his
witness statement dated 1 July 2016. I  invited  Ms  Reid  to  consider  the
terms of the witness statement and she agreed that  that  witness  statement
does not offer evidence of private life within the meaning of article  8  of
the 1950 convention. Ms Reid told me that it has never been argued that  the
appellant has established article 8 family life within the UK.

27.  I return to the skeleton argument which was relied on before the First-
tier. That skeleton argument contains 36 paragraphs spread  over  10  pages.
It is only at [32] that there is a suggestion of "private and family  life".
The first sentence of paragraph 32 of the skeleton argument says

    "There is a clear risk that the appellant would not be able to  lead  a
    normal  and  respectable  private  and  family  life  if  returned   to
    Afghanistan"

That is not an argument that private life has been established in the UK.

28.  I turn to the Judge's record of proceedings, where  the  submission  of
counsel for the appellant is summarised as

    '276 ADE appellant is under 18 and not here seven  years.  After  going
    outside rules to consider his private life.'

29.   Ms  Reid  accepts  that  the  appellant  cannot  succeed   under   the
immigration rules, and told me that her submission  to  the  First-tier  had
been that in this  case  there  are  compelling  circumstances  which  merit
consideration of article 8 ECHR grounds outside the immigration rules.

30.  I accept that that was the submission made by Ms  Reid  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal, but the information before  me  indicates  that  the  was  no
evidence to support  that  submission.  The  appellant's  witness  statement
dwells on his asylum claim only. It is not  suggested  that  the  Judge  has
inaccurately summarised the evidence at [10] of the decision. It would  have
been helpful if the Judge had set out  that  the  appellant  fails  to  lead
sufficient evidence to establish private life within the meaning of  article
8 and so  cannot  succeed.  The  Judge  did  not  and  (as  I  have  already
indicated) that is an error.

31.  To assess whether that error is material I consider  the  evidence  and
submissions afresh. It is conceded that family life within  the  meaning  of
article 8 does not exist for the appellant in the UK. It  is  conceded  that
the appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
rules.

32.  In SS(Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 Lord Justice Richards  said
at paragraph 33

    "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does  not  apply
    in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is  accurate
    to say that the general position outside the sorts of special  contexts
    referred to above is that compelling circumstances  would  need  to  be
    identified to support a claim for grant of Leave to remain outside  the
    new Rules in Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation  which  is
    not as strict as a test of exceptionality or  a  requirement  of  "very
    compelling reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria) in the  context  of
    the Rules applicable to foreign criminals), but which gives appropriate
    weight to the focused consideration of public interest factors as finds
    expression in the Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules  in
    Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at  para.  [29],
    which has been tested and has survived scrutiny  in  this  court:  see,
    e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ."

33.  There is no reliable  evidence  of  compelling  circumstances  in  this
case.  The appellant is a 15-year-old boy  who  has  lived  with  carers  in
England since he claimed asylum in November 2015, having arrived in  the  UK
in September 2015. Since at least  November  2015  the  appellant  has  been
going to school in the UK.  Because  of  the  paucity  of  evidence  of  the
appellant's circumstances in the UK, those are the  only  findings  of  fact
that I can make.

34.  Nothing in the findings of fact made at [33] above can be  said  to  be
either  a  compelling  or  compassionate  factor.  There  was   insufficient
material placed before the First-tier to enable consideration of  article  8
outside the immigration rules.

35.  If I were to remake the decision in this  case  my  decision  would  be
that the appellant's appeal is dismissed on  article  8  ECHR  grounds.  The
decision that the Judge made, promulgated on 22nd of August  2016,  is  that
the appellant's human rights appeal is dismissed. That decision  is  correct
in law. It would have helped all parties if the decision had been framed as

    "The appeal is dismissed on article 2, 3 & 8 ECHR grounds."

36.  The difference in wording does not amount to a material error of law.

CONCLUSION

No errors of law have been established and the Judge's decision  promulgated
on 22 August 2016 stands.



DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 2 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
