
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03316/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated                                 |
|On 7th November 2018                   |     |On 7th December 2018                                           |
|                                       |     |                                                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AHH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Longfellow
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in the Upper  Tribunal
    I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a  national  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  25th
    February 2018 to refuse to grant her asylum, humanitarian protection or
    relief on human rights grounds.  Judge K Swinnerton allowed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 27th April 2018.  Permission to appeal was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on 2nd October 2018.

 3. The Secretary of  State  appealed  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision on the grounds that the judge erred in  his  approach  to  the
    decision  by  the  Competent  Authority  under  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism (NRM) of 3rd October 2018 which reached a conclusion that the
    Appellant is not a victim of modern slavery.  The grounds rely  on  the
    decisions in AUJ (Trafficking - no conclusive grounds decision)  [2018]
    UKUT 200 and Secretary of State for the Home Department v MS (Pakistan)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 594.

 4. However, at the hearing Ms Harris submitted the decision of ES (Section
    82 NIAA [2002]; negative NRM) Albania [2018]  UKUT  00335  (IAC).   The
    Decision of the Upper Tribunal in ES is summarised in the head note  as
    follows:

         "1.   Following  the  amendment  to  s  82  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'), effective from 20
         October 2014, a previous decision made by the  Competent  Authority
         within the National Referral Mechanism  (made  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities) is not of primary relevance to the determination  of
         an asylum appeal, despite the decisions of the Court of  Appeal  in
         AS (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1469  and  SSHD  v  MS
         (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.


         2.   The correct approach to determining whether a person  claiming
         to be a victim of trafficking is entitled to asylum is to  consider
         all the evidence in the round as at the date of  hearing,  applying
         the lower standard of proof.


         3.   Since 20 October 2014, there is also no right of appeal on the
         basis that a decision is not in accordance with  the  law  and  the
         grounds of appeal are limited to those set out in the amended s  82
         of the 2002 Act."


 5. In her submissions at the hearing Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that,  even
    taking into account the position as set out in the decision of ES,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in that he failed to  consider  the
    decision of  the  Competent  Authority  within  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism.  She  relied  on  the  decision  in  AUJ  in  particular  at
    paragraph 52 which quoted from AS Afghanistan  paragraphs  17  and  18.
    She referred to paragraph 62 of the decision in AUJ and  in  particular
    62(ii) which indicated that, where an Appellant continues to rely in  a
    statutory  appeal  upon  evidence  that  he  has  been  the  victim  of
    trafficking or modern slavery, the judge should decide at the start  of
    the hearing and before the oral evidence is given whether the  decision
    of the Competent Authority was perverse or irrational or not reasonably
    open to it and only if the judge concludes that  Competent  Authority's
    decision was perverse, irrational or not reasonably open to  it,  could
    the  judge  re-determine  the  relevant  facts  and  take  account   of
    subsequent evidence.

 6. Ms Harris relied on the decision in ES where  the  Tribunal  said  that
    this part of the decision in AUJ was obiter.   In  ES  that  issue  was
    directly at play and the Tribunal considered the issue fully and  found
    ultimately that the Competent Authority decision had been made  on  the
    balance of probabilities for different purposes and that  the  Tribunal
    had to look at all of the evidence in the round.  In any event, in  her
    submission, it is clear from the findings in this case  that,  although
    the NRM decision was  not  before  the  judge,  the  findings  in  that
    decision  were  made  known  to  him  and  were  assessed  within   the
    determination.  In  her  submission  the  Respondent  had  raised   the
    arguments dealt with in the NRM decision.

Error of Law

 7. It is clear that the position as set out in ES is directly relevant  to
    the judge's decision in this  case.   In  this  case  this  Appellant's
    application for asylum was made on 18th March 2016.   Accordingly,  the
    option of deciding that a decision is not in accordance  with  the  law
    was no longer before the First-tier Tribunal and the only ground before
    the judge was whether the Appellant's removal from the  UK  would  give
    rise to a breach of the Refugee Convention (28 and 29 of ES).   I  note
    that in ES the Tribunal highlighted that it is  necessary  to  consider
    all relevant evidence before reaching  a  holistic  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account.

 8. Ms Isherwood submitted that the Judge had failed to take account of the
    Competent Authority's decision.  That decision is not contained in  the
    Respondent's bundle nor  is  it  in  the  Appellant's  bundle.   It  is
    apparent that the decision  was  not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  In any event it is clear from the Tribunal's decision that  the
    judge was aware that such a decision had been made as  pointed  out  in
    paragraph 8 of the decision.  The judge's findings  of  fact  have  not
    been specifically challenged.

 9. Instead it was contended by the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  judge
    should not have gone on to make any  findings  of  fact  based  on  the
    authority of AUJ.  However, as the appeal was on asylum grounds, it was
    for the judge to consider all of the evidence and make findings of fact
    in relation to that evidence.  The judge did so at paragraphs 16 to 22.
     At paragraph 24 the judge  reached  conclusions  in  relation  to  the
    evidence finding that  the  Appellant  was  credible  and  taking  into
    account all of the evidence the judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    given a truthful  account  and  that  she  would  be  at  risk  of  re-
    trafficking if returned to Albania [24].  This approach  is  consistent
    with that set out in ES. The findings made were all  findings  open  to
    the judge on the basis of the evidence.

10. Accordingly, I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    does not contain a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 5th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


Signed                              Date: 5th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
