

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/03999/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 April 2018                          |On 9 May 2018                     |
|(delivered orally at hearing)             |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    m R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Reza Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  1  January
    1984.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 October 2009 and  applied
    for asylum on 13 August 2016.  On 11 April 2017 the Secretary of  State
    refused his application for asylum, humanitarian protection  and  under
    Art 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard on 7 December 2017 and in a decision sent on 4 January 2018 Judge
    A J Parker dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds and permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A D Baker on 30 January 2018.

 5. Mr Iqbal, who represented  the  appellant,  placed  reliance  upon  the
    grounds set out in para 3,  in  particular  paras  3.1  -  3.2  of  the
    grounds.  The basis of the appellant's claim before the judge was  that
    he was a member of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (the BNP) and  that
    he was wanted by the authorities there.  He relied in  putting  forward
    that claim upon a visit he said had occurred on 25 August 2016, when of
    course he was  in  the  UK,  when  the  police  came  to  his  home  in
    Bangladesh.  In his decision Judge Parker dealt with this at  paras  18
    and 19 where he said:

         "18. [The Presenting Officer] in  an  excellent  cross-examination,
             extracted from the appellant that he found out that  the  case
             against him in Bangladesh was  on  25  August  2016  when  the
             police came to his house.

         19.  It was put to him that the asylum interview  was  on  4  April
             2017 and he made no mention of  this  fact  in  screening  and
             asylum interview.  This is a major discrepancy which  goes  to
             the core of the appellant's claim."

 6. Mr Iqbal took me to the appellant's asylum interview and in  particular
    to the answer given to question 81 when he was asked "Your  mother  has
    not received any further threats in Bangladesh?", to which he replied:

         "The election took place in May  2016  and  after  that  I  started
         raising a voice against the corruption  and  once  I  did  election
         carried out by the Awami League, all this I was highlighting online
         and this made [G] more hostile against me online and on  25/08/2016
         police raided our house, police were looking for me  they  searched
         the whole house and when they didn't find  me  they  questioned  my
         mother, my mother is quite old and she is a heart patient when  she
         asked them why did you come, the police replied that we are looking
         for [the appellant], when my mother asked why have you  come,  then
         they show a paper to my mother although she didn't understand  what
         the paper is but they said ask your son to report to the police  as
         soon as possible, in Sept 2016 my mother went to the  local  police
         station to find out why they were looking for me, the  police  said
         ask your son to report  although  they  are  well  aware  about  my
         participation and my activities through the  press  media  and  the
         online media my involvement with the BNP  politics  ..."  (emphasis
         added)

 7. Mr Iqbal submitted that the judge had therefore made  a  fatal  factual
    mistake in para  19  of  his  decision  when  he  counted  against  the
    appellant that he had not referred to the raid upon, or  visit  by  the
    police to, his mother's house on 25 August 2016  in  his  screening  or
    asylum interview.  The appellant had done so in answer to  question  81
    of his asylum interview.  He also pointed out that the judge in para 19
    referred to this as a "major discrepancy which goes to the core of  the
    appellant's claim" and therefore this was,  he  submitted,  a  material
    error by the judge in reaching his adverse credibility finding.

 8. Mr Kotas who represented the Secretary of State candidly accepted  that
    there had been a mistake by the judge and that given the wording of the
    judge's decision in para 19 he was not in  a  position  to  defend  the
    decision on this ground and he accepted that the decision had to be set
    aside and the decision remade.

 9. The concession made by Mr Kotas  was  entirely  appropriate  given  the
    factual error made by the judge in para 19.   In those circumstances, I
    agree that the decision of the judge is materially flawed in law.   The
    judge's adverse credibility finding is based  upon  a  significant  and
    material  mistake  as  to   the   appellant's   evidence.    In   those
    circumstances the First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot stand and I set
    it aside.

10. The proper disposal of this appeal is that it be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge A
    J Parker.





                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                  3 May 2018


