
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03578/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC (via Microsoft      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|teams)                                      |                               |
|On 26 August 2021                           |On 01 September 2021           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                   AHMED ABOELWAFA ABOELHAMD MOHAMED ISSA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms S Khan instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, a national of Egypt born on 13 July  1969,  appealed
        the refusal by the  Secretary  of  State  of  his  application  for
        international protection.
     2. A substantial volume of evidence has been provided for the purposes
        of this appeal which includes an expert report  filed  on  the  day
        from Alison  Pargeter  who  it  was  accepted  by  Mr  Bates  is  a
        recognised country expert.
     3. The final paragraph of the report, paragraph 5.11, reads:

        5.11.     In summary, on the basis of his sur place  activities,  I
             am of the opinion that, were he to be returned  to  Egypt  and
             were the authorities to have picked up on his opposition links
             and activities, Mr Issa would be at real risk of harm.

     4. There is also evidence that the appellant has over  5000  followers
        on his Facebook account which the Secretary  of  State's  own  CPIN
        confirms places him in an enhanced category of risk in the eyes  of
        the Egyptian authorities.
     5. I have also seen  photographic  evidence  of  demonstrations  being
        attended by the appellant in United Kingdom and note  the  expert's
        opinion that in light of surveillance  techniques  adopted  by  the
        Egyptian authorities, including from individuals within the  United
        Kingdom, it is likely that the appellant's activities will come  to
        the attention of the authorities.
     6. I have also seen witness statements from  two  senior  doctors  who
        support the appellants case, both of whom were  willing  to  attend
        the hearing today to give oral evidence.
     7. I accept, to lower standard, that the appellant will  face  a  real
        risk of harm sufficient to amount to persecution as a result of his
        genuine political beliefs  and  opposition  to  the  government  in
        Egypt.
     8. Mr Bates also submitted in light of the evidence that even  if  the
        appellants political views were only perceived, he will still  face
        a real risk on return.
     9. The error of law finding referred to the decision in HJ (Iran). The
        appellant's own statements together with  the  volume  of  evidence
        provided supports his claim that his views are genuine. The country
        material also shows that if he expressed the views he has been able
        to express openly in the  UK  within  Egypt  he  is  likely  to  be
        detained and ill-treated by  the  authorities.  The  only  way  the
        appellant could not express such views and act discreetly would  be
        to avoid persecution. This will entitle  him  to  succeed  on  this
        basis too.
    10. To the lower standard applicable in an appeal  of  this  nature,  I
        find the appellant has discharged the burden of proof upon  him  to
        the required standard show that he faces a real risk of persecution
        for a Convention reason on return to  Egypt  entitling  him  to  be
        recognised as a refugee.

Decision

    11. I allow the appeal.

   Anonymity.

    12. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 26 August 2021
