
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03512/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 March 2018                     |On 23 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    Y H A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Green, promulgated on 31 October 2017.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the UT run to  8  detailed  pages,  framing  a
    debate on whether the judge failed to give sufficient consideration  to
    the appellant's sur place activities.

 3. There was a live issue at the hearing in the FtT about whether  further
    evidence of those activities should be admitted.  It is not likely that
    the judge's refusal to admit that  evidence  might  be  found  to  have
    involved any procedural unfairness or error of law, but that issue does
    not now need to be resolved.

 4. Mrs O'Brien said that the debate about admitting  further  evidence  in
    the FtT, and  concentration  there  on  matters  which  are  no  longer
    disputed, appeared to have led the judge into overlooking  evidence  of
    sur place activities which was already on file,  as  rehearsed  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the  UT.   She  conceded  that  this  amounted  to
    material error of law.

 5. The further resolution of the case was agreed between the parties.

 6. The remaining issue is only the significance  of  the  appellant's  sur
    place activities.  There is no reason to revisit the FtT's findings  on
    other matters.

 7. The decision of the FtT is set aside and the case is  remitted  to  the
    FtT to enable that further decision to be made by another judge.

 8. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  There does  not  appear  to  have
    been an application for one, or any need for one, but as the matter was
    not addressed in the UT, anonymity is preserved herein.


            [pic]


            21 March 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




