
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03952/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) hearing in Field   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 6th June 2019                     |On 17th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                 K P D G k F
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka whose appeal was dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Norris in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12th
    February 2019.   Grounds  of  application  were  lodged  and  initially
    permission to appeal was refused but granted by  Deputy  Judge  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Shaerf in a decision dated  2nd  May  2019.   Thus,  the
    appeal came before me on the above date.

 2. For the Appellant Ms Gherman departed slightly  from  the  grounds  put
    forward by the instructing solicitors and  explained  that  she  had  a
    number of main points.

 3. Firstly, it was important to note that in paragraph 7.4 of the  judge's
    decision reference had been made to a previous decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Baldwin that the Appellant's husband and  the  Appellant
    were  "wholly  credible  in  their  assertions".   In   assessing   the
    Appellant's credibility in the asylum appeal this should have been  the
    starting point for the judge but it was not.  This was an error in law.

 4. The second and fundamental point was that central  to  the  Appellant's
    case was that the abduction was made by persons using a white van.  The
    judge had dismissed this as implausible - see paragraphs 7.17 and 7.20.
     The judge was entirely wrong to come to that conclusion given what was
    said in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees [2013]  0031  (IAC)  a
    country guidance case, and in particular  at  page  76,  paragraph  343
    where it said that a number of white vans had been used  in  connection
    with disappearances and their usage was increasing.  However, the judge
    had given no proper reasons for discounting  this  and  had  failed  to
    apply country guidance.  Further failures were in respect of  the  fact
    that the Appellant had given a statement to the LLRC and not sufficient
    reasons had been given for discounting that.   There  were  conflicting
    remarks made by the judge in connection with the spelling of  documents
    (see paragraphs 7.18 and 7.22) and finally in terms  of  the  criticism
    that the Appellant's husband did not go back to Sri Lanka for a funeral
    this was a subjective view of the judge and did not take  into  account
    that his wife was ill.

 5. In all the circumstances I was asked to  set  aside  the  decision  and
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. For the Home Office Ms Jones said that the judge had applied Devaseelan
    and the material before Judge Norris was completely different  to  that
    in the previous decision.

 7. In terms of whether the judge was correct to discount the  use  of  the
    white vans it was important to look at the case in its totality.

 8. In terms of paragraphs 7.18 and  7.20  the  judge  had  looked  at  the
    various spellings and had given the Appellant the benefit of the  doubt
    on one occasion.  Overall the judgment was sound and the appeal  should
    be dismissed.

 9. I reserved my decision.

 Conclusions

10. The judge gave several reasons for finding that the Appellant was not a
    credible witness before going on to dismiss the appeal.  Some of  these
    reasons are not impugned.

11.  However,  the  key  passages  in  this  decision   are   the   judge's
    consideration of the plausibility of the abduction of  Mr  Sathiyakumar
    in paragraphs 7.17 and 7.20.  In particular at paragraph 7.17 the judge
    says, "we then have the thoroughly  implausible  suggesting  that  they
    would send white vans to circle the area...".

12. Again, in paragraph 7.20 the judge says that the Appellant accepted  it
    was  pure  speculation  that  it  was  the  authorities  who  took   Mr
    Sathiyakumar given that there  were  just  two  men  in  plain  clothes
    driving a white unmarked van with no numbers and this  speculation  has
    found its way into her sworn affidavit.

13. Reading these passages together it seems  to  me  that  the  judge  has
    thoroughly  discounted  the  Appellant's   account   because   it   was
    implausible that white vans would be used to circle  the  area  and  be
    used in the abduction.  However, that is not what GJ says and the judge
    failed to apply country guidance on this  particular  point  which  was
    central to the Appellant's appeal.  Had the judge applied  the  country
    guidance then it  seems  clear  enough  that  she  might  have  made  a
    different finding in that regard and not  to  consider  it  all  was  a
    material error in law.

14. Other points raised by Ms Gherman may or may not be material  but  this
    point goes to the essence of the Appellant's appeal  and  it  is  clear
    enough that this decision is not safe.  It must therefore be set aside.
     I have concluded that because further fact-finding is  necessary  that
    the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by
    a judge other than Judge Norris.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  In the meantime, the anonymity order  will
    be continued.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   JG Macdonald  Date 13th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
