
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03618/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2019                   |On 16 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                 Juliana [D]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Shoye of Counsel, instructed by CW Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oliver promulgated on 30 May  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  her  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 8 April 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria,  born  on  16  July  1938,  who
    claims to have been  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  since  2003.
    Although the most recent application to the Respondent was a protection
    claim, this was not pursued on appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    where reliance was placed solely on the right to  respect  for  private
    and family life under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 3. The Respondent refused the human rights aspect of the  application  the
    basis that the Appellant did not have a partner in the  United  Kingdom
    to satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    nor did she have any dependent children  under  the  age  of  18.   The
    Appellant did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    private life.  The Appellant had  an  adult  daughter  in  Nigeria  and
    family in the United Kingdom who could continue to support her  on  her
    return.   The  Respondent  did  not  consider  that  there   were   any
    exceptional circumstances and in particular that the Appellant's health
    conditions could be treated in Nigeria where healthcare was available.

 4. Judge Oliver dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  30  May
    2019 on all grounds, the reasons for which I return to below.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on five  grounds,  which  can  be  summarised  as
    follows.  First, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make  any
    express findings as to whether the Appellant enjoyed family  life  with
    her adult children in the United Kingdom on the grounds  of  dependency
    and care provided by them for her, whether or  not  it  is  care  which
    would normally be expected in old age.  Secondly, that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed in  any  event  to  attach  sufficient  weight  to  the
    Appellant's private life established in the United  Kingdom.   Thirdly,
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to undertake an assessment  of  the
    Appellant's private and family life in accordance with the  five  stage
    process  in  Razgar,  including  a  failure  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant would meet the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  as  an  adult
    dependent relative.  Fourthly, that the First-tier Tribunal relied upon
    matters as adverse to the Appellant which had not been  canvassed  with
    her at the hearing, primarily whether she had paid tax  in  the  United
    Kingdom or whether she had paid for health  services  used  during  her
    time here.  Finally, that the First-tier  Tribunal  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof, requiring the Appellant's claim  to  be  established
    beyond  the  criminal  standard  rather  than   on   the   balance   of
    probabilities.

 6. At the oral hearing, although the Respondent continued  to  oppose  the
    appeal, Mr Lindsay appropriately observed that  the  findings  made  in
    paragraph 31 of the decision were capable of substantiating  a  finding
    that family life existed but there was no express consideration  of  or
    finding on the same, with the final conclusion only expressly referring
    to established private life.

Findings and reasons

 1. In this case, there is a clear error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal
    in its failure to make any findings at all on whether the Appellant had
    established  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  particularly   in
    circumstances where there was at least a prima facie  case  capable  of
    supporting such a finding.

 2. In paragraph 31 of the decision, Judge Oliver found as follows:

         "Her claim now rests upon her article 8 rights.  She  is  80  years
         old and has no partner.  She lives with one  of  her  children  and
         sees  the  others  regularly.   Although  these  are  relationships
         between grown adults, and there are clearly serious bonds developed
         over many years.  I accept that the appellant has  physical  needs,
         many of which are provided by the daughter  with  whom  she  lives.
         These, however, are  the  ills  of  old  age  and  all  are  common
         ailments.  They  cannot  be  viewed  as  serious  enough  to  merit
         consideration under exceptional compassionate circumstances."

 3. These findings themselves raise  an  obvious  question  as  to  whether
    family life has been  established  between  adults,  but  there  is  no
    consideration of the same by the First-tier Tribunal, who  simply  jump
    to a conclusion that the Appellant's needs, as a result of old age,  do
    not amount to exceptional or compassionate circumstances.   That  fails
    to apply any structured or reasoned approach and fails to make adequate
    findings of fact as to the existence or otherwise of family life in the
    United Kingdom, which would have to form part of the balancing exercise
    as to whether the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with her right to respect for  private  and  family  life.
    There is a  consequential  error  of  law  in  the  balancing  exercise
    undertaken in paragraph 34 of the decision.

 4. The error of law is material as it is capable of affecting the  outcome
    of the appeal and for  that  reason  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside and remade.  Further extensive  findings  of
    fact are required as to the Appellant's family and private life, for  a
    lawful assessment  of  whether  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with her right to respect for private and
    family life.  For this reason, it is appropriate to remit the appeal to
    be heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, before  any  judge  except
    Judge Oliver.

 5. In these circumstances, it is not necessary to consider  the  remaining
    grounds of appeal in any detail.  However, I would also find  an  error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal's failure  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant could meet any of the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    for a grant of leave to remain, which would inform part of  the  public
    interest to be included in the balancing exercise.

 6. As to the weight to be attached to the Appellant's private  life,  this
    is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal having taken into  account  all
    relevant  evidence.   As  expressly  stated  in   paragraph   34,   the
    Appellant's strong  private  life  with  her  children  must  be  given
    significant weight and in all of the circumstances, it is difficult  to
    see what greater weight the Judge should have given beyond this.  There
    is no error of law in the  weight  attached  to  private  life  in  the
    circumstances.  There is also no basis upon which it can be  said  that
    the Judge has applied a standard of proof which is higher  than  beyond
    reasonable doubt, i.e. beyond the criminal standard, as opposed to  the
    balance of probabilities and I find no error of  law  on  this  ground.
    However, for the reasons are given above, the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of  law  which  require  the
    decision to be set aside in any event.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross hearing centre), to be heard  de  novo
before any judge except Judge Oliver.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         11th October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

