
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03386/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2016                         |On 20th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     PFL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell, Counsel, instructed by Adonai Beulah
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Sharkett
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 10th August 2016.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of China born on 26th July 1969.  He arrived
    in the UK on 13th February 2000 and claimed asylum  three  days  later.
    He was refused on non- compliance grounds because he had absconded.  He
    submitted further information on 9th July 2015 and was refused again on
    20th November 2015.

 3. The appellant's claim was based upon having organised a rally in  April
    1999 in Beijing on behalf of the Falon  Gong  movement.   He  had  been
    detained previously in August  1989  as  a  result  of  the  events  in
    Tiananmen Square and feared being detained again following a  visit  to
    his home by the police in August 1999.

 4. In his Statement of Additional Grounds the appellant said that he had a
    brother and sister living in the UK, both British  citizens,  and  they
    were very close to each other.

 5. The judge rejected the appellant's account of the events leading to his
    leaving China in its entirety.  She also rejected the appellant's claim
    that he had siblings in the UK.  So far as the practice of  Falon  Gong
    is concerned, she wrote as follows:

         "In respect of his practice as a Falon Gong I accept  that  he  has
         perhaps had some interest in this practice. However the  fact  that
         the appellant says in his witness statement that there is no  Falon
         Gong movement in the UK is  a  clear  indication  of  his  lack  of
         commitment to the practice when  the  objective  evidence  shows  a
         wealth of activity in the movement in the  UK.   If  the  appellant
         practises Falon Gong at all, it is practised at such a discrete and
         private level that even his brother-in-law, with whom  he  purports
         to live, is unaware of anything more than him doing some  exercises
         and chanting prayers behind closed doors.

         I find that if the appellant does practice Falon Gong he is one who
         practices his faith in private, and that he is discreet  about  his
         practice with others.  Therefore in  accordance  with  the  current
         country guidance, he will not be at risk on return to China and  he
         will not need to modify his behaviour to such  an  extent  that  it
         engages the principles outlined in HJ  (Iran)  in  order  to  avoid
         risk."

The Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds make no complaint with the  judge's  credibility  findings.
    However, it was submitted that the  judge  had  materially  erred  when
    assessing the appellant's Falon Gong activities  and  she  should  have
    considered what the appellant would do on return to China. If he  would
    practice Falon Gong discreetly the question arises why he would do  so.
    In his witness statement the appellant said that he was ill-treated  in
    China.  It could  therefore  be  concluded  that  the  appellant  would
    practice his faith discreetly because he  fears  persecution  from  the
    authorities if he were to do so publicly, which brings his case  within
    the principles of HJ (Iran).

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hodgkinson on 14th  September
    2016 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

 8. On 30th September 2016 the respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing Mr  Ell  confirmed  that  the  determination  was  being
    challenged on the sole issue of whether the  appellant  would  practice
    Falon Going discreetly on a return to China, and if so what the reasons
    for that discretion  would  be.  He  argued  that  the  judge  had  not
    adequately addressed her mind to that question and submitted  that  the
    determination was incomplete.

10. Mr Harrison submitted that the judge had not made a  finding  that  the
    appellant actual practised Falon Gong, but in  any  event  this  was  a
    person who had been untruthful with the Tribunal from start to  finish.
    The judge's conclusions should stand.

Findings and Conclusions

11. This is  a  very  well  reasoned,  thorough  determination.  The  judge
    properly set out all of the evidence and reached clear and  sustainable
    conclusions.

12. It is simply wrong to say that she accepted that the  appellant  was  a
    practitioner of Falon Gong.  She merely said that he had some interest.
     However she quite rightly highlighted the fact that,  at  present  the
    appellant is practising at such a discrete level that  his  brother-in-
    law is unaware of his doing so.  Moreover his contention that there was
    no Falon Gong movement in the UK clearly indicated a lack of commitment
    to the movement when there is a wealth of activity here.

13. The judge was perfectly entitled to conclude that the appellant, having
    practiced Falun Gong  in  the  UK,  where  there  was  no  risk,  would
    behaviour no differently in China. She did all  that  was  required  of
    her.

14. The reference in the grounds to his having been  ill-treated  there  is
    misconceived since the judge's unchallenged  credibility  findings  are
    that he received no such ill-treatment.

15. The judge did not err in law.

Decision

16. The judge's decision stands. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed   [pic]                          Date 19 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
