
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal No:  PA/03865/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House                     Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 17 November 2016                      On 13 December 2016


                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD BANNATYNE
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     MZW
                                     NZ
                                     MUZ
                                     MAZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                 __________
Anonymity
Rule 14: The tribunal procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted at an earlier stage of the  proceedings,  however,
the case involves protection issues and we find that it  is  appropriate  to
grant anonymity.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them.  This direction applies  both  to  the
appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Nicolson, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary Observations
1.    The First-tier Tribunal throughout its determination appears to be  of
      the view that there was only a single appellant.  When this matter was
      before the Upper Tribunal both sides agreed that this was an error and
      that  in  fact  before  the  First-tier Tribunal  there  were   four
      appellants, namely:  the first and second appellants who  are  husband
      and wife and the third and fourth appellants their children.

2.    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal moves directly  from  the
      position of the respondent as set out in her decision  letter  to  its
      decision and reasons.  It does not set out the detail of the  evidence
      before it.  It does not set out the submissions made on behalf of  the
      respondent and only briefly  and  in  passing  in  its  "Decision  and
      Reasons" refers to the submissions made on behalf of  the  appellants.
      This I found to be a rather unhelpful way in which  to  structure  the
      determination.

Introduction


3.    The first  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  was  born  on
      5 January 1973.  The second appellant is the first appellant's wife.
      The third and fourth appellants are the first and  second  appellants'
      children and they  were  born  respectively  on  4 October 2005  and
      15 November 2007.  The respondent in a decision of 5 June 2015 refused
      to grant the appellants leave to remain in the United Kingdom and in a
      decision of 4 December 2015 refused their applications for asylum in
      the UK.   The  appellants  appealed  these  decisions  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal.   It  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The
      appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and this
      was granted on 18 July 2016.

Background

4.    The core of the appellants' asylum claim was this:  first it is  based
      upon the first  and  second  appellants  having  been  threatened  and
      subjected to violence due to their having married  contrary  to  their
      respective families wishes and secondly it is  based  upon  the  first
      appellant's persecution  which  he  suffered  before  he  entered  the
      United Kingdom in April of 2005 due  to  his  work  as  an  executive
      director for a newspaper which was critical of the human rights record
      of the then Musharraf regime.

5.    The appellants also applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom
      under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  In their grounds  of
      appeal against the decision of 5 June 2015 to refuse their application
      the third and fourth appellants assert that the respondent has wrongly
      refused an application since they plainly fulfilled  the  requirements
      of sub-paragraph 276ADE (iv),and  the  first  and  second  appellants
      satisfied the requirements of sub-paragraphs 276ADE (vi).

The First-tier Tribunal's determination


6.    The First-tier Tribunal rejected the core of the appellants' case  on
      asylum grounds.  The basis for this decision was a finding of lack  of
      credibility  with  respect   to   the   first   appellant   based   on
      inconsistencies in his evidence in regard to the first chapter of  the
      asylum claim.  The reasons for the rejection of the second chapter  of
      the claim I will consider later in this determination.  In addition it
      rejected the appeal in terms of the Rules for  reasons  which  I  will
      turn to later.

Submissions


7.    There were hugely lengthy grounds of appeal in this case,  running  to
      some 18 pages.  These grounds of appeal broke down into  a  number  of
      discrete chapters in which the appellants challenged the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal.

8.    The first chapter was an attack on the fairness of the hearing  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.  In development of this it was argued:   the
      First-tier Tribunal's decision on the first branch of the appellants'
      asylum claim was based almost entirely on inconsistencies in the first
      appellant's evidence.  Counsel's  position  was  that  none  of  these
      alleged inconsistencies had been put to the  first  appellant  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal and in addition had not been founded upon by  the
      respondent.  He submitted that had these inconsistencies been  put  to
      the first  appellant  full  explanations  for  them  could  have  been
      provided.  The inconsistencies are set out at paragraphs 19 to  32  of
      the determination.  The explanations are detailed at pages 6 to 11  of
      the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that in  these  circumstances  it
      was unfair to decide a material part of the appellants' case based  on
      these  inconsistencies.   Counsel  directed  my   attention   to   two
      authorities with respect to this issue.  He  firstly  referred  to  IO
      ("Points  in  Issue")  Nigeria  [2004]  UKIAT  00179  in   which   the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal noted as follows:

            "8 As the Adjudicator rightly appreciated, the  Adjudicator  was
           obliged to decide  the  case  for  himself  but  it  is  a  long
           established  convention  in  immigration  cases  (which  include
           visitor applications) that unless a point had been put in  issue
           by the Entrance Clearance Officer an appellant  is  entitled  to
           assume that the Adjudicator would  not  decide  it  against  him
           without putting him on notice of that possibility."

9.    Counsel submitted that the same broad principle was contained  in  the
      Court of Appeal's judgment in Gaima v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [1989] Imm AR 205 and in Maheshwaran v Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  173.   In  particular  the
      following observations were made in Maheshwaran.

            "Undoubtedly a failure to put to a party to litigation  a  point
           which is decided against him can be grossly unfair and  lead  to
           injustice.  He must have  proper  opportunity  to  deal  with  a
           point.  Adjudicators must bear this in mind."


10.   Counsel submitted that on this first basis there was a material  error
      in law.

11.   The  second  ground  of  appeal  in  summary  was  this:   The  First-
      tier Tribunal with respect to the second aspect  of  the  appellant's
      claim for international protection had unlawfully  held  that  it  was
      necessary for the first appellant  to  provide  corroboration  of  his
      account of the  events.   Moreover  the  treatment  of  the  newspaper
      articles provided by the first appellant was irrational.

12.   The third ground of appeal was in short this:   There  was  no  proper
      direction by the First-tier Tribunal as to the standard of proof  and
      when the approach to the issue in terms  of  the  second  chapter  was
      examined there were clear indications that the First-tier Tribunal had
      misdirected itself on this matter.

13.   With respect to  the  fourth  ground  of  appeal  this  related  to  a
      material error of fact as regards the ages of  the  third  and  fourth
      appellants.  It was submitted that this amounted to a  material  error
      of law  in  that  Immigration Rule  276ADE  (iv)  is  age  sensitive.
      Accordingly it was argued that a material error as regards the ages of
      the children resulted in the decision in terms of the  said  paragraph
      being subject to a material error of law.

14.   The next ground of appeal was to this effect:  the First-
      tier Tribunal had failed to make a decision in terms of 276ADE.

15.   For the forgoing reasons it was submitted that the First-
      tier Tribunal's determination contained material errors of law and
      could not be sustained.

Reply for the respondent


16.   As regards the first chapter of the appellants' submissions Mr Clarke
      submitted that the case of IO was of no assistance to  the  appellants
      as it quite specifically related  to  a  matter  concerning  an  Entry
      Clearance Officer.  Turning to Maheshwaran he directed my attention to
      paragraph 5 in the judgment and argued  that  this  was  the  relevant
      paragraph when considering an issue of this type.    The  observations
      of the court made it clear that it was highly unusual for a  judge  to
      step in as the appellants argued the judge should  have  done  in  the
      instant case.  He submitted that the refusal letter  took  issue  with
      the circumstances of the wedding and it was clearly a live issue.   It
      was his position that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to  have
      regard to the inconsistencies in  the  first  appellant's  version  of
      events.  There was no error of law.

17.   Turning to the second ground of appeal it was his position that  there
      was  no  material  error  of  law.   On  a  proper  reading   of   the
      determination  of  the  First-tier Tribunal  it  had  not   demanded
      corroboration of the first appellant's case.  The First-tier Tribunal
      had properly considered the evidence in the round.   Its  approach  to
      the newspapers was an acceptable one.

18.   As regards the standard of proof argument it was his position that  it
      was quite clear what standard of proof  the  First-tier Tribunal  was
      working to and this was set out at paragraph 33 of the determination.

19.   Moving on to the arguments in terms of  Article 8  he  accepted  that
      there had been an error as regards the ages of the children,  however,
      he described this as no more than a slip and it had no material effect
      on the decision.  As regards the argument that the First-tier Tribunal
      had failed to determine the second stage of the test under 276ADE (iv)
      this was immaterial.  It was he submitted self-evident that the First-
      tier Tribunal had considered the analogous test under 117B(6) Of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  at  paragraph  43.  It
      comprehensively considered the factual matrix of the appellants as set
      out between  paragraphs  44  and  48  and  made  express  findings  at
      paragraphs 48 that it would be reasonable to expect  the  children  to
      leave the United Kingdom.


Error of Law


20.   The  first  question  is  this:   whether  the  First-tier Tribunal's
      failure to put various inconsistencies which it founded  upon  to  the
      first appellant for comment was unfair?  I am satisfied  that  it  was
      not.

21.   First, for the reasons advanced by Mr Clarke, I do not  believe  that
      the IO case can be read across to the  circumstances  of  the  instant
      case.  For these reasons I do not believe that the observations in  IO
      are of any real assistance to the appellants.  In any event,  if  they
      can be read over, it is clear that the respondent had put in issue  in
      her refusal letter inconsistencies regarding the circumstances of  the
      wedding.

22.   Turning to the case of Maheshwaran  I  believe  that  the  significant
      part  of  the  judgment  is  at  paragraph  5  where   the   following
      observations are made:

            "Where much depends on the credibility of a party and when  that
           party makes several inconsistent statements which are before the
           decision-maker, that party manifestly has  a  forensic  problem.
           Some will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight on and
           make evidential or forensic submissions on  them.   Others  will
           hope  that  'least  said,  soonest  mended'  and  consider  that
           forensic concentration on the point will only make matters worse
           and it  would  be  better  to  try  and  switch  the  tribunal's
           attention to some other aspect of the case.  Undoubtedly  it  is
           open to the tribunal expressly to put a particular inconsistency
           to a witness because it considers that the witness  may  not  be
           alerted to the point or it fears  that  it  may  have  perceived
           something as inconsistent with an earlier answer which in  truth
           is not inconsistent.  Fairness may in some circumstances require
           this to be done butthis will not be the usual case.  Usually the
           tribunal, particularly if the party is represented, will  remain
           silent and see how the case unfolds."  (Emphasis added).

      I am persuaded that  the  instant  case  falls  into  the  usual  case
      category  as  identified  in  Maheshwaran.   I  believe  that   issues
      regarding inconsistencies in the first appellants' position  regarding
      the circumstances of the wedding  were  clearly  foreshadowed  in  the
      respondent's refusal letter where issues of inconsistency are  founded
      upon at paragraphs 37 to 42.  It is  clear  from  the  terms  of  this
      letter that the lack of consistency in the first appellant's story was
      a  principal  ground  for  refusal.   The  appellant's  legal  advisor
      accordingly should have been fully aware prior to the  hearing  before
      the First-tier Tribunal that such points were likely  to  be  at  the
      heart  of  the  hearing  before   the   First-tier Tribunal.    Such
      inconsistencies  clearly  formed  a  very  significant  part  of   the
      respondent's case.  The types of inconsistencies relied  upon  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal in its determination  are  very  similar  to  the
      issues raised by the respondent in the refusal letter.   Against  that
      background I can identify no unfairness  in  the  First-tier Tribunal
      having regard to these inconsistencies  in  circumstances  where  they
      have not raised these matters with the first  appellant.   I  find  no
      merit in this ground of appeal.

23.   However,  I  believe  that  the  second  ground  of  appeal  has  more
      substance.  The First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 33 to 36 deals with
      the issue of the first appellant's fear of return to Pakistan arising
      from his previous position as an editor of a newspaper.  It deals with
      this issue entirely separately from the fear of  return  arising  from
      the circumstances of the marriage.  In particular it  does  not  carry
      over the adverse credibility findings which it made with regard to the
      first appellant's fear of return based upon the circumstances  of  his
      wedding.  Rather it accepts part of the first appellant's  version  of
      events.   Thereafter  at  both  paragraphs  33  and  34   the   First-
      tier Tribunal says that the appellant has  provided  no  evidence  to
      support this part of his claim.  It appears  to  be  this  failure  to
      provide corroboration, which on a fair reading of  this  part  of  the
      determination, has caused  the  First-tier Tribunal  to  reject  this
      aspect of the first appellant's claim. There is of course no necessity
      for corroboration to be provided  in  these  circumstances  (see:   ST
      (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethopia [2004] UK IAT 00119.  Accordingly  in
      my view this is a material error of law.

24.   Connected to the above issue was the First-tier Tribunal's  treatment
      at paragraphs 33 - 35 of newspaper  articles  provided  by  the  first
      appellant Counsel said this:  it was not the  respondent's  case  that
      the articles were fabricated.   In  these  circumstances  it  was  his
      position,  that  there  was  no  basis  for  the  First-tier Tribunal
      rejecting these articles, which on the face  of  them,  supported  the
      first appellant's position.  The  only  reason  given  by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal for rejecting them was the form in which they had  been
      provided.  However, the appellant gave  an  explanation  for  this  at
      paragraph 45 of his statement and the First-tier Tribunal appeared to
      have failed to take this into account.

25.    Moreover  counsel  argued  that  the  First-tier Tribunal  had  only
      referred to one of the  articles  and  not  to  both  and  accordingly
      appeared to have forgotten that there were two articles.

26.   I find this whole section of the First-tier Tribunal's  determination
      confusing:  it first appears to have been  looking  for  corroboration
      where there was no need for  corroboration;  the  primary  reason  for
      giving no weight to the single newspaper article  it  considered  does
      not appear to engage with the first appellant's  explanation  for  its
      form; the First-tier Tribunal does appear to have forgotten that there
      were two articles and therefore not considered one  of  them.   Taking
      all  of  these  factors  into  account  I  believe  that  the   First-
      tier Tribunal's decision on this issue amounts to a material error of
      law.

27.   Lastly with the  respect  to  the  claim  for  protection  the  First-
      tier Tribunal appears to accept  at  paragraph 36  that  the  second
      appellant's claim to have been beaten up by her family  following  the
      discovery of her relationship with the first appellant  had  not  been
      challenged by the respondent.  However, the First-tier Tribunal  then
      goes on to say as follows:

            "but looking at the evidence in the round in particular with the
           inconsistencies in  the  evidence  about  the  wedding  ceremony
           itself I was not satisfied that the appellant had shown  he  and
           his wife were marrying against the wishes of either family."


      It is trite law to say that a court should look at the evidence in the
      round. However what is the First-tier Tribunal's  position  regarding
      this unchallenged evidence?  It is wholly unclear.  Did it reject  it,
      if so why?  There are no material adverse  credibility  findings  with
      respect to the second appellant.  The only reference  to  such  is  at
      paragraphs 23 and 32 and relates to a  single  inconsistency.   If  it
      accepted this piece of evidence which goes to the core  of  the  issue
      before it why then does it reject the position advanced on  behalf  of
      the appellants regarding the need for protection arising  out  of  the
      circumstances of the wedding?  In these circumstances it is saying  it
      finds  one  witness  credible  on  this  issue,  the  other  it  finds
      incredible (the first appellant) but does not go on  to  grapple  with
      the question of how  that  situation  should  be  reconciled.   In  my
      opinion this amounts to a material error of law.

28.   The next two grounds of appeal advanced on behalf  of  the  appellants
      were connected and related to the section of the First-tier Tribunal's
      determination from paragraph 38 onwards headed: "The Article 8 claim".

29.   The first argument was founded upon an  error  of  fact  in  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal had wrongly stated at paragraph 41 the number  of
      years that the third appellant had been in this country (8 years,  the
      correct figure being 9 years and 7  months).    With  respect  to  the
      fourth appellant it did not state the number of  years'  residence  of
      that child.

30.   276ADE is a time-sensitive provision and the period  of  residence  is
      of core significance.  This is highlighted  in  two  sections  of  the
      respondent's own IDI.  Firstly at paragraph 32:

            "The longer the child has resided in the UK the more the balance
           will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to  expect
           the child to leave the UK".

Further the following is said:

           "The requirements that a non-British citizen child has lived  in
           the UK  for  a  continuous  period  of  at  least  the  7  years
           immediately preceding the date of application,  recognises  that
           over time children start to put down roots  and  integrate  into
           life in the UK, to the extent that being required to  leave  the
           UK may be unreasonable.  The longer the child has resided in the
           UK, the more the balance will begin to  swing  in  terms  of  it
           being unreasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK,  and
           strong reasons will be required in order to refuse a  case  with
           continuous UK residence of more than 7 years."


31.   Having regard  to  this  being  a  rule  dealing  with  children,  the
      importance of length of residence in  terms  of  the  rule,  then  the
      failure by the First-tier Tribunal to take into account  the  correct
      length of residence for the third appellant in excess of 7  years  and
      its failure to clearly identify the length of residence of the  fourth
      appellant amounts to a material error of law.  The  failure  to  state
      the precise figure tends to suggest a  failure  to  properly  consider
      this core factor in relation to the fourth appellant.

32.   The First-tier Tribunal considers the issue in terms of 276ADE  in  a
      single paragraph, namely:  at paragraph  42.   However,  it  makes  no
      finding in terms of the second limb of 276ADE(1) namely:   whether  it
      was reasonable to expect the third and fourth appellants to leave  the
      UK.  I am persuaded that this failure amounts to a material  error  of
      law.  In PD and others (Article 8 - Conjoined Family Claims) Sri Lanka
      [2016] UKUT 00108 (1AC) the president of the Upper  Tribunal  approved
      the approach taken in Bossade (Sections 117A  -  D:  Interrelationship
      with rules) 2015 UKUT 415(IAC).  At paragraph 15 of its  determination
      in PD the tribunal referred to Bossade and said:

            "this issue was examined at (30)  -  (52).   It  was  held  that
           ordinarily, it will be appropriate for  the  tribunal  to  first
           consider an appellant's Article 8 ECHR  claim  by  reference  to
           Immigration Rules.   This  exercise  will  entail  determining
           whether the relevant substantive conditions are satisfied by the
           person  concerned.   Part  5A  has  no  role  in  this  discreet
           process."


      Having regard to the foregoing the  First-tier Tribunal  should  have
      made a finding with respect to the  third  and  fourth  appellants  in
      terms of 276ADE before turning to consider whether 117B  (6)  operated
      to prevent the first and second named appellants  from  being  removed
      from the UK.

33.    I  recognise  that  both  276ADE  and  117B(6)   contain   tests   of
      reasonableness.  However,  paragraph 276ADE(1) particularly focuses on
      the length of the child's residence in the UK  and  it  is  emphasised
      within the respondent's own IDI that "strong reasons will be  required
      in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than  7
      years".  The emphasis I believe in terms of  this  rule  is  different
      from that in 117B(6) and therefore requires separate consideration.

Decision

34.   For the above reasons I find that there have been material  errors  of
      law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot be sustained and
      is set aside.  The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the
      case to be reheard.


Signed:                      Date:

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as Judge of the Upper Tribunal

