
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03319/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15th December 2017                 |           On 29th January 2018       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    SSZMM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood, of Counsel, instructed by Rochdale Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe  born  on  1st  July  1983.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom  in  December  2000.   In  July  2016  he
    claimed asylum, which was refused by the respondent in a decision dated
    16th March 2017.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on 3rd May 2017.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 17th  May  the  appeal  was  dismissed  in  all
    respects.

3.   The claim as presented has a number of aspects to it.  First of all  it
    is said that the appellant is bisexual or will be perceived  by  others
    as being bisexual and that he is thereby  at  risk  as  a  consequence.
    Secondly, it is said that as a member of the Shona black population  in
    Zimbabwe he would be at risk upon return.  Thirdly, it is said that his
    uncle N M is a political activist and that he would be at risk  because
    of his connections with his uncle.

4.   Finally  the  appellant  contends  that  by  reason  of  his  political
    activities in the United Kingdom he has a significant profile.

5.   Linked with that is also the contention that even as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker returning to Zimbabwe after a long time of absence that he would
    be at risk thereby as failing to show adherence to the ZANU-PF.

6.   The evidence of the appellant before the Judge was that he had had  two
    relationships of a heterosexual nature and none of  a  homosexual  one.
    He had not told anybody about his bisexuality.  It was  the  conclusion
    of the Judge that the appellant was not bisexual or would be  perceived
    as such.  Significantly that is a finding that  is  not  sought  to  be
    challenged  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  now  submitted  against  that
    decision.

7.   It is said, however, in the grounds of appeal that the Judge failed  to
    make findings on material matters, and in particular failed to consider
    CM (EM country guidance:  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  0059
    (IAC).

8.   It is said that the appellant's place of birth in  Manicaland  Province
    and in Midlands Province, both of which areas, it is said, are affected
    by politically motivated violence, that there would be a  risk  to  the
    appellant were he to return there.  It is  also  said  that  the  Judge
    failed to consider any aspect of internal relocation and  whether  such
    would be reasonable in all the circumstances.

9.   The appellant further contends that his  relationship  with  his  uncle
    places him at risk upon return.

10.  Leave was granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that  CM
    [2013] had not been properly considered or at all.  It was also granted
    in relation to the uncle.  Thus the matter comes before me to determine
    the issues.

11.  In terms of his own political profile the appellant  contends  that  he
    attended four demonstrations in the United  Kingdom  between  2013  and
    2016 and has gone online in protest.  He contends that he  has  brought
    attention to  himself  by  singing,  marching  and  demonstrating.   He
    believes that he appeared in Metro, a Zimbabwe tabloid  newspaper.   He
    heard about this from somebody who went on holiday to Zimbabwe and  saw
    his  picture.   He  indicated  in  interview  that  he  had  no   other
    information on the matter and has received no specific threats.

12.  The Judge noted the lack of direct evidence on the matter  relating  to
    the Metro and did not find  that  the  appellant  had  any  significant
    profile arising from his demonstrations and posting online.   Thus  the
    Judge found  in  effect  that  the  appellant  lacked  any  significant
    political profile.

13.  In terms of his uncle NM, that uncle was indeed politically  active  in
    Harare.

14.  It is far from clear how long the uncle has been engaged  in  political
    activity.  What is very relevant, submits Mr McVeety on behalf  of  the
    respondent, is that there is no indication that he has been  in  danger
    or is under threat as a result of his activities.  Accordingly,  he  is
    able and free to canvass for his own political agenda and there  is  no
    reason to believe that the appellant would be linked with  him  in  any
    adverse way.  There is a small article from newsday.co.zw of 20th March
    2017 speaking of the fact that in terms of the  Zimbabwe  Alliance  the
    convenor NM has said if elected in next year's  general  elections  his
    government will slash  public  spending.   The  article  speaks  of  NM
    addressing  journalists  in  Harare   and   criticising   the   ZANU-PF
    government.  There is nothing to indicate  that  that  uncle  has  come
    under any attack or is in  any  danger  by  reason  of  his  publically
    expressed views.

15.  Perhaps of more immediate relevance is, however, the  issue  of  return
    on the basis of being Shona and having been out of the country for many
    years.  It is said that a person without ZANU-PF connections  returning
    from the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area  of
    Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland North or Matabele South, may find  it
    difficult to avoid adverse attention from ZANU-PF authority figures and
    those they control.  Such may involve the  requirement  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to ZANU-PF with the prospect of serious harm if  unable  to  do
    so.

16.  It is said that the issue of what is a person's home  for  the  purpose
    of internal relocation should be decided as a matter of  fact.   It  is
    said that this the Judge has failed to do.

17.  Mr Wood submits that there has been no consideration at all as to  what
    is the appellant's home area and whether he can  reasonably  return  to
    it.  It is only when that issue is  determined  that  the  question  of
    internal relocation arises.  Even in that case, it is necessary for the
    Judge to consider whether internal relocation is reasonable and  viable
    in all the circumstances.

18.  Mr Wood indicates that generally speaking on the decision in  CM  there
    could be a return to Harare or to Bulawayo which a returnee will not in
    general suffer the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.  He said however  that
    under footnote 8:

         "(8) Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or (subject to
             what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in general more realistic
             but the  socioeconomic  circumstances  in  which  persons  are
             reasonably  likely  to  find  themselves  will  need   to   be
             considered  in  order  to  determine  whether  it   would   be
             unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.


         (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved since the period
             considered in RN.  The replacement of the Zimbabwean  currency
             by the US dollar and the South  African  rand  has  ended  the
             recent hyperinflation. The  availability  of  food  and  other
             goods in shops has likewise improved, as has the  availability
             of utilities in Harare.  Although these improvements  are  not
             being felt by everyone,  with  15%  of  the  population  still
             requiring food aid, there has not been  any  deterioration  in
             the humanitarian situation since late 2008.   Zimbabwe  has  a
             large informal economy, ranging from street traders  to  home-
             based enterprises,  which  (depending  on  the  circumstances)
             returnees may be expected to enter".


19.  In terms of reasonable relocation to Bulawayo reliance is  placed  upon
    a report by Zimbabwe  Peace  Project  (ZPP)  Human  Rights:  Violations
    Monthly Monitoring Report February 2017 being unprepared  for  disaster
    (15.3.2017).   That  speaks  of  floods  that  have  hit  the   country
    particularly in Matabeleland and Bulawayo have left a number  dead  and
    thousands homeless.  Crops, livestock and other property were destroyed
    in the rains.  Schools and other infrastructures  had  been  destroyed.
    Mr Wood submits that in those circumstances it would not be  reasonable
    to expect the appellant to relocate to Bulawayo given the damage to the
    infrastructure caused by the floods.

20.  In terms of return to Harare reliance is also placed upon a  report  by
    the  Zimbabwe  Peace  Project  Alert:  Displacement  of   vendors   and
    disruption of businesses at Mbare Musika, 25th January 2017.  It speaks
    of displacement of vendors and  other  traders  from  their  designated
    trading spots at Mbare Musika as part of Harare City  Council's  effort
    to clean up the place in a fight against typhoid.  Youths affiliated to
    the ruling party ZANU-PF who have operated  in  that  area  have  taken
    advantage of the exercise to claim open spaces to  use  as  car  parks.
    They are also  victimising  vendors  and  traders  on  the  grounds  of
    political affiliation.  This would deprive vendors of their  livelihood
    and they would have to relocate to Machipisa in Highfield.  It is  said
    that that is an indication that it would be difficult for the appellant
    to trade.

21.  It is argued that had the Judge  considered  those  reports  that  were
    indeed placed before him, that it would have been found  that  internal
    relocation would not have been reasonably available to the appellant.

22.  Clearly the Judge's failure to consider CM is an  error  of  law.   The
    question is however whether that error is in reality a material one.

23.  It seems to me that on the basis of the findings of fact by  the  Judge
    the appellant has no significant MDC profile such  as  to  prevent  him
    from returning at the very least to Harare.

24.  Although the grounds of challenge  seek  to  criticise  the  Judge  for
    failing to consider return  to  a  home  area  or  in  the  alternative
    internal relocation, no detail is provided as to why a return in  those
    circumstances would be unreasonable or unduly harsh.  The appellant has
    a family member in a prominent position in Harare.   Nothing  has  been
    advanced to indicate that the uncle would not or  could  not  be  in  a
    position to lend financial or other support  to  him.   Accepting  that
    there has been some clearance of street traders in one part of  Harare,
    such does not mean that employment in that trade or other trade is  not
    possible in other areas.   CM makes it  clear  that  the  socioeconomic
    circumstances in which persons are reasonably likely to find themselves
    will need to be considered in order to determine whether  it  would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to  relocate.   As  I  have
    said, the grounds criticise the Judge for failing to do that but do not
    put forward a positive case that such hardship would arise.

25.  The appellant in his witness statement indicates that he has a  brother
    and two sisters in the United Kingdom who are now British citizens.  He
    failed to indicate that they would be unsupportive of him  were  he  to
    return.  As I have indicated, there is his uncle in any event living in
    Harare.  The appellant speaks Shona and English. As the Judge indicated
    at paragraph 9 of the determination, the Shona are the  majority  black
    population in Zimbabwe.

26.  It was noted that the appellant was fit and well and  the  Judge  noted
    the uncle living now in Harare.

27.  The grounds fail to indicate in any way  what  reasons  exist  to  make
    life in Harare unreasonably harsh for the appellant.

28.  Mr Wood also seeks to argue that the Judge  has  not  factored  in  the
    possibility that the appellant would engage in political activities  in
    Harare and as such increase his political profile.  It is not  entirely
    clear to me whether that matter was ever raised in the hearing  itself,
    and in that connection it is to be noted that the activities  conducted
    by the appellant in the United Kingdom when he was free to do  so  over
    the period since 2000 have been very limited; as set out  in  paragraph
    16 of the determination four demonstrations between 2013 and 2016.  The
    Judge clearly calls into question his motivation either  as  a  genuine
    believer of political activity or as a person creating his own profile.
     CM makes it clear that a returnee to Harare will in  general  face  no
    significant difficulties unless he or she has a significant MDC profile
    or would otherwise engage political activities likely  to  attract  the
    adverse attention of ZANU-PF.  On the very limited participation by the
    appellant in political activities it is difficult to conceive that  the
    appellant in fact meets that profile or indeed  has  any  real  genuine
    interest in politics.  It should be noted that the Judge  at  paragraph
    19 comes to the clear finding that the appellant has sought to  bolster
    a weak asylum claim by inventing a number of potential  problems.   The
    Judge finds that he is an educated individual who can find the means to
    support himself now that he has attained his majority.

29.   The Judge clearly ought to have considered and applied CM.   Even  had
    the Judge done so I do  not  find  that  he  would  have  come  to  any
    conclusion than that the appellant could safely return  to  Harare  and
    that  it  was  not  unreasonably  harsh  for  him  to  do  in  all  the
    circumstances.  The appellant has failed to show  any  reason  why  the
    generality of application of CM should not apply to him.

30.  In the circumstances, therefore, I do not find that there  has  been  a
    material error on the part of the Judge such that would have  made  any
    appreciable difference to the outcome.

31.   In  all  the  circumstances  the  appeal  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

32.  The findings of the Immigration Judge are to be upheld.

33.  In the circumstances, the appeal  of  the  appellant  is  dismissed  in
    relation to asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 25 January 2018

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD






