
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03276/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th September 2017                        |27th September 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                    T T X
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel, instructed by Howe &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An anonymity direction has already been made in respect of this case and  it
should continue.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Morron sitting at Taylor House  on  3rd  May  2017.
    The Appellant had appealed against the Secretary of  State's  rejection
    of her  claim  for  asylum,  the  salient  background  being  that  the
    Appellant claimed to be a member of the China New Democracy Party.

2.   The judge had said at paragraph 49 of his decision that the main  issue
    in the appeal  before  him  was  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence relating to her claimed membership  of  and  connections  with
    that party.  At paragraph 56 the judge  noted  and  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was aged only 16 at the time of her  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

3.   The grounds of appeal, which have been drafted  by  Ms  Panagiotopoulou
    and who also appears before me today, set out clearly  the  basis  upon
    which it is said that there was an error of law.  I focus in particular
    on paragraph 6, which deals the Document Verification Report which  had
    been relied upon by the Respondent.  It is said at paragraph 6  of  the
    grounds of appeal,

         "The judge erred in his assessment  of  the  document  verification
         report relied on by the Respondent in that he failed to have regard
         to the fact that the police officer working in the  Criminal  Cases
         Department had not been shown the documents he was asked to verify.
          In the alternative, the judge erred in fact in considering that it
         was the police officer that had a copy before him (see para 41  and
         para 62 of the determination),  when  it  was  actually  the  Entry
         Clearance Assistant liaising with him over  the  phone  who  had  a
         copy.  This argument formed part  of  the  Appellant's  submissions
         relating to the reliability of the  document  verification  report.
         The importance of this was that the person who actually purports to
         verify the document (namely the police officer) had not been  shown
         them; he appeared to simply describe over the phone  to  the  Entry
         Clearance Assistant what a document he referred to  as  a  'summons
         certificate' should look like.  The judge in paragraph  62  of  his
         determination relies on this mistaken fact to  conclude  that  'the
         officer states that he had a copy of the document in front  of  him
         and I consider therefore that the most likely explanation  for  the
         difference in terminology is linguistic'.  As stated above, it  was
         not the police officer who had the copy before him  but  the  Entry
         Clearance Assistant.  It is respectfully submitted that the judge's
         conclusions are therefore unsustainable."


4.   At the  hearing  before  today,  Ms  Panagiotopoulou  took  me  to  the
    Respondent's bundle, particularly at E6 and E7,  which  refers  to  the
    document verification report, and, in my judgment, it  is  quite  clear
    from looking at that that the Respondent's  caseworker  who  sought  to
    seek  verification  had  a  telephone  conversation  with  the   police
    authorities and, in my judgment, it is quite clear that the  judge  had
    erred in terms of the  factual  basis  upon  which  he  considered  the
    document verification report.  What the  judge  appears  to  have  been
    mistaken about is whether or not the police authorities  were  actually
    able to look at the summons. In fact, they did not see it so  were  not
    able to give a view one way or the other as to whether the document was
    genuine or not.  There are other grounds of  appeal  as  well  but,  as
    became clearer during the discussion of the case during submissions, in
    my judgment, this was an important aspect of the case.

5.   Mr Walker in his clear and helpful submissions said that  the  position
    was a little confusing in respect of the document verification  report.
    He agreed that in the main there may be checks made over the  telephone
    and it appears to be presumed here that the police officer had  a  copy
    of the document being verified. Mr Walker  said  it  was  important  to
    consider the judge's decision as a whole.  He  said  it  was  a  finely
    balanced point in respect of the grounds themselves.  He said he  would
    leave his submissions in those brief but succinct and clear terms.

6.   Now, having reflected on the matter and having  discussed  the  aspects
    with the Appellant's Counsel during her submissions it does seem to  me
    that the whole basis of the judge's findings relied upon  the  document
    verification report being accurate.  Had he concluded that the document
    verification report was wrong or that it may be wrong it is likely that
    the judge would have made a different finding. It is quite clear to  me
    that the premise of the document verification report that it  had  been
    viewed by the officer concerned was wrong. There was an error of law in
    the judge's approach.

7.   In the circumstances and because  this  is  a  protection  claim  which
    requires application of the most anxious scrutiny to the  case,  in  my
    judgment that the error of law was a material error.  Consequently, the
    decision by the judge, which is otherwise detailed  and  clear,  relied
    upon a mistake of fact. That amounts to an error of law  in  accordance
    with the principles enunciated by the Court  of  Appeal  in  E  &  R  v
    Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ.

8.   As a consequence, I conclude that the matter has to be reheard  on  all
    issues and the appropriate venue for that hearing is at the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I am told that an interpreter in Mandarin  will  be  required
    for that hearing.


Notice of Decision


   1. The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
   2. There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date: 8th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
