
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03879/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 December 2017                           |On 15 January 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     AR
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hodson
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born in 1986.  She appeals  against
      a decision of the respondent made on 6 April 2017 to refuse her  claim
      to asylum and on human rights grounds.

   2. The basis of her claim is that she fears a man who  will  either  kill
      her British citizen husband who she married in Iraq in 2010, or kidnap
      her son born in 2012, because he had been threatening her and had said
      that he had wanted to marry her.


   3. Her claim to have been threatened was not believed by the respondent.


    4. She appealed.


           First tier hearing

   5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 19 May 2017, Judge of the First-
      tier Hosie dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.   In  essence,  she
      did not find the evidence of the  appellant  and  her  husband  to  be
      credible.

   6. In considering  Article  8  ECHR  the  judge  having  found  that  the
      appellant's husband has been a British citizen since 2007 (at para 91)
      then found that the son is 'not currently  a  British  citizen'.   She
      noted that the husband had lived most of his life in Iraq as had their
      young son.  They have property there and both she and her husband  had
      worked there.  She concluded that it  was  reasonable  for  the  whole
      family to return to Iraq and for the appellant and  her  son  to  seek
      entry clearance.


   7. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal.   On  23  October  2017
      permission was refused on the grounds submitting that there  had  been
      an error of law in the consideration of the  asylum  claim.   However,
      permission was granted in respect of Article 8, namely, that the judge
      had erred in her finding as to the child's nationality.


      Error of law hearing


   8. At the error of law hearing  before  me  Mr  Jarvis  agreed  with  the
      submission that the judge had erred in finding that the child was  not
      a British citizen.  He was automatically a British citizen by  descent
      at the time of birth. I also agreed.


   9. Mr Jarvis said it was conceded it would  not  be  reasonable  for  the
      British citizen child to leave the UK.  As a consequence  leave  would
      be granted to the appellant.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  asylum  grounds
shows no error of law and that decision dismissing the appeal stands.

The making of the decision on human rights grounds shows error of law.

That decision is set aside to be remade as follows:-

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).

Anonymity

Unless or until a court or tribunal directs otherwise, no  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant  or  any
member of her family. This  order  applies  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this order may lead to contempt of  court
proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
     Date 12.01.2018

