
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03100/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2018                  |On 8 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                           MARIWAN AMEEN MOHAMMED
                            (ANONYMITY NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    We have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence  we
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bradshaw promulgated on 27 September  2016,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 21/06/1985 and is a national  of  Iraq.  The
appellant entered the UK on 22/07/2015 and  claimed  asylum.  On  12/11/2015
the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's Protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bradsahaw ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  25/10/2016  Judge  Nightingale
gave permission to appeal stating

    "1.    Permission is sought to appeal, in time, against the decision of
    the First-tier Judge Bradshaw, dated 27 September 2016, dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum.

    2.     The grounds argue that the Judge failed to consider whether  the
    appellant would be able to travel to the IKR without a CSID. The  Judge
    failed to give consideration to how the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    secure employment in the IKR. The Judge had also failed  to  take  into
    account that the appellant had had no contact  with  his  family  since
    leaving Kirkuk. The Judge had failed  to  properly  apply  the  country
    guidance on AA.

    3.     In an otherwise full and sustainability reasoned decision, it is
    arguable that the Judge did  not  consider  the  method  by  which  the
    appellant, accepted to be undocumented, could travel on to  Erbil  from
    Baghdad. Arguably, the Judge did not therefore correctly apply  AA.  It
    is also arguable that the Judge gave no reasons for  finding  that  the
    appellant would be able to obtain employment in the 10 day  period  and
    so be permitted to remain in the IKR. It is also arguable, albeit  only
    just, that the Judge failed to consider that the appellant had  had  no
    contact with his family in Iraq. Permission is granted on  all  grounds
    pleaded."

The Hearing

6.    Parties' representatives told us that they  were  in  agreement  about
this case. Ms O'Brien told us that the crux of the challenge  is  a  failure
to make factual findings and a failure to follow the guidance  given  in  AA
(Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

7.    Both Mr Caskie & Ms O'Brien asked us to remit this case to the  First-
tier to be determined of new. Ms O'Brien told us that credibility  is  still
an  issue,  &  that  specific  findings  require  to  be  made   about   the
availability of documentation to this appellant.



Analysis

8.    At [10]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  clearly  identifies  that  the
appellant comes from Kirkuk, and that the applicant is  not  from  the  IKR.
Between [16]  and  [26]  the  Judge  summarises  the  appellant's  case  and
identifies the appellant as an Iraqi Kurd.

9.     Between  [27]  and  [36]  the  Judge  summarises   the   respondent's
submissions, and then between  [37]  and  [42]  summarises  the  appellant's
submissions. The Judge's findings of fact start at [43]. At [84]  the  Judge
finds that the appellant is a young, healthy man and (after taking  guidance
from AA) between [85] and [88] the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  could
safely relocate to IKR.

10.   Since the Judge's decision was promulgated, the Court  of  Appeal  has
provided the following guidance in AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

    A.      INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE   15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

    1.     There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

11.   In making that finding the Court of Appeal adheres to  what  was  said
in AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 0054  (IAC).  The  following  guidance  is  also
found in AA (Iraq)

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)

    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:

         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);

         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);

         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;

         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);

         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;

         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;

         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).

    E.     IRAQI KURDISH REGION

    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.

    20.    Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be expected to
         avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by  travelling  to
         the IKR, will be fact  sensitive;  and  is  likely  to  involve  an
         assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
         IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
         employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
         family and friends in the IKR.

    21.    As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk  in  a  home
         area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

12.   What is missing from the Judge's decision is a consideration  of  what
will befall the appellant if he is returned to Baghdad. What is required  is
a consideration of whether or not the appellant has  a  network  of  support
available to him and whether or not he has or is able  to  acquire  a  CSID.
The facts and circumstances of the appellant's case must be set against  the
seven factors set out at [15] of annex A to the case of AA (Iraq) CG  [2017]
EWCA Civ 944. Analysis of how the appellant would make his way from  Baghdad
to IKR is also necessary.

13.   As that analysis is missing from the Judge's decision,  we  find  that
the decision is tainted by  a  material  error  of  law.  We  must  set  the
decision aside.

14.   We consider whether or not we can  substitute  our  own  decision  but
find that we cannot  do  so  because  of  the  extent  of  the  fact-finding
exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

15.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16.   In this case we have determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

17.   We remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Glasgow  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Bradshaw.

Decision

18.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

19.   We set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  27  September  2016.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed      Paul Doyle Date 7 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

