
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03316/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 December 2017                        |On 11th December 2017            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                             ALI MOHAMMED RAZAAI
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Patel, instructed by Lei Dat Baig Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith promulgated 15.5.17, dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  20.3.17,  to
    refuse his protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 3.5.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    19.9.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 4.12.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 5. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

 6. In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Macdonald  considered  it
    arguable that, as asserted in the grounds, the judge misunderstood  the
    evidence and omitted reference to the background material  relating  to
    the Iranian judicial system.

 7. The Rule 24 response, dated 28.9.17, points out that the case turned on
    the credibility of the appellant's account and asserts that  the  judge
    gave adequate reasons for the adverse credibility findings.

 8. Ground 1 relates to the judge's treatment of the evidence that Mr  Aziz
    disclosed to the authorities that weapons and propaganda were stored in
    the appellant's shop. The judge considered it made no sense for Mr Aziz
    to have disclosed this information, as it would only make the situation
    worse for him. The grounds plead that, based on the  asylum  interview,
    the correct sequence of events was that information had been passed  to
    the intelligence authorities and that this led  to  the  arrest  of  Mr
    Aziz. It is suggested that he may have disclosed the  location  of  the
    illicit material  under  questioning  and  interrogation,  leading  the
    authorities to the storage at the shop.

 9. However, the ground results from  a  misreading  of  the  decision.  At
    [13(i)] what the judge found to make no logical sense was the whole  of
    this part of  the  account,  including  that  Mr  Aziz  implicated  the
    appellant as the person who knew the people who  came  to  collect  the
    illicit goods, and that he did this in order to save himself  from  the
    authorities (see Q95-98). The judge pointed out that this account would
    not save Mr Aziz at all, but further endanger him, making his situation
    worse. As Mr McVeety submitted, Mr Aziz would be "dobbing in" not  only
    the appellant but himself. The alternative scenario  suggested  in  the
    grounds is no more than speculation. The adverse finding by  the  judge
    was justified on the evidence from the interview.

10. The second ground criticised  the  finding  at  [13(ii)]  that  it  was
    implausible that a member of the family would go directly to  the  shop
    to enquire about what had happened, because given the knowledge of  the
    practices of the authorities, he would fear  being  implicated.  It  is
    submitted that the judge made  a  material  mistake  of  fact,  as  the
    appellant did not say that his brother went directly to the coffee shop
    to enquire, but only that "he couldn't find anything out the  shop  was
    closed." It is suggested that the brother may have  made  enquiries  in
    the neighbourhood. However, this is again speculation. On  the  limited
    evidence, the judge was entitled to  assume  that  on  the  appellant's
    account the brother went to the shop to find out what had happened, but
    found it was closed. On the evidence, this  is  the  only  and  obvious
    explanation. How else could he know the shop was closed? In any  event,
    this complaint is a minor point and barely significant in the light  of
    the overall credibility findings. Even if there is any error  of  fact,
    it is not material.

11. The third ground relates to an extract  from  [13(iv)]  quoted  in  the
    grounds as to a family member finding out about the  case  of  Mr  Aziz
    within 24 hours of the raid on the shop. Misleadingly, the grounds take
    a narrow view that it was the claim that the judicial system  had  been
    able to operate within 24 hours of the raid. It is complained that  the
    judge had not referred to any background information  to  suggest  that
    this would be implausible. However, what the  judge  found  implausible
    was the entire part of this aspect of  the  appellant's  account:  that
    within 24 hours of the raid, the court system would not only have  been
    aware of the case of Mr Aziz but also been able to provide the  claimed
    details in such a short time to a private individual  unconnected  with
    the investigation.

12. In  essence,  the  grounds  are  a  disguised  attempt  to  proffer  an
    alternative version of facts and to do so appear to wilfully misread or
    misinterpret the judge's clear findings. The judge was entitled to make
    an overall assessment  of  credibility,  in  respect  of  which  cogent
    reasons have been provided. There is no perversity or irrationality  in
    the findings and conclusions.

13. No error of law is disclosed.



Remittal

Conclusion & Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated





Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and the appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


