
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03383/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19 June 2017                       |On 23 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     HH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jones, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, HH, is a citizen of  Iraq.   By  a  decision  which  was
    promulgated on 25 April 2017, I found that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that its decision fell to be set aside.  My  decision
    was as follows:

         1.   The appellant, HH, was born in 1986 and is a citizen of  Iraq.
         He is of Kurdish ethnicity.  By a decision dated 18 March 2016, the
         appellant was refused asylum in the United Kingdom.  He appealed to
         the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Atkinson)  which,  in  a  decision
         promulgated  on  15  November  2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Both parties agree that this appeal should succeed.  In a Rule
         24 letter of 30 December 2016, the respondent  indicated  that  she
         does not oppose  the  application  and  "invites  the  Tribunal  to
         determine the appeal [and to] consider the  limited  issue  of  the
         practicality of travel from Baghdad to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region
         which appears absent from the [First-tier  Tribunal]  consideration
         at [48]." The Upper Tribunal finds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         failed to address the following matters which it shall now  address
         at a resumed hearing: (i) on the basis that  the  appellant  cannot
         live in his home area of Iraq and must, therefore, seek to exercise
         internal flight within Iraq, whether it would be unduly  harsh  for
         the appellant, having arrived from the United Kingdom, to remain in
         Baghdad for any period of time at all before transferring to reside
         in the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR); (ii) assuming that it  would  be
         safe for the appellant to reside in the IKR in the short term,  the
         practical travel and other logistical arrangements which would need
         to be undertaken to transfer the appellant safely from  Baghdad  to
         the IKR; (iii) on the basis that the  appellant  is  able  to  gain
         entry in the IKR, whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to
         remain living there indefinitely.  The  findings  of  fact  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal shall  stand  and  the  resumed  hearing  shall
         proceed by way of submissions  only.   There  is  no  need  for  an
         interpreter.

         Notice of Decision

         3.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 15 November 2016  is  set  aside.   The  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
         Tribunal Judge Clive Lane) shall remake the  decision  following  a
         resumed hearing at Bradford on a date to be fixed.  The findings of
         fact of the First-tier Tribunal shall  stand.   The  appeal  should
         proceed by way of  submissions  only  in  relation  to  the  issues
         identified above (see paragraph 2).  No interpreter required.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings.

 2. At the resumed hearing on 19 June 2017 at Bradford, Mr  Jones  appeared
    for the appellant and Mrs Pettersen, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, appeared for the respondent.  Mr Jones gave  oral  submissions
    at the hearing and Mrs Pettersen asked if  she  could  send  a  written
    decision to the Tribunal at a later date.   No  submissions  have  been
    received from her or any of her colleagues.  I therefore  proceeded  to
    determine the appeal on the basis of Mr Jones's submissions only.

 3. The issues remaining to be determined by the Upper Tribunal were  those
    set out in [2] of my decision of 25 April  2017.   Mr  Jones  submitted
    that the appellant is a Kurd and a Sunni Muslim.   It  is  accepted  by
    both parties that he cannot return to his home area of  Iraq.   He  had
    been living in the United Kingdom for ten years.  I had the benefit  at
    the resumed hearing of a witness statement by  Tori  Sicher  who  is  a
    solicitor at Sutovic & Hartigan acting for the appellant in this  case.
    In that statement, Miss Sicher describes how in March 2017 a number  of
    Iraqi citizens had been detained "in order to be interviewed  by  Iraqi
    authorities in the UK".  The statement records that all the  Iraqis  of
    whom Miss Sicher was aware had been issued with removal  directions  to
    Baghdad.  The removals were to be carried out on the basis of a laissez
    passer; the individuals concerned had no passport, identity  cards  or,
    importantly, CSID cards.

 4. Mr Jones submitted that removals to Baghdad now took place subject to a
    laissez passer which had not been  the  case  at  the  time  the  Upper
    Tribunal promulgated its Croft House decision (now,  following  appeal,
    see AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 ).  Mr  Jones  submitted  that  there
    seemed a realistic possibility, in the light of Miss Sicher's evidence,
    that individuals such as the appellant in this appeal who has  no  CSID
    or passport would be removed on  the  basis  of  a  laissez  passer  to
    Baghdad and that it was important to consider whether he  would  be  at
    risk there.  Mr Jones acknowledged that the appellant could attempt  to
    fly to Erbil in the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR) but there  was  no
    evidence to show how soon he would be able to make a flight.   Once  he
    entered the IKR, issues would arise as to how he would  survive  there;
    unemployment rates are high and he would in the first instance, only be
    granted a visa for ten days.

 5. I considered the submissions very carefully.  It would appear from  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in AA (subsequently subject  to  amended
    country guidance by the Court of Appeal) that, if he  spends  any  time
    living in the capital, an individual such as  the  appellant,  a  Sunni
    Kurd, would be at real  risk.   Significantly,  no  evidence  has  been
    adduced by the respondent to show that  the  appellant  would  be  safe
    during such periods as he may need to remain in Baghdad  before  onward
    transit to the IKR.  I proceeded, therefore,  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant would remain in Baghdad  City  rather  than  at  the  airport
    awaiting a flight to Erbil.  The length of  his  residence  in  Baghdad
    would be uncertain but, in the possession only of a laissez passer, the
    effect of which would have ceased upon his admittance to the country at
    the airport and, in particular, given that he has no CSID he  would  be
    unable to access government or local services and in light of the  fact
    also that he has no family members living in Baghdad, I  find  that  he
    would be at risk there and that expecting him to remain in Baghdad even
    for a short period of time would be unduly  harsh.   In  the  light  of
    those findings, it follows that the appellant's appeal must be allowed.



Notice of Decision

 6. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 18 March 2016 is allowed on asylum and human rights  (Article  3)
    grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 31 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 31 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

