
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03933/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Remotely by Skype for Business       |On 9 November 2020                   |
|On 22 October 2020                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    b h h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott instructed by Hoole & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) I make an  anonymity  order  prohibiting
    the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members
    of the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 3 June 1990.  He  is
    Kurdish and comes from Mala Abdullah Village which is near Kirkuk  City
    in the South West of the Kirkuk Governorate.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  18  January  2017.   He
    claimed asylum on that day when he was arrested on suspicion of illegal
    entry and was detained.  A screening interview took place on 19 January
    2017 and an asylum interview on 13 March 2018.

 4. The basis of the appellant's claim was that in  July  2014  he  started
    work as a tanker driver for a company which, unbeknownst  to  him,  was
    involved in the illegal trade of oil in Iraq shipping  it  between  the
    IKR and Central Iraq.  He claims  that  he  was  arrested  by  the  IKR
    authorities and imprisoned without charge for a  period  of  two  years
    because of his involvement with illegal oil smuggling.  He claimed that
    after two years he was bailed by the IKR authorities, having been  held
    in prison in Sulaymaniyah, subject to a provision of a guarantor.

 5. His case was, in essence, that he was  inadvertently  involved  in  the
    smuggling.  Powerful figures in the IKR (Sheikh Jafar and Abdulla Bour)
    were involved with, or behind, the smuggling operations.   A  trial  of
    high-ranking individuals involved in the smuggling of oil, at which the
    appellant and others would have been witnesses for the prosecution, did
    not take place because of a standoff between the political  parties  in
    the IKR.  It was settled informally.  He  claimed  that  if  the  rival
    political party came to power, then the high-profile individuals behind
    the smuggling would face trial.

 6. The appellant claimed that, on the day he was released from prison,  he
    was shot at in the street by an individual from the rear of a car,  the
    windows of which were blacked out.   A  bullet  hit  him  in  the  chin
    grazing his face.  He believes he was targeted by those involved in the
    illegal smuggling.  The appellant claimed that if he were  returned  to
    Iraq he would face a real risk of persecution and/or serious harm  from
    those who were involved in  smuggling  the  oil  between  the  IKR  and
    Central Iraq.

 7. The appellant also claimed that he is an atheist,  having  relinquished
    his Muslim faith, and he would also be at risk on that basis.

 8. On 9 April 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal

 9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 29 June 2019, Judge Richards-Clarke dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  Although the judge accepted  the  bulk  of  the
    appellant's claim, including that he had been involved  in  an  illegal
    oil smuggling operation and that he had been  shot  at  in  the  street
    following his release from prison, she did not accept that incident was
    connected to the illegal oil smuggling operation and that he  would  on
    return be at risk from the high-ranking IKR individuals as he  claimed.



10. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 30
    October  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Adio)  granted   the
    appellant permission to appeal.

11. Following a part-heard hearing on 12 March 2020 and  a  resumed  remote
    hearing on 30 July 2020, in a determination sent on 3 September 2020  I
    found that the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an
    error of law.  First, I concluded that the judge had erred  in  law  in
    reaching her adverse finding in respect of the appellant's claim to  be
    at risk from high-ranking IKR officials on return as a  result  of  his
    involvement in the  illegal  oil  smuggling  operation  in  July  2014.
    Secondly, and this was conceded by the Secretary of State, I found that
    the judge failed properly to apply the  relevant  country  guidance  in
    relation  to  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  could  obtain  a
    replacement Civil Status Identity  Document  ("CSID")  which  would  be
    essential for his safe passage within Iraq and in order to allow him to
    live in his home area.

12. Consequently, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and,  as
    both parties invited me to do, I  retained  the  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal in order that the decision could be remade in respect  of  the
    appellant's international protection claim and in relation to his claim
    for humanitarian protection.   There  had  been  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8 and that
    decision stood.

The Resumed Hearing

13. The appeal was listed for the resumed hearing on 22 October  2020.   In
    the light of the COVID-19 crisis, the appeal was listed at the  Cardiff
    Civil Justice Centre with me  based  in  court  and  Mr  Draycott,  who
    represented the appellant and Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary
    of State joining the hearing  remotely  via  Skype  for  Business.   In
    addition, the appellant took part  in  the  hearing,  including  giving
    evidence via an interpreter, both of whom joined the hearing via  Skype
    for Business.

14. Mr Draycott sought to rely upon a  supplementary  bundle  of  documents
    together with a number of background  documents  concerning  Iraq.   Mr
    Howells  relied  upon  three  CPIN  documents:  (1)  "Iraq:   Religious
    Minorities"  (October  2019);  (2)"  Iraq:  Security  and  Humanitarian
    Situation"  (May  2020);  (3)   "Iraq:   Internal   Relocation,   Civil
    Documentation and Returns" (June 2020).  None of these  documents  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Both representatives agreed  that  the
    material relied upon by their opponent should be admitted  and,  I  did
    so, in the interest of  justice  under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

The Issues

15. Based upon the submissions of the parties, the issues  in  this  appeal
    are as follows.

          1) First, the appellant contends that he would be at real risk of
             persecution or serious harm due to his political opinion if he
             were returned to Iraq because he would be  at  risk  of  being
             killed or  seriously  harmed  by  those  powerful  individuals
             involved in the illegal oil smuggling operation.


          2) Secondly, the appellant contends that he would be at real risk
             on return to Iraq because of religious reasons, namely because
             he is an atheist.


          3) Thirdly, to the extent that the appellant cannot  establish  a
             Convention reason under basis (1) and (2)  of  his  claim,  he
             contends that he is entitled to humanitarian protection  under
             Art 15(b) of the Qualification  Directive  (Council  Directive
             2004/83/EC) and there would be a breach of Art 3 of  the  ECHR
             as he would be at real risk of serious harm.


          4) Fourthly, although Mr Draycott did not pursue  this  basis  of
             the appellant's claim with any vigour in his oral submissions,
             the appellant also relies upon Art 15(c) of the  Qualification
             Directive, namely that there would be a real risk  of  serious
             harm arising from indiscriminate violence in his home area.


          5) Finally, the appellant contends that he would be  at  risk  of
             serious ill-treatment or harm contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR if
             he is returned to Iraq  as  he  would  not  have  an  identity
             document (such as a CSID), that  would  allow  him  to  travel
             safely from Baghdad (to which he would  be  returned)  to  his
             home area in Kirkuk Governorate.


16. In his oral submissions, Mr Howells accepted  that,  if  the  appellant
    were at risk in his home area,  he  could  not  safely  and  reasonably
    internally relocate either to the IKR (given his past history of  being
    charged and imprisoned there as a result of illegal  smuggling)  or  to
    Baghdad (given he is a single Kurdish  man  with  no  family  or  other
    support in Baghdad).

The Law

17. In relation to the appellant's asylum claim, relying upon  the  Refugee
    Convention (Art 1A(2)), the appellant must establish that  there  is  a
    real risk or reasonable likelihood that on return to Iraq  he  will  be
    persecuted for a Convention reason.  The  relevant  Convention  reasons
    relied upon in this appeal are political opinion (in  relation  to  the
    risk  arising  from  his  previous  involvement  in  an  oil  smuggling
    operation) and religion (arising from his atheism).

18. In relation to the appellant's humanitarian protection claim under  Art
    15(b) and 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, the he  appellant  must
    establish that there are substantial grounds for believing that  he  is
    at real risk of serious harm (torture or inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment) or a serious and individual threat to his life by reason
    of indiscriminate violence.

19. In relation to both claims, the appellant must establish, to the extent
    that any risk emanates from non-state actors, that the  authorities  in
    his home area would not be willing or able to provide a sufficiency  of
    protection.

20. In relation to the appellant's Art 3  claim,  he  must  establish  that
    there is  a  real  risk,  in  the  same  terms  as  Art  15(b)  of  the
    Qualification Directive), namely that he will be subject to serious ill-
    treatment,  i.e.  torture  or  inhuman  or   degrading   treatment   or
    punishment.

21. In relation to each of these claims, the lower standard of proof  (real
    risk or reasonable likelihood) applies to all factual issues.

Discussion and Findings

    1. Preserved Findings

22. It was common ground that a number of factual findings  made  by  Judge
    Richards Clark are preserved for the purposes of remaking the decision.



23. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd who comes  from  Mala  Abdullah  Village
    which is near Kirkuk City in the Kirkuk Governorate.

24. The judge accepted the appellant's account that he was a tanker  driver
    who, in July 2014, had become unwittingly involved in  an  illegal  oil
    smuggling enterprise in which senior PUK  individuals  within  the  IKR
    were involved, namely Sheikh Jafar and Abdulla Bour.  It is plain  from
    the material that Abdulla Bour is a senior officer in the Peshmerga  in
    Kirkuk and Sheikh Jafar is now the Vice President of the IKR.

25. It is accepted  that  the  appellant  was  involved  in  oil  smuggling
    activities between the IKR and  Iraq.   He  was  arrested  by  the  IKR
    intelligence agency (the Asayish) and imprisoned  in  Sulaymaniyah  for
    two years without charge.

26. The judge accepted the appellant's account that whilst  in  prison  the
    authorities had wanted him to  be  a  witness  in  prosecutions  to  be
    brought but which were not as the matter was resolved informally.

27. After two years, the appellant was released on bail.  On the day of his
    release, on the way from the prison, he  was  shot  at  by  an  unknown
    person from a 'blacked-out' car and he sustained an injury on his  chin
    when a bullet grazed him.  Although he does not know  who  was  in  the
    car, he  believes  they  were  associated  with  the  high-ranking  IKR
    individuals and the attack arose because  of  his  involvement  in  the
    illegal oil smuggling operation.

28. The appellant was a Sunni Muslim but is now  an  atheist.   Mr  Howells
    accepted that the judge had made that finding and he did  not,  in  the
    light of that, seek to go behind that finding.

29. Finally, it is accepted that the appellant does not have a CSID in  the
    UK.

    2. The Evidence

30. A number of factual matters remained to  be  resolved.   The  appellant
    gave oral evidence through an interpreter and he  adopted  his  witness
    statement dated 28 May 2019 which had been before the FtT.

31. In the course of the appellant's evidence, a number of factual  matters
    were explored including,  (i)  the  oil  smuggling  operation  and  the
    shooting incident, (ii) the whereabouts of his family in Iraq  and  his
    contact with them, (iii) the whereabouts of any ID documents, (iv)  his
    knowledge of the family's entry in the family book held in Iraq and (v)
    his atheism.

32. In his examination-in-chief, the appellant confirmed that he  had  been
    born in Mala Abdullah Village near Kirkuk.  He also confirmed that  his
    parents had been born within the Kirkuk Governorate.  The  family  home
    was in Mala Abdullah but they had left around 2014 when Daesh came.

33. When asked what family he presently had in Iraq, the appellant said  he
    only had a mother and she was staying with his maternal uncle in Kirkuk
    City.  He said that he was not frequently in contact  with  his  mother
    because she had no access to the internet.  It was only  when  somebody
    was there who had access to the internet that it was possible  to  make
    contact.

34. In relation to his ID documents, the appellant said that his mother was
    not aware where they were.  He said that nothing was left.  He had lost
    everything with the arrival of Daesh.  That had been unexpected and  so
    quick and everything had been left behind.  He accepted, however,  that
    he had taken his Iraqi passport but on arriving in  Turkey,  the  agent
    had taken all his documents from him, including his passport because he
    had been told it would not be safe to keep them.

35. The appellant was asked about the two individuals whom, in  his  asylum
    interview, he had said were behind the illegal oil smuggling operation.
     He had described Sheikh Jafar as being head of "Force 70"  within  the
    Peshmerga.  He was asked what position Sheikh Jafar  now  held  and  he
    said that he was a deputy president of the Kurdish Region.  As  regards
    Abdulla Bour, the appellant  had  said  that  he  was  a  high  profile
    Peshmerga commander.  When asked what his status is now, the  appellant
    replied that he was in charge of the Peshmerga force, he  was  a  major
    general.

36. The appellant was asked what would happen if he  was  returned  to  the
    IKR, and he replied that when he was arrested, the plan was to use  him
    as part of  a  political  move  against  high-ranking  members  of  the
    political parties.  If he returned, those  individuals  would  wish  to
    protect their authority and position and do whatever it took to protect
    themselves.

37. In cross-examination, the appellant was asked about  his  contact  with
    his mother which he said that he did through  WhatsApp  and  Messenger.
    He said that his mother was at his maternal uncle's home  and  he  gave
    that address in Kirkuk City.  He was asked whether his mother and uncle
    had ID documents and he replied that his uncle lived  in  Kirkuk,  that
    his mother had lost hers with the other family documents.  He  said  it
    was not easy to get a replacement as  the  files  had  been  destroyed.
    When he was asked about  how  she  managed  to  live  without  a  CSID,
    including obtaining health services, the appellant said that there were
    different types of ID documents and that she had  been  issued  with  a
    temporary card with a code issued for security purposes by the Asayish.
     When it was suggested to him  that  he  had  now  changed  his  answer
    concerning what documents his mother had, he  said  that  there  was  a
    difference between the CSID and  the  temporary  code  which  had  been
    issued to his mother.

38. The appellant said that he had last seen his mother before the  arrival
    of Daesh.  He had been in Sulaymaniyah taking exams.  He then  recalled
    that  she  had  visited  him  once  in  prison  when  he  was  held  in
    Sulaymaniyah.

39. The appellant was asked some questions concerning  his  documents.   He
    agreed that when in Iraq he had had a passport, a CSID and Registration
    Document.  He said that the CSID had been issued in the office  in  his
    home town of Mala Abdullah.  When he was asked why this would be so  if
    it was a village, the appellant replied that it  was  in  fact  a  town
    where there were public offices and where documents  were  issued.   He
    said the town was simply called Mala Abdullah Village.   The  appellant
    said that he no longer had any of these identification  documents.   He
    denied that these documents were with his family  in  Kirkuk  City  and
    said that they had been destroyed or lost.

40. The appellant was asked whether he knew the  volume  and  page  of  the
    family book.  He said that he did not.  It was not important for him to
    know.  It was put to the appellant that it had  been  accepted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal (in SMO and others (Art 15(c);  Identity  Documents)  CG
    [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC) ("SMO") at [391] - [392]), that this  information
    was very important and that it had to be used many times and was likely
    to be known by an individual.  It was put to the appellant that he  was
    simply pretending not to know the information.   He  replied  that  the
    information  was  not  something  that  an  individual  remembered   or
    memorised.  He said, once you have a  CSID,  it  is  not  important  to
    memorise it.

41. The appellant was asked about the incident in 2014 when  he  was  shot.
    He said that he did not know the individual who had shot him.   It  was
    suggested to the appellant that it was  just  his  suspicion  that  the
    shooting was linked to the oil smuggling operation.   He  replied  that
    that was the only problem  that  he  had  and  he  could  not  see  any
    alternative reason.  There was nothing for him to  suspect  apart  from
    this being linked to the oil smuggling operation.

42. The appellant accepted that the high profile individuals had  not  been
    prosecuted and he said that, with the arrival of Daesh in  the  region,
    that was not a priority.  He  pointed  out  that  Parliament  had  been
    closed and the judiciary not active.  He said there had been an attempt
    to bring the case to court but due to  the  political  climate  at  the
    time, it was no longer a priority.  He said that he had  not  attempted
    to contact anyone in Iraq about any news concerning what was happening.
     When it was suggested that he might contact his paternal  cousin,  who
    had accommodated him in the IKR and arranged his journey out  of  Iraq,
    he responded that he had been in touch with him  but  "to  obtain  what
    information?".

43. The  appellant  said  that  he  did  not  fear  the  Kurdish  or  Iraqi
    authorities but only the two individuals who he had mentioned who  were
    "very powerful individuals".  He accepted  that  he  had  reported  the
    shooting to the police and had been able  to  leave  Iraq  on  his  own
    passport.  He said that that did not mean that the case was at an  end.
    He agreed that after he was shot, and taken to hospital,  he  had  been
    asked if he suspected anyone and he was unable to help as he could  not
    name any names.  He did not know the individual who had shot him.   The
    appellant was asked why, if he returned to  his  home  area  in  Kirkuk
    which was under the control of Iraqi forces and not the  Peshmerga,  he
    would be at risk there.  He replied that  Sheikh  Jafar  was  a  senior
    member or the PUK and deputy president of Kurdistan.   He  was  a  very
    influential member of the PUK.  The appellant said  that  Sheikh  Jafar
    had a lot of influence in Kirkuk.  He said  that  even  though  it  was
    legally under Iraqi control, their  party  was  the  biggest  political
    party and had the biggest political influence.

44. The appellant was asked about his stepbrother with whom he lived in the
    UK.  He was asked whether his stepbrother was in contact with anyone in
    Iraq and the appellant replied that he did not know.  He accepted  that
    if his stepbrother was making contact it would be  with  their  mother.
    He was asked why it was that he was not interested if  his  stepbrother
    had been in contact with his mother.  He replied that  he  had  contact
    with his mother and it would be only if he did not  have  contact  with
    her that he would like to know about  his  stepbrother's  contact.   He
    agreed that his stepbrother had returned to Iraq since he had  obtained
    refugee status in the UK.  He could not remember when  his  stepbrother
    had last gone to Iraq.  He agreed that his stepbrother had gone back to
    visit family but when he was asked whether that was in the Kirkuk area,
    the appellant said that he did not know.  That was his life.  He agreed
    that he had been living with his stepbrother for three years.

45. The appellant was asked why he could not ask  his  family  in  Iraq  to
    obtain ID documents.  He said that  he  would  need  to  be  physically
    present.  He could not have any documents replaced.

46. The appellant was asked a  number  of  questions  about  his  religious
    beliefs.  Some of this evidence need not  to  be  set  out  now  as  Mr
    Howells accepted subsequently, in his submissions, that  the  appellant
    was an atheist.  Some, however, remains relevant  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim to be at risk because of his atheism.

47. In cross-examination, the appellant said that he had  started  to  have
    his views about atheism when he was 17 or 18 in school.  He  said  that
    his beliefs in relation to his religion and the groups around him  made
    him distance himself from his religion.  But there was no set  time  or
    date when he became an  atheist.   He  agreed  that  he  had  gradually
    stopped practising as a Muslim in Iraq.  It did not  happen  overnight.
    It was as he was growing up and that he saw killing people over  words.
    He said that he mostly told his friends about his lack  of  faith  when
    they sat down and had a discussion.  He said it was  not  so  much  his
    friends in Kirkuk unless you had trusted close friends as you could get
    killed for saying something like this in Kirkuk.  He said it was mainly
    when he was living in Sulaymaniyah.  He agreed, however,  that  he  had
    told friends in Kirkuk but only his closest friends.   He  said  "very,
    very few friends knew".

48. It was put to him that in his asylum interview (at  questions  110  and
    111) he had inconsistently said that when asked about his  religion  in
    Kirkuk and why he was not going to the mosque, he had told  individuals
    that he was praying at home.  In his oral evidence, the appellant  said
    that he had been trying to explain that this is what  he  had  said  to
    neighbours not friends.  He agreed that his mother did not know that he
    had become an atheist but that she had known he was not practising  and
    he had told her that he just could not be bothered or that he was lazy.
     He agreed that he had told some friends in  the  UK  that  he  was  an
    atheist when it had come up in discussion and  that  he  had  told  his
    stepbrother.  He said that there was no evidence from  his  stepbrother
    at this hearing because he did not see the need for any such  evidence.
    He said his claim was not on that basis.  He did not accept that he had
    stopped practising his religion since he had come to the UK.   He  said
    that he had already done that before he arrived in the UK.  He said  he
    would not resume practising in Iraq simply because it was the  cultural
    thing to do, he said that he did not believe in doing that.

49. Finally, in cross-examination, the appellant  agreed  that  he  had  no
    physical  or  mental  health  problems  apart  from  suffering  from  a
    digestive system issue brought on by stress which,  he  said,  affected
    his memory as well.

50. In re-examination, the appellant explained  that  when  they  had  left
    their home anything in their homes worth  taking  or  being  looted  by
    Daesh  members  were  taken  so  all  their  possessions  were   taken.
    Documents in public offices were burnt.  When asked what  had  happened
    to the CSA Offices in Kirkuk or Mala Abdullah when they were under  the
    control of Daesh, he said that those  public  offices  were  no  longer
    functioning.  All documents were burnt and destroyed.  He  agreed  that
    he had not seen this happening but it is what he had seen  through  the
    media and what people had witnessed.  He had not seen it himself.

51. Finally, when asked about Shia militia in Kirkuk, and how did he  think
    they would react if they discovered he was an  atheist,  the  appellant
    said that they would see it as a good thing to kill him.

    3. The Submissions

52. In relation to the factual issues, Mr Howells relied  on  a  number  of
    matters arising from the appellant's oral evidence which, he submitted,
    called into question his credibility.

53. First, he submitted that the appellant had inconsistently  referred  to
    his home as being in Mala Abdullah which was a  village  and  had  then
    said it was a town when  identifying  that  the  CSA  Office  had  been
    destroyed when overrun by Daesh.  Secondly,  the  appellant  had  first
    said, in his relation to his mother who was living with  his  uncle  in
    Kirkuk City, that she had no CSID but he now said  that  she  had  been
    issued with a temporary document by the Asayish in order to explain how
    she was able to live and obtain services.  Mr Howells  relied  on  that
    change in the appellant's account.  Thirdly, Mr Howells relied upon the
    appellant's evidence in relation to his stepbrother with whom he agreed
    he had lived for three years in the UK.  Mr Howells submitted  that  it
    was not plausible that the appellant would not know if his  stepbrother
    was in contact with family in Iraq, in particular with their mother  in
    Kirkuk City.  Mr Howells submitted that on the issue of availability of
    documentation, contacts and visits by the  appellant's  stepbrother  to
    Iraq, this was important and the appellant was obscuring the  position.



54. Further, Mr Howells invited me to  find  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established  that  the  appellant  had  been  shot  at  by  individuals
    associated with the oil smuggling operation and  that  consequently  he
    was at risk from them on return to Iraq.

55. Mr Howells accepted that Sheikh Jaffar was the Vice  President  of  the
    IKR and that Abdulla Bour was a major general in the Kirkuk  Peshmerga.
    However, Mr Howells submitted that Kirkuk  City  (and  Kirkuk  Province
    generally) whilst disputed was governed by Iraqi government forces with
    the presence of PMU militia (citing para 7.3.1 of the  May  2020  CPIN,
    "Iraq: Security and Humanitarian Situation").  Mr Howells invited me to
    conclude that there was no evidence that Sheikh Jafar or  Abdulla  Bour
    exerted any power or influence in Kirkuk so as to pose a threat to  the
    appellant in his home area.

56. As regards the  appellant's  atheism,  Mr  Howells  accepted  that  the
    appellant was an atheist but that was not the same  as  apostacy.   The
    appellant had not engaged in public criticism of Islam either  in  Iraq
    or the UK and he did not claim he would do so on return  to  Iraq.   Mr
    Howells pointed out that the appellant had lived with his doubts  about
    Islam in Iraq before he  had  left  and  that  he  had  not  told  many
    individuals about his atheism.  Mr Howells relied upon Section 7 of the
    CPIN, "Iraq: Religious Minorities" (October  2019)  pointing  out  that
    there was no specific law prohibiting atheism and,  although  society's
    toleration was limited, the evidence did not establish there was a real
    risk on this basis.

57. As regards  Art  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive,  Mr  Howells
    submitted that, on the basis of SMO, there was no general risk  falling
    within Art 15(c) in Kirkuk Governorate including the  appellant's  home
    area.  Even applying the  'sliding-scale'  approach,  including  having
    regard to the appellant's atheism,  there  was  no  real  risk  to  the
    appellant in his home area providing he was returned with  an  identity
    document.

58. In relation to documentation, Mr Howells submitted that  the  appellant
    could be safely returned to Iraq with documentation.  He accepted  that
    the appellant could not obtain a CSID or the new INID  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy in the UK.

59. However, Mr Howells submitted that it was likely  that  the  family  in
    Kirkuk had the appellant's documents which he had left in Iraq.  He was
    in contact with his mother and maternal uncle and he could obtain those
    documents before returning to Iraq.

60. In any event, on the basis of [391]-[392] of SMO, Mr Howells  submitted
    that the appellant was likely to know  the  details  of  the  page  and
    volume number  of  the  family  book.   He  did  not  fall  within  any
    exceptions recognised in SMO -  he  had  no  mental  health  issues  or
    numeracy or literacy issues and he had not left at  a  young  age.   He
    submitted that his family could, as a consequence, obtain a  CSID  from
    the relevant CSA Office in Kirkuk.

61. In addition,  Mr  Howells  submitted,  relying  upon  the  CPIN  "Iraq:
    Internal Relocation, Civil Documentation and Returns"  (June  2020)  at
    para 2.6.15 - 2.6.16, that the appellant could  obtain  a  Registration
    Document (1957) from the Iraqi Embassy which could be used, not only to
    obtain an INID on return to Iraq, but which would  also  allow  him  to
    safely return from Baghdad to his home area.  He submitted  that  there
    was no reason to believe that if the Iraqi Embassy would issue  such  a
    document in the UK that  it  would  not  allow  individuals  to  travel
    onwards from Baghdad safely.  That was not an issue  addressed  in  SMO
    because the evidence then was that the Embassy was issuing  CSIDs.   Mr
    Howells accepted that the appellant would not be able to obtain  (by  a
    proxy) a document from Kirkuk City as SMO demonstrated that they had an
    INID terminal and did not, therefore, issue CSIDs anymore.

62. Mr Draycott relied upon his skeleton argument which he adapted to  deal
    with the issues that remained live at the hearing.

63. First, he submitted that I should accept that the  appellant  had  been
    shot at as a result of his involvement with the illegal  oil  smuggling
    enterprise.  Mr Draycott  submitted  that  the  incident  had  all  the
    hallmarks of a professional 'hit man'.  There was no  other  reasonable
    explanation for the incident.  Mr Draycott submitted that the appellant
    had been consistent that Sheikh Jafar and Abdulla Bour,  both  of  whom
    were associated with the PUK and Peshmerga, had been  involved  in  the
    underlying oil smuggling  operation.   They  were,  as  the  background
    evidence  showed,  highly  influential  individuals  being   the   Vice
    President of the IKR and a senior officer  in  the  Peshmerga.   Sheikh
    Jafar's influence, now that he was Vice President, was likely  to  have
    increased since the attack in 2014.  Mr  Draycott  submitted  that  the
    appellant was at risk because the proceedings were  ongoing  and  there
    remained the possibility of prosecutions.  He submitted  that  applying
    para 339K of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) the evidence  of
    past persecution was relevant and pointed to a future risk unless there
    was good reason to think otherwise.  Mr  Draycott  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State could not point to anything that would displace this
    presumption.  Mr Draycott submitted that, given the level of corruption
    throughout Iraq, someone as powerful as the Vice President of  the  IKR
    or who is a senior officer in the Peshmerga would likely have  contacts
    in the government of Iraq, including  having  an  influence  in  Kirkuk
    which bordered with the IKR.

64. In relation to the appellant's atheism, Mr Draycott  relied  upon  para
    7.1.1 and 7.1.2 of the CPIN.  He submitted that the appellant would  be
    at risk on return including because in the redocumentation  process  he
    would have to give his religious  affiliation.   Although  Mr  Draycott
    submitted that that would not create an immediate risk,  thereafter  he
    might be required to lie and that following HJ  (Iran)  v  SSHD  [2010]
    UKSC 31 he was at risk of serious harm if it became known in Iraq.

65. Mr Draycott submitted that the appellant should succeed in  his  asylum
    claim on the basis of imputed political opinion and religion.

66. As regards Art 15(c), Mr Draycott did not address me on  this  part  of
    the appellant's claim.

67. As regards redocumentation, Mr Draycott pointed out that the  Secretary
    of State recognised that the appellant could not obtain a CSID from the
    Iraqi Embassy in the UK.

68. As regards obtaining any document in Iraq, Mr Draycott  submitted  that
    it was more likely than not that the office  in  the  appellant's  home
    area, which had been under the control of ISIL, had been destroyed  and
    so a replacement could not be obtained.

69. As regards Mr Howells' submission that the  appellant  could  obtain  a
    Registration Document (1957) from the  Iraqi  Embassy  in  the  UK,  Mr
    Draycott submitted that there was no evidence to  establish  that  this
    document would permit the appellant to travel  safely  between  Baghdad
    and his home area when confronted at checkpoints by Shia  militia.   He
    submitted that the evidence did not support a finding that the  journey
    could be safely made.  Mr Draycott pointed out that the  evidence  from
    the Iraqi Embassy could not be relied upon  to  establish  the  claimed
    effect of possessing  a  Registration  Document  (1957).   Mr  Draycott
    pointed out that the UT in SMO had rejected  other  evidence  from  the
    Iraqi Embassy that a 'laissez passer' or a 'certification letter' would
    be sufficient to travel safely.

70. Finally, in relation to the points relied upon by Mr  Howells  relevant
    to the appellant's credibility, Mr Draycott submitted that  these  were
    not significant.  The appellant had explained why  his  home  area  was
    called a "Village" as part of its name but was, in fact, a town.  There
    was  nothing  inconsistent  in  the  appellant's  evidence  about  what
    documents his mother possessed.  Finally, the evidence  concerning  his
    stepbrother's contact with his mother and his visits to  Iraq  and  the
    appellant's knowledge of those matters, was 'neither here nor there'.

71. Mr Draycott invited me  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds or on humanitarian protection grounds and Art 3 of the ECHR.

    4. My Conclusions

72. My starting  point  is  Judge  Richards-Clarke's  positive  credibility
    finding which resulted in her accepting virtually all  the  appellant's
    evidence.  The only part of her evidence she did not accept, or find in
    his favour upon, was his belief that the shooting incident  arose  from
    his involvement with the illegal oil smuggling operation.  That was, as
    he said in his evidence before me, something which he accepted  he  did
    not know but was simply his belief because he could not  think  of  any
    other reason why he would have been attacked in this way.  The  judge's
    non-acceptance of the fact underlying his belief in  no  way  reflected
    upon  his  credibility  and  truthfulness  upon  matters   within   his
    knowledge.

73. I also found the appellant to be a truthful  witness  when  giving  his
    evidence before me.  He did so in a clear and unrehearsed  way.   I  do
    not accept Mr Howells' submission that aspects  of  his  evidence  were
    significant enough to  call  into  question  his  credibility  and  the
    truthfulness  of  his  evidence.   He  gave   an   entirely   plausible
    explanation as to why his home area of Mala Abdullah was in fact a town
    (in size) whilst it was called  as  part  of  its  name  Mala  Abdullah
    Village.  Further,  the  appellant's  explanation  about  his  mother's
    documentation was  not,  in  my  judgment,  something  which  raised  a
    reasonable suspicion that he was not seeking to  tell  the  truth.   He
    accepted that she did not have her CSID but that  she  had  obtained  a
    temporary code in order to live  in  Kirkuk  City.   I  agree  with  Mr
    Howells,  however,  that  the  appellant's  lack  of  interest  in  his
    stepbrother's contact with their mother or visits to Iraq was difficult
    to understand.  It does not, however, lead me to distrust the  veracity
    of the appellant on the central features of his claim.  Overall,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant was seeking to tell the  truth  and  I  am
    satisfied that I can rely upon his  evidence  in  reaching  my  factual
    findings.

74. First, as regards the shooting incident, that incident is  accepted  as
    having occurred as a result of the judge's earlier  finding.   I  agree
    with Mr Draycott's submission that  the  description  of  this  by  the
    appellant, involving a parked car with blackened windows from which the
    appellant was shot by an individual sitting in the rear,  has  all  the
    hallmarks of a 'hitman' attack.  There is nothing  in  the  appellant's
    history, or suggested to be in  the  appellant's  history,  that  could
    explain this incident apart from his accepted involvement in an illegal
    oil smuggling operation.   Given  that  it  is  accepted  that  he  was
    imprisoned for two years, and that he was lined up to be a witness in a
    prosecution which involved an illegal smuggling operation in which  two
    senior figures in the IKR were involved, it is a  reasonable  inference
    that it was this (and the prospect that he  might  be  a  witness  that
    could implicate them) that led to the attack.  It can be no coincidence
    that it occurred shortly after he had been released from  prison.   The
    unlikelihood of that coincidence together with the nature of the attack
    itself leads me to accept, on the lower standard, that the  attack  was
    instigated by those who had been  involved  in  the  illegal  smuggling
    operation and feared the appellant's involvement as a  witness  in  any
    prosecution.  The position of prominence of the two  individuals  which
    the appellant has named, and the judge  accepted,  is  consistent  with
    such an attack (and having knowledge of his release) to  protect  their
    reputation and positions.

75. I accept also that despite having been released  on  bail  there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that, at  some  point  in  the  future,  the  IKR
    authorities might reactivate a prosecution of individuals with the risk
    of implicating the high-ranking  individuals  that  the  appellant  has
    identified.  In  my  judgment,  this  risk  is  only  enhanced  by  the
    increased prominence of at least one of those individuals in the IKR at
    present.

76. Mr Howells submits that any risk arises only in the IKR  -  the  attack
    took place in Sulaymaniyah - and not in Kirkuk  Governorate  where  the
    appellant's home area is located.  He relies upon  the  fact  that  the
    Iraqi authorities are in control of Kirkuk Governorate where the  Iraqi
    Army and PMU units operate (see CIPN (May 2020)  at  7.3.1).   That  is
    undoubtedly the factual position.  However, the appellant's  home  area
    has a border with the IKR.   Kirkuk  Governorate  is  a  disputed  area
    between the Iraqi government and the  IKR.   Mr  Draycott  took  me  to
    material that demonstrates levels of corruption within  Iraq  generally
    (see, e.g. Human Rights Watch, "We Might Call You in at Any Time:  Free
    Speech under Threat in Iraq" (June 2020)) and Mr Howells did  not  seek
    to counter Mr Draycott's suggestion that that was the position in Iraq.
     Whilst it would be mere speculation as  to   whether  the  appellant's
    home area might be taken over by the IKR  authorities,  it  is,  in  my
    judgment, reasonable to infer that given the geographical proximity and
    the prominence of the individuals whose reputation and  position  might
    be affected if the  appellant  were  to  become  involved  again  in  a
    potential prosecution, that their reach could extend to the appellant's
    home area if they wished to take coercive action against him to prevent
    him giving evidence against them.

77. The standard of proof is the  lower  one  applicable  in  international
    protection cases.  Mr Draycott  also  relied  upon  para  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules that past persecution or serious harm is  a  "serious
    indication" of the individual's well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or
    real risk of serious harm in the future unless there are "good  reasons
    to  consider  that  such  persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be
    repeated".  The appellant has  been  subject  to  a  past  incident  of
    persecution or potential serious harm when he  was  the  subject  of  a
    shooting (as I have found because  of  his  prior  involvement  in  the
    illegal oil smuggling operation) and, in my judgment, the Secretary  of
    State  has  provided  no  "good  reasons"  to  deflate   the   "serious
    indication" or future  risk  that  follows  from  that  incident  being
    established.

78. Mr Howells did not suggest in his submissions  that  any  risk  to  the
    appellant could or would be obviated by the provision of a  sufficiency
    of protection from the Iraqi government in his home  area.   Given  the
    prominence, and undoubted power, of those  behind  any  attack  on  the
    appellant, I  am  satisfied  that  even  if  the  Iraqi  government  or
    authorities were willing to provide protection to  the  appellant  they
    would not to reasonable level be able to provide protection.  As I have
    said, Mr  Howells  did  not  address  me  on  this  issue  and  suggest
    otherwise.

79. In these circumstances, I therefore find that there is a real risk that
    the appellant will be subject to persecution  or  serious  harm  if  he
    returns to his home area as a result of his prior  involvement  in  the
    illegal oil smuggling operation.

80. What I do  not  accept,  however,  is  that  this  risk  arises  for  a
    'Convention reason', namely because of his actual or imputed  political
    opinion.

81. Mr Draycott did  not  take  me  to  any  supporting  material  for  his
    submission that, the appellant has established this Convention  reason.
    A helpful case is Suarez v SSHD [2002] EWCA  Civ  722.   The  Court  of
    Appeal was concerned with a claim by a former soldier of the  Colombian
    Army who  had  taken  a  stance  against  the  endemic  corruption  and
    lawlessness in Colombia having witnessed the criminal activities of his
    immediate commanding officer (which included murder)  and  whether  the
    risk of persecution was for 'imputed  political  opinion'.   The  Court
    recognised the core issue was the motivation of  the  persecutor.   The
    Court  upheld  the  decision  that  the  Convention  reason   was   not
    established.  At [29]-[30], Potter LJ said this:

         "29. When dealing with the motivation of a persecutor, it has to be
         appreciated that he may have more than one motive. However, so long
         as an applicant can establish  that  one  of  the  motives  of  his
         persecutor  is  a  Convention  ground  and  that  the   applicant's
         reasonable fear relates to persecution on that ground, that will be
         sufficient. Thus, if the maker  of  a  complaint  relating  to  the
         criminal conduct of another is persecuted because that complaint is
         perceived as an expression or manifestation  of  an  opinion  which
         challenges governmental authority, then  that  may  in  appropriate
         circumstances amount  to  an  imputed  political  opinion  for  the
         purposes of the Convention. That is made  clear  in  the  Colombian
         context in Gomez at 560 para 22. Although, in the case of Gomez  [v
         SSHD [2000] INLR 549], the acts of  persecution  of  the  appellant
         were those  of  non-state  actors,  namely  members  of  the  armed
         opposition  group  FARC,  the  decision  contains  an  illuminating
         discussion, replete with reference to authority,  of  the  problems
         associated with the  notion  of  imputed  political  opinion  in  a
         society where  the  borderlines  between  the  political  and  non-
         political have been distorted so that it is  difficult  to  draw  a
         distinction between governmental authority  on  the  one  hand  and
         criminal activity on the other.


         30.  In such cases, the political nature of an applicant's  actions
         or of the opinions which may be imputed to him in the light of such
         actions must be judged in the context of the conditions  prevailing
         in his country of origin. Thus, what may  in  a  relatively  stable
         society be a valid distinction between a crime  committed  for  the
         purposes of revenge, intimidation or the furtherance of some  other
         personal interest on  the  one  hand,  and  a  political  crime  of
         repression on the other, may not  hold  good  in  a  society  where
         violence and repression are  routinely  used  to  stifle  political
         opinion or any challenge to established authority: see paras  (42)-
         (45) of Gomez."


82. At [40]-[41], Potter LJ upheld the IAT's conclusion that the judge  had
    been  entitled  to  find  that  'imputed  political  opinion'  by   the
    individual's persecutors had not been established:

         "40. On the  particular  facts  of  this  case,  the  claimant  had
         witnessed a murder committed by three of his immediate superiors in
         circumstances where there is no suggestion  such  action  had  been
         authorised by, or enjoyed the approval of, higher authority  within
         the army. On the next day, when the appellant  protested  at  these
         matters, he was immediately threatened by one  of  those  superiors
         that he would be killed if he said anything and, within hours,  the
         perpetrators of the crime had shot at him, killing his  friend  and
         causing him to flee. It was also his case that, on his return home,
         the follow-up threats and shooting which took place two days  later
         where the work of the same perpetrators in  an  effort  to  silence
         him. His fear as to what might happen on his return  was  not  that
         the  government  or  higher  authorities  within  the  army   would
         persecute him on the ground of his political opinions but  that  he
         might go to prison for desertion  where  the  perpetrators  of  the
         crime might yet seek to kill him in order to secure his silence.


         41.  In these circumstances, it was plainly  open  to  the  IAT  to
         find, as the Special Adjudicator had found, that if true  this  was
         the case of a man (laudably it should be said) who had protested at
         a criminal act or acts by three of  his  immediate  superiors,  who
         then sought to silence him to prevent him from taking  that  matter
         further. While he feared for his safety on his return  to  Colombia
         on the basis that the same men might get to him in  prison,  should
         he be sentenced for desertion, there was no reason to suppose,  nor
         did the appellant really suggest, that reprisals  would  come  from
         any other quarter or for any other reason."


83. Keene LJ and Sumner J agreed.  Keene LJ added this at [46]:

         "46. I would only add that I accept that there can be  cases  where
         the risk of persecution arises from  a  mixture  of  political  and
         criminal reasons,  particularly  in  a  society  such  as  Columbia
         currently  is,  where  criminal  economic  activity   may   support
         political structures. But it is wrong to assume  that  all  actions
         aimed at preventing the exposure of criminal activities in  such  a
         society can be characterised as imputing a political opinion to the
         witness. These matters need to be looked  at  on  a  case  by  case
         basis. In the present case, the Special Adjudicator found that  the
         commanding officer:


             "was concerned to silence the appellant in order to avoid  the
             consequences of criminal prosecution if  his  activities  were
             exposed ... I was not satisfied  that  any  general  political
             opinion could be imputed to [the appellant] along the lines of
             his being on the side of law and order and against  the  "dark
             forces" of guerrillas and criminal gangs.""


84. I accept that a person who is  involved  in  prosecutions  relating  to
    corruption (especially if it involves governmental  figures)  might  be
    expressing a political opinion or, at least, be perceived as expressing
    political opinion.  In my judgment, however, the view taken  in  Suarez
    is applicable in this appeal.  The  evidence  in  this  case  does  not
    establish that would be the appellant's actual motivation  or  that  it
    would be imputed to him by his potential persecutors.   As  in  Suarez,
    the appellant will, at its highest, be exposing  criminal  activity  by
    others, including high ranking IKR individuals.  Their activities  were
    not on behalf of the IKR Government but were those  individuals'  self-
    interested criminal acts.  The reasonable inference I am able  to  draw
    is the same as in Suarez, namely that the risk to the  appellant  arise
    would arises from their desire "to silence the appellant  in  order  to
    avoid the consequences of criminal  prosecutions  if  their  activities
    [are] exposed" and not because any political opinion would  be  imputed
    to him despite the evidence, to  which  Mr  Draycott  referred  me,  of
    corruption in Iraq (including the  IKR).   The  basis  upon  which  the
    appellant would be persecuted or be subjected to serious  ill-treatment
    would be simply to prevent him from taking part in a prosecution  as  a
    witness.  It would not be because of his actual or perceived  political
    opinion.

85. However, although I do not accept that the  appellant  can  succeed  on
    this  basis  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  the  fact  that  it   is
    established that he is at real risk of serious harm means  that  he  is
    entitled to succeed in a claim for humanitarian  protection  under  Art
    15(b) of the Qualification Directive and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

86. The alternative basis upon which the appellant put his asylum claim was
    that there is a real risk of persecution or serious harm on  return  to
    Iraq because of his atheism.  That undoubtedly, and it was accepted  by
    the respondent, engages a Refugee  Convention  reason.   The  issue  is
    whether, because of his atheism, the  appellant  is  at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return.  The relevant material to which my attention was
    drawn is set out in the CPIN "Iraq: Religious Minorities" at Section 7.
     At paras 7.1.1 - 7.1.4 the CPIN sets out the following material:

         "7 Atheists


         7.1.1    UNHCR in its 'International Protection Considerations with
         Regard to People Fleeing the Republic of  Iraq'  published  in  May
         2019 summarised that:


         'Although open atheism is extremely rare in  Iraq,  the  number  of
         atheists is reported to be on the rise. Although there are no  laws
         prohibiting "atheism", in some instances, atheists have  reportedly
         been prosecuted for "desecration of religions" and related charges.
         Moreover, societal tolerance vis--vis atheists is reported  to  be
         very limited, as evidenced also by  the  public  rhetoric  of  some
         politicians  and  religious  leaders.  For   fear   of   rejection,
         discrimination and violence at the hands of their families, private
         vigilantes and conservative/hardline religious groups, atheists are
         reported to often keep their views secret.'


         7.1.2    The June 2019 EASO Guidance on Iraq report stated that:


         'Atheism is not illegal in Iraq, but State actors typically  equate
         atheism with blasphemy. Although there are not any articles in  the
         Iraqi Penal Code that provide for a direct punishment for  atheism,
         the desecration of religions is penalised. In  March  2018,  arrest
         warrants were issued in Dhi Qar against four Iraqis on  charges  of
         atheism.  According  to  COI  sources,  no   recent   examples   of
         prosecution of atheists in the KRI have been reported.


         'In Iraq, atheists are reportedly  viewed  with  disdain  and  face
         threats. It is reported that persons who openly admit they are  not
         religious would risk arrest in, for example, Baghdad and the South,
         whereas in the KRI there would be more freedom of  expression  with
         regards to religious  beliefs.  According  to  COI  sources,  Kurds
         primarily identify themselves in terms of their ethnicity  and  not
         their religious affiliation.


         'While  atheism  is  rare  in  Iraq,  the  number  of  atheists  is
         reportedly growing. Secularism is also on the rise  amongst  Iraq's
         youth. A  poll  released  in  2011  recorded  that  67%  of  Iraq's
         population  answered  that  they  believe  in  God,  21%   answered
         probably, whilst 7% answered that they  did  not  believe  in  God.
         There are many Iraqi websites and blogs that cater to atheists, but
         membership lists  are  kept  secret  for  fear  of  persecution  by
         extremist religious groups or the surrounding society.


         'Atheism is in general not well  perceived  in  the  KRI.  However,
         according to some sources, it is somewhat more acceptable to be  an
         atheist than an apostate. Criticism of religious  functionaries  in
         general is quite widespread in  KRI  and  is  not  looked  upon  as
         something  scandalous.   Criticising   Islam   on   social   media,
         particularly on Facebook, has become something of a social trend in
         the KRI, whereas up until recently it was not acceptable.  However,
         proclaiming oneself as an atheist publicly  could  cause  problems.
         There have reportedly  been  cases  in  which  atheists  have  been
         physically threatened, harassed  or  rejected  by  their  families.
         According to COI sources, atheists who  suffer  harassment  due  to
         their beliefs prefer to hide than to report to the police. Although
         the Kurdish government is secular, society in  general,  especially
         in Erbil, is conservative and  people  are  generally  expected  to
         respect Islamic norms.'


         7.1.3    An article published by NBC News in  April  2019  entitled
         'Iraq's  atheists  go  underground  as  Sunni,  Shiite  hard-liners
         dominate' stated:


         'In a move that struck fear in Iraq's small community of  atheists,
         police in October [2018] arrested  Ihsan  Mousa,  the  owner  of  a
         bookstore in southern Iraq. They accused him of selling works  that
         encouraged readers  to  reject  Islam,  according  to  local  media
         reports.


         Col. Rashad Mizel, a local police  official,  told  NBC  News  that
         Mousa had been released after promising not to sell  the  offending
         books again.'


         7.1.4    Arab Weekly also reported on the arrest of Ishan Mousa  in
         an  article  published  in  July  2019  entitled  'Iraq's   growing
         community of atheists no longer peripheral':


         'Bookkeeper Ihsan Mousa was arrested during a police  raid  on  his
         library in late 2018. An official statement by the  Directorate  of
         Intelligence stated that the charge facing Mousa "is the attempt to
         promote and spread atheism."


         'The community in the southern  province  of  Nasriiya,  where  the
         incident took place, rallied behind Mousa. Iraqi writer  Ahmad  al-
         Saadawi criticised the arrest and the evolving saga "as trivial and
         stupid," adding that "authorities are trying  to  build  legitimacy
         under the imposition of a culture of prevention and control."'"


87. As Mr Howells submitted, atheism is  not  the  same  as  apostacy,  i.e
    conversion from Islam to another religion, for  example,  Christianity.
    Apostacy is dealt with in Section 6 of the CPIN Report at paras 6.1.1 -
    6.1.5.  Those paras provide as follows:

         "6 Converts


         6.1.1    UNHCR in its 'International Protection Considerations with
         Regard to People Fleeing the Republic of  Iraq'  published  in  May
         2019 summarised that:


         'The  Penal  Law  does  not  prohibit  conversion  from  Islam   to
         Christianity (or any other religion); however,  the  law  does  not
         provide for the legal recognition of a change  in  one's  religious
         status. As a result, a convert's national identity card would still
         identify its holder as "Muslim". Instances of open conversion  from
         Islam to Christianity in Iraq are very  rarely  reported.  Converts
         are reported to  keep  their  faith  secret  given  the  widespread
         animosity towards converts from Islam in Iraqi society and the fact
         that families and tribes would likely interpret conversion  by  one
         of their members as an affront to their collective  "honour".  Open
         conversion would likely result in ostracism and/or violence at  the
         hands of the individual's community, tribe or  family  as  well  as
         Islamist armed groups.'


         6.1.2    The June 2019 EASO Guidance on Iraq stated that:


         'Apostasy is uncommon in Iraq and is generally seen  as  unnatural.
         Despite its acknowledgment of  religious  diversity,  the  Personal
         status laws and regulations prohibit the conversion of  Muslims  to
         other religions. Whilst civil laws provide a simple process  for  a
         non-Muslim to convert to Islam, conversion of a Muslim  to  another
         religion is forbidden by law. Article 26 of the  National  Identity
         Card Law affirms the right of non-Muslims to convert to Islam,  but
         does not grant the same rights to Muslims. Converts from  Islam  to
         other religions cannot change  their  religion  on  their  identity
         cards after conversion  and  must  continue  to  be  registered  as
         Muslims. Children born to a Muslim and  a  non-Muslim  parents  are
         legally deemed Muslim.


         'According to  COI  sources,  people  who  convert  from  Islam  to
         Christianity may be at risk of being killed in Iraq. While converts
         may encounter difficulties with the authorities, the main source of
         problems is  usually  the  community  and  family,  with  reactions
         varying from one family to another. In some cases,  family  members
         are open-minded and do not react to the conversion in any  way.  In
         others, the convert may be disowned, receive death threats or  even
         be killed. According to  some  sources,  problems  typically  arise
         within the extended family. The treatment  of  female  converts  is
         reportedly much worse than the treatment of men.


         'The situation of the convert may also vary somewhat  depending  on
         the person's social status and tribal  background.  Kurdish  tribes
         could be more permissive  towards  the  convert  compared  to  Arab
         tribes. There are also regional differences, with  reactions  being
         generally harsher in the countryside. The situation for converts is
         reportedly worse in other parts of Iraq as compared to the KRI.  In
         2015, the KRG passed a law  to  protect  the  rights  of  different
         religious groups. There are no reported cases of anyone being tried
         in the KRI for changing religion. Although  the  KRG  supports  the
         Christian converts residing in the KRI,  state  authorities  cannot
         provide the  converts  constant  protection  against  the  possible
         threat posed by their own tribe.  Kurdish  authorities  are  fairly
         tolerant of the Christian converts but it has not been possible for
         converts to e.g. change the official status of religion  for  their
         children. Some years ago Kurdish authorities did, however, register
         a Kurdish Christian group that had converted from Islam. The number
         of Christian converts in the KRI is generally thought to be  around
         a few hundreds.'


         6.1.3    The DFAT report of 2018 stated that:


         'Regulations founded on Islamic law (sharia)  prohibit  individuals
         from converting from the Muslim faith, although DFAT is  not  aware
         of any prosecutions for this. Local churches may refuse  to  accept
         converts for fear of retribution by members of the local community.


         'Under Iraqi law, a child under 18 years old will automatically  be
         converted to Islam if one of  their  non-Muslim  parents  has  also
         converted. Muslims are unable to convert to other religions.  Under
         the Personal Status Law (1959), if one parent is Muslim, the  child
         must be Muslim. This prevents  children  from  choosing  their  own
         religion as adults.'


         6.1.4    The USSD 2018 religious freedom report stated that:


         'Personal status laws and regulations prohibit  the  conversion  of
         Muslims to other religions, and require administrative  designation
         of minor children as Muslims if either parent converts to Islam, or
         if one parent is considered Muslim, even if the child is a  product
         of rape.


         'Civil laws provide a simple process for a non-Muslim to convert to
         Islam, but the law  forbids  conversion  by  a  Muslim  to  another
         religion.


         '... According  to  Christian  leaders,  in  some  cases  Christian
         families formally registered as  Muslim  but  privately  practicing
         Christianity or another faith were forced  to  choose  to  register
         their child as a Muslim or to have the child  remain  undocumented.
         Remaining undocumented would affect the  family's  eligibility  for
         government benefits such  as  school  enrollment  and  ration  card
         allocation for basic food items,  which  depends  on  family  size.
         Larger families with legally registered  children  received  higher
         allotments than those with undocumented children.


         '... The KRG continued to offer support and funding  to  some  non-
         Muslim minorities, but  other  minorities  in  the  IKR,  including
         evangelical Christians, said they continued to face difficulties in
         changing their registration from Muslim to Christian if  they  were
         converts, or engaged in in proselytizing.'


         6.1.5    The U.S. Commission  on  International  Religious  Freedom
         (USCIRF)annual report covering events in 2018 noted that:


         '...the Iraqi government continued to prevent other communities  or
         individuals from freely expressing or practicing their beliefs. The
         2015 National Identity Card  Law  remains  problematic  for  Iraq's
         minorities: Article 26 forces children with one  Muslim  parent  to
         identify  as  Muslim.  It  reinforces  existing  restrictions  that
         Muslims cannot  change  their  religious  identification  on  their
         identity cards after conversion to any  other  religion.  Christian
         leaders have said that in some cases, families  that  are  formally
         registered as Muslim but practice Christianity have fled  to  avoid
         registering their children as Muslims or  to  have  their  children
         remain undocumented. The law remains  in  place,  despite  periodic
         promises by successive Iraqi administrations since 2015 to  revisit
         it.'"


88. In my judgment, the position of apostates - i.e. converts from Islam to
    other religions such as Christianity - is different.   In  relation  to
    converts, for example, some sources stated that such individuals  might
    be "at risk of being killed in Iraq".  By  contrast,  whilst  there  is
    reference to a fear of "discrimination and violence" from families  and
    others reported  by  atheists,  the  overall  impression  left  by  the
    evidence in Section 7 of the CPIN Report (and it was the only  evidence
    relied upon before me) is that there is no general risk of serious harm
    to atheists even if they face some discrimination and  disadvantage  in
    Iraqi  society.   The  CPIN  notes  that  there  is  no  specific   law
    prohibiting  atheism  although  prosecutions  have  been  reported  for
    "desecration of religions".  Whilst there appears to be  "distain"  and
    "potential" threats, against those who are known to  be  atheists,  the
    evidence does not, in my judgment, establish a  real  risk  of  serious
    harm to an individual such as the appellant who is an atheist.

89. Mr Draycott relied on the appellant having to disclose his religion (or
    lack of it) to obtain ID documents.  He accepted that, if this was  the
    case, there was no immediate threat to the appellant.  He relied on the
    impact at Shi'a checkpoints or from Shi'a militia generally if he  were
    stopped.  I was not taken to any detailed evidence on the issue.  I  do
    note, however, what is said in para 6.1.5 (above) of the  CPIN  that  a
    change of religious identification on  the  National  ID  card  is  not
    permitted.

90. I do not accept, on the basis of the evidence  relied  on,  that  there
    would be a real risk to the appellant from Shi'a militia.   It  is  not
    established on the evidence that any ID  document  he  possessed  would
    show that he is an atheist.  That they would know,  or  ask  about  his
    religion, is not demonstrated.

91. Mr Draycott also relied upon HJ (Iran), but that  case  has  no  direct
    application to the appellant's circumstances.  The appellant's evidence
    was that he had told close friends, including in Kirkuk, but mainly  in
    Sulaymaniyah about his atheism.  He also told me about his fear  if  it
    became more widely known.  Indeed, he said that he did not  explain  it
    to his neighbours and, in effect, he prevaricated and  dissembled  when
    asked by his mother about his not attending the mosque.   I  also  note
    that during his evidence the appellant explained as one reason why  his
    step-brother was not giving evidence about his religion that it was not
    the basis of his claim.  Even if he were not to disclose  his  atheism,
    it would not be, in my judgment, to avoid persecution or serious  harm.



92. I do not accept that any subjective fear is well-founded or that  there
    is a real risk to him even if his atheism was more generally  known  in
    his home area.  Mr Draycott did not rely upon any position expressed in
    any of the country guidance decisions including SMO which  suggested  a
    general risk to atheists in Iraq such that the Refugee Convention would
    be engaged.  The only material to which I was referred is that which  I
    have set out above in the relevant CPIN.  That evidence does not, in my
    judgment, sustain a finding that atheists (such as the  appellant)  are
    at real risk of persecution or serious harm because of their beliefs.

93. For these reasons, therefore, the appellant  has  not  established  his
    claim on the two  bases  relied  upon  under  the  Refugee  Convention.
    However, for the reasons I have already given, he has established  that
    he is entitled to humanitarian protection  or  that  his  return  would
    breach Art 3 of the ECHR.

94. The remaining bases of his claim relies upon Art 15(c) and, it is said,
    the absence of relevant ID documentation on return  to  Iraq.   I  will
    take each of these in turn.

95. As regards Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, Mr  Draycott  made
    no oral submissions in support of this basis of the appellant's  claim.
    He did, however, continue to rely upon it in his skeleton argument.  In
    my judgment, the claim under Art 15(c) does not succeed.

96. In SMO the UT recognised that there was no general risk of serious harm
    arising  from  indiscriminate  violence  in  Kirkuk  Governorate   (see
    [425(30)]).  In SMO, the UT adopted the 'sliding-scale' approach of the
    CJEU in Elgafaji v Staatssecretaris van Jutsitie  (C-465/07)  [2009]  2
    CMLR 45 at [39] and Diakite v Commissaire gnral aux rfugis  et  aux
    apatrides (C-285/12) [2014] 1 WLR 2477 at [31], the UT  said  this  (at
    [32]):

         "At [31] the Court [in Diakite] reaffirmed the view it expressed in
         Elgafaji at [39] that Article 15(c) also contains (what  UNHCR  has
         termed) a "sliding scale" such that "the more the applicant is able
         to show that he is  specifically  affected  by  reason  of  factors
         particular to his personal circumstances, the lower  the  level  of
         indiscriminate  violence  required  for  him  to  be  eligible  for
         subsidiary protection."  The Court thereby recognised that a person
         may still be accorded protection even when  the  general  level  of
         violence is not very high if they are able to show that  there  are
         specific reasons, over and above them  being  mere  civilians,  for
         being affected by the indiscriminate violence.   In  this  way  the
         Article 15(c) inquiry is two-pronged: (a) it asks whether the level
         of violence is so  high  that  there  is  a  general  risk  to  all
         civilians; (b) it asks that even if there is  not  such  a  general
         risk, there  is  a  specific  risk  based  on  the  "sliding-scale"
         notion."


97. The UT went on in [250(32)] to identify the 'sliding-scale'  assessment
    as follows:

         "The situation in the Formerly Contested Areas (the governorates of
         Anbar, Diyala,  Kirkuk,  Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-Din)  is  complex,
         encompassing ethnic, political and humanitarian issues which differ
         by region.  Whether the return of an individual  to  such  an  area
         would be contrary  to  Article  15(c)  requires  a  fact-sensitive,
         'sliding-scale' assessment  to  which  the  following  matters  are
         relevant."


98. Then at [425(33)] and [425(34)] the UT set out the relevant matters  as
    follows:

         "33. Those with an actual or perceived association  with  ISIL  are
             likely to be at enhanced risk throughout Iraq.  In those areas
             in which ISIL retains an active presence,  those  who  have  a
             current personal association with local or national government
             or the security apparatus are likely to be at enhanced risk.


         34.  The impact of  any  of  the  personal  characteristics  listed
             immediately below  must  be  carefully  assessed  against  the
             situation in the area in which return  is  contemplated,  with
             particular reference to the extent of  ongoing  ISIL  activity
             and the behaviour of the security actors in  control  of  that
             area.  Within the framework of such  an  analysis,  the  other
             personal characteristics which are capable of being  relevant,
             individually and cumulatively, to the  sliding-scale  analysis
             required by Article 15(c) are as follows:


             .    opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the KRG  or  local
                  security actors;


             .    membership of a national, ethnic or religious group which
                  is either in the minority in the area in question, or  not
                  in de facto control of that area;


             .    LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to Islamic  mores
                  and wealthy or Westernised individuals;


             .    humanitarian or medical staff and those  associated  with
                  Western organisations or security forces;


             .    women and children without general family support; and


             .    individuals with disabilities."


99. The UT set out the evidence relating to the Kirkuk Governorate at [24]-
    [50]  of  its  determination.   At  [251]-[257]  the  UT  set  out  its
    conclusions in relation to Kirkuk Governorate as follows.

         "Kirkuk Governorate


         251. All of Kirkuk governorate is disputed between the GOI and  the
             IKR.  It is an ethnically diverse governorate which has seen a
             great deal of upheaval in recent decades.  We were  struck  by
             Dr Fatah's evidence that an individual who had lived in Kirkuk
             since the 1970's would  have  seen  it  change  hands  several
             times.  Kirkuk City itself was never taken  by  ISIL  although
             Hawija was, and Hawija was one of the last places in  Iraq  to
             be liberated, in October 2017.  The battle for  Hawija  caused
             significant damage to its infrastructure.  Since control  over
             Kirkuk was taken back from the peshmerga in the  aftermath  of
             the Kurdish Independence Referendum, the whole governorate  is
             controlled by the ISF, with  a  significant  presence  of  PMU
             militia.


         252. ISIL controls no territory as such in Kirkuk  governorate  but
             it is certainly present and active, particularly in the  areas
             surrounding  Hawija  and  the  Hamrin  Mountains.   There  are
             pockets of fighters in these areas, or  permanently  operating
             attack cells, as  they  are  also  called  in  the  background
             material.  We accept Dr Fatah's evidence that  around  half  a
             million  people  live  in  the  areas  in  which  these  cells
             operate.


         253. The statistics we have recorded above show a sharp fall in the
             number of  civilians  killed.   We  recall  just  one  of  the
             datasets before us: IBC recorded 950 civilian  deaths  in  the
             governorate in 2017, which fell to 276 in 2018.  The intensity
             fell from 62.9 civilians deaths per 100,000 population in 2017
             to 18.3 in 2018.


         254. ISIL's main focus in Kirkuk is to attack specific targets, who
             are usually authority figures or  those  associated  with  the
             security services.  More recently, as recorded in the  Musings
             blog, they have  also  been  burning  farms  and  agricultural
             infrastructure, and it is this activity which was  responsible
             for the increased number of security incidents recorded in the
             blog in May 2019.  It is notable that there have been frequent
             attacks of this nature in Kirkuk, particularly  in  the  South
             West of the city, which is the  area  nearest  to  the  Hamrin
             Mountain range, in which  ISIL  retains  a  constant  presence
             despite some ISF successes in locating  and  destroying  their
             cells.  The White Flag group also operates there, although its
             activities are limited.


         255. All commentators agree  that  ISIL  is  attempting  to  regain
             control of rural areas in  this  governorate.   Concerns  have
             been  expressed  about  their  attempts  to  regroup  in   the
             governorate.  The killing of village mukhtars and the  attacks
             on farms  are  part  of  that  plan.   There  have  also  been
             skirmishes during the day time.   Civilians  have  undoubtedly
             been affected by the violence, particularly  in  rural  areas,
             but also in Kirkuk city and during  checkpoints  attacks.   We
             note that EASO recorded one assessment as  being  that  Hawija
             and  Daquq  Districts  are  actually  contested,  due  to  the
             physical and psychological pressure exerted by ISIL  over  the
             population.  Dr Fatah declined to use that label when  it  was
             put to him, although he said that the situation  was  bad  and
             that the White Flags also continued to operate  in  the  area.




         256. There  is  a  security  vacuum  in  the  rural  parts  of  the
             governorate, left by the departure of the  peshmerga  in  late
             2017.  ISIL has some support in the region and has  been  able
             to move freely and expand its operations in the  region  as  a
             result of that vacuum.  It is regarded  as  one  of  the  core
             areas for ISIL's rebuilding efforts by  Joel  Wing  and  other
             respected contributors.  We also accept the evidence given  by
             Dr Fatah about the effect of the PMU  in  Kirkuk  governorate.
             Whilst they lessen the threat from ISIL in  the  region,  they
             have also brought renewed sectarian tension, for  instance  by
             renaming Sunni sites with Shia names.   The fact  that  Kirkuk
             remains  a  Disputed  Territory  also   contributes   to   the
             uncertainty experienced by residents of the Governorate.


         257. The urban areas  of  Kirkuk  and  the  transport  links  which
             connect them therefore suffer primarily from targeted  attacks
             against authority and security  figures  which  cause  largely
             unintended civilian casualties.  The  rural  areas  of  Kirkuk
             suffer from targeted attacks of a similar type but also from a
             security vacuum which is exploited by  ISIL  and,  to  a  much
             lesser extent, the White Flags.  The risk to civilians in  the
             rural areas is demonstrably higher, given ISIL's  attempts  to
             rebuild in those areas and the way in which they  pursue  that
             goal.  Nevertheless, we do not consider the proper application
             of  the  inclusive  approach  set  out  above  to  justify   a
             conclusion the level of violence in  the  governorate  reaches
             the  Article  15(c)  threshold.   The   levels   of   civilian
             casualties are not indicative of such a  threat,  standing  as
             they did at 276 amongst a population of 1.5 million  in  2018.
             Similar figures emerge from  the  2019  evidence.   The  small
             numbers of ISIL fighters are thinly spread, operating in small
             groups, and the scale of their activities is limited.   As  at
             23 May,  329,622  IDPs  had  returned  to  Kirkuk  governorate
             according to Musings on Iraq.  We  take  account  of  indirect
             forms of violence, as required by HM2 and as  described  above
             but we do not consider that the level of risk to  an  ordinary
             civilian purely on account of his presence in Kirkuk,  or  any
             part of it, is such as to cross the Article  15(c)  threshold.
             The existence and actions  of  permanently  operating  attacks
             cells, the coercion brought to bear on sections of  the  rural
             population by ISIL and the other forms  of  indirect  violence
             from ISIL and other groups (including the PMU) are  not  at  a
             sufficiently  high  level  to  cross   that   threshold   when
             considered as a whole."


100. In his skeleton argument  Mr  Draycott  submitted  that  the  Appellant
    would face an individual risk of indiscriminate  violence  contrary  to
    Art 15(c) by reason of his falling within the following  enhanced  risk
    categories (i) that Kirkuk is under the control of  Iran  backed  Shi'a
    militias, given that the Appellant is a Sunni Kurd who  has  become  an
    atheist; and (ii) given that the Appellant first arrived in the  UK  in
    January 2017, he will  inevitably  be  viewed  as  an  individual  with
    Western traits.  I do not agree.

101. The appellant's home area is under the control of the Iraqi  Government
    and PMU militia (which are predominantly Shi'a).   The  appellant  does
    not come from a rural area but, on his own evidence, a town.   Even  in
    rural areas, where the UT in SMO noted a higher incidence of attacks by
    armed groups, the UT still did not consider that the indirect  violence
    including from groups such as the PMU did not engaged Art 15(c).

102. I see no basis for concluding that the appellant, having  been  in  the
    UK only since January 2017, would stand out as "Westernised" and be  at
    an enhanced risk as a result.  At [311], the UT in SMO noted  that  the
    basis  for  this  category  was  related  to  enforcing   "conservative
    standards on personal appearance" and was focussed on women rather than
    men.  The UT noted that there was "little recent evidence" to support a
    claim that men were at "significantly enhanced risk" certainly in areas
    where ISIL no longer retain a presence.  I do not  accept,  based  upon
    SMO, that the appellant's home area, which is urban and not rural, is a
    place which creates any significant risk to him from ISIL or  otherwise
    on this basis.

103. Taking into account all of these factors  including  his  atheism,  the
    evidence  does  not,  in  my  judgment,  establish  a  real   risk   of
    indiscriminate violence to the appellant in his home area.   The  claim
    does not succeed under Art 15(c).

104. The final issue  concern  documentation.   It  is  common  ground  that
    without the appropriate ID documentation, the appellant would likely be
    at risk of serious ill-treatment contrary to Art 3 of the  ECHR  or  at
    risk of serious  harm  contrary  to  Art  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive (see SMO headnote at para (11)).

105. It is accepted that the appellant does not have a  CSID.   It  is  also
    accepted that he cannot obtain a CSID or indeed an INID from the  Iraqi
    Embassy in the UK.  Mr Howells submitted, however, that  the  appellant
    could obtain his existing CSID which he left in Iraq from his family.

106. The appellant's evidence is that his CSID was left in his home and,  he
    understands, will have been destroyed or  lost  as  a  result  of  ISIL
    taking over his home area.  I see no reason to reject  the  appellant's
    evidence that his documentation was  left  in  his  home.   It  is  not
    suggested that his home area was not overrun by ISIL.  It would be pure
    speculation to conclude that his  mother  took  any  documents  of  the
    appellants with her to Kirkuk City.  The appellant's evidence was  that
    she did not have her own  CSID  and,  given  my  (and  Judge  Richards-
    Clarke's) views on the appellant's credibility, I accept that to be the
    case.  If she did not take her own CSID, there is  no  good  reason  to
    believe she took the appellant's  documents.   Given  that  it  is  not
    suggested that the appellant's home area was not overrun by  ISIL,  and
    the looting of his home was likely as a result, I am satisfied that the
    appellant's documents (in particular his CSID) have been destroyed  or,
    at least, are lost and could not be obtained by his family in Iraq.

107. However, I do not accept that the appellant's family could  not  obtain
    a replacement CSID for the appellant.  Whilst Mr Howells accepted  that
    the CSA Office in Kirkuk City has an INID terminal  and  therefore  was
    probably no longer issuing CSIDs (see SMO at [431]), the appellant  did
    not claim that his CSID had been obtained from the CSA Office in Kirkuk
    City.  Rather, he maintained that it had been  obtained  from  the  CSA
    Office in his home  town  of  Mala  Abdullah  Village.   The  appellant
    believes that the  documents  and  that  office  have  been  destroyed.
    However, he accepted that he has no direct knowledge of this and he has
    simply derived this from media and other reports.  As the UT made plain
    in SMO, it is for an appellant to establish that  the  relevant  office
    and records are no longer available and that any particular  office  no
    longer issue a CSID (see [389]).  The evidence in SMO did  not  suggest
    that any of the offices were destroyed or that any remained  closed  or
    that any records were destroyed during the  conflict  -  although  they
    left open the possibility in some parts of Iraq given the "scale of the
    devastation" (see [394]).  In the absence of supporting evidence, I  am
    not satisfied that it established that the CSA Office (and the  records
    it contained) in his home area of Mala Abdullah Village were destroyed.
     There is also no evidence that  that  office  now  only  issues  INIDs
    rather than CSIDs.

108. In SMO, the UT outlined the requirements for  obtaining  a  replacement
    CSID in Iraq:

         "The process for obtaining a replacement CSID by the use of a proxy
         (or a power of attorney) has been considered in previous cases  and
         there is no reason to depart  from  the  guidance  given  in  those
         cases.  As explained at [25] of AAH (Iraq), a number  of  documents
         are ordinarily required and, if those documents are available,  and
         a suitable proxy can present them to the  relevant  CSA  office,  a
         CSID should be issued within three days: [27].  In the  event  that
         some of  the  documents  are  missing,  it  might  nevertheless  be
         possible to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID  and  the  key  piece  of
         information which is required  is  the  family's  volume  and  page
         reference in the civil register: [28]."


109. The UT referred with approval to the earlier  decision  in  AAH  (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC).   At  [25],
    the UT in AAH set out the documents usually required:

         "25. Dr Fatah states to his knowledge the documents  that  must  be
             produced in order to apply for a CSID within Iraq are:


                  i)   Application form


                  ii)  Birth certificate


                  iii) A 'housing card' or a letter from the  local  council
                      confirming the applicant's residence


                  iv)  (In the IKR) a recommendation from the mukhtar


                  v)   PDS card


                  vi)  Two photographs of the  applicant  (or  in  the  IKR,
                      four)


              This information broadly accords  with  that  reproduced  by
             Landinfo (December 2015), who confirm this list but  add  that
             the ID card of a close relative would  also  be  required.  Dr
             Fatah has been told by practitioners in the IKR that a  person
             returned to Iraq from abroad who wishes to  replace  his  CSID
             would,  before  making  his  application,   also   require   a
             certificate from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs."


110. Whilst these documents are usually required, in AAH the  UT  recognised
    (at [28]) that the "key piece of information" is  the  family's  volume
    and page reference in the civil register:

         "If some of the documents were missing it might generally take  you
         up to a month  to  collate  and  replace  them  all.  In  his  live
         evidence, when pressed by Mr Singh, Dr Fatah acknowledged  that  it
         may be possible, when dealing with some officials, to obtain a CSID
         even if one does not have all of the  documents  listed  above.  He
         conceded that an official might  be  'persuaded'  to  overlook  the
         official requirements,  and  that  there  may  be  some  degree  of
         flexibility about the process in  some  governates.  He  maintained
         however that it would normally be the  case  that  these  documents
         would be required. The key piece of information that the individual
         would however have to have would be his family's  volume  and  page
         reference  number  in  the  civil  register.  Without   that,   the
         individual "is in trouble". He could only obtain a new CSID if  the
         Registrar was prepared to trawl through volume after volume looking
         for the family record. In his evidence before the  Tribunal  in  AA
         (Iraq) Dr Fatah wondered if such an official would  be  willing  to
         undertake such a task, or could be  "made  willing".  The  Tribunal
         concluded that this was not likely. The only  way  that  a  totally
         undocumented Iraqi could realistically hope to obtain  a  new  CSID
         would be the attendance at the civil  registry  of  a  male  family
         member prepared to vouch for him or her. The production of  a  CSID
         from, for instance, an uncle, would enable the Registrar  to  trace
         back through the record to find the  individual's  father,  and  in
         turn him."


111. In the absence of the documentation (and it is not suggested  that  the
    appellant has it), crucial to the appellant obtaining such  a  document
    would be knowledge of the relevant page and volume for the  appellant's
    family entry in the  civil  register  held  at  the  CSA  Office.   The
    appellant's evidence was that he did not know  the  relevant  page  and
    other details.  He claimed that he  had  no  reason  to  memorise  such
    information.  In SMO, the UT concluded that, absent particular factors,
    it was  likely  that  an  adult  individual  would  know  the  relevant
    information in the civil register in  order  to  obtain  a  replacement
    CSID.  At [391] the UT said this in SMO:

         "We consider the number of individuals who do not  know  and  could
         not ascertain their volume and page reference would be quite small,
         however.  It is  impossible  to  overstate  the  importance  of  an
         individual's volume and  page  reference  in  the  civil  register.
         These details appear on numerous official documents,  including  an
         Iraqi passport, wedding certificate and birth certificate, as  well
         as the CSID.    It was suggested  in  a  report  from  the  British
         Embassy in Baghdad, quoted at 6.1.9 of the Internal Relocation CPIN
         of February 2019, that "[a]ll Iraqi nationals will know or be  able
         to easily obtain this information".  We find the  former  assertion
         entirely unsurprising.  The volume and page reference in the  civil
         register is a piece of information which is of significance to  the
         individual and their family from the moment of their birth.  It  is
         entered on various documents and is ever present in  that  person's
         life.  We do not lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  there  remain  a
         significant number of people in Iraq who are undocumented.   We  do
         not consider that problem to be attributable to a  difficulty  with
         recalling the relevant information.  It is instead attributable  to
         the closure - until comparatively  recently  -  of  the  local  CSA
         offices  at  which  people  were  required  to  obtain  replacement
         documents and to their reluctance to return to those areas  from  a
         place of relocation."


112. Then, at [392] the UT identified that,  in  certain  circumstances,  it
    might be plausible the person would not know these details:

         "There will of course be those who can plausibly claim not to  know
         these details.  Those who left Iraq at a  particularly  young  age,
         those who are mentally  unwell  and  those  who  have  issues  with
         literacy or numeracy may all be able to make such a claim plausibly
         but we consider that it will be very much  the  exception  that  an
         individual would be unaware of a matter so fundamental to their own
         identity and that of their family.  The  letter  from  the  Embassy
         also suggested that most  Iraqis  would  be  able  to  obtain  this
         information easily.  Again, that  assertion  is  unsurprising  when
         viewed in its proper context.  As is clear from AAH(Iraq), Iraq  is
         a collectivist society in which the family is all important.  It is
         also a country with a high prevalence  of  mobile  telephone  usage
         amongst the adult population.  Even when we bear in mind the  years
         of conflict and displacement in Iraq, we would expect there  to  be
         only a small number of cases in which an individual could plausibly
         claim to have no means of contacting a family member from whom  the
         relevant volume and page reference  could  be  obtained  or  traced
         back."


113.  In  this  case,  as  Mr  Howells  submitted,  the  appellant  has  not
    established that there are plausible reasons why he would not know  the
    details.  The importance of the document and  its  contents  must  have
    been obvious to the appellant, not least because he went to  university
    in Sulaymaniyah and that document would have been necessary for him  to
    travel and live there.  In addition, he has no mental health  or  other
    issues which would support a contention that he would not know or would
    not need to know this important information for living in Iraq.  He was
    an adult who was attending university and clearly  had  no  educational
    background or issues with illiteracy of numeracy which  would  make  it
    plausible he would not know the relevant volume and page number.  In my
    judgment, he could provide that information to his family in  Iraq  who
    would be able to obtain a replacement CSID from the CSA Office  in  his
    home area in Mala Abdualah.

114. Consequently, and possession of that document is generally relevant  to
    the appellant's situation in Iraq, there is no basis for a claim  under
    Art 3, or, indeed, humanitarian protection) based upon a lack of such a
    document.

115. The final submission made by Mr Howells concerned the process by  which
    the  Iraqi  Embassy  in  the  UK  could  issue  the  appellant  with  a
    Registration Document (1957) which could then be used, with appropriate
    process, for an INID to be obtained on his return.  The issue is  dealt
    with at para 2.6.15.

         "2.6.15  Since  SMO  was  promulgated  in  December  2019   further
         information regarding the issuance of CSIDs  in  the  UK  has  been
         obtained by the Home Office in April 2020 [see Annex I]. When asked
         to describe the process of obtaining a CSID from the Iraqi  Embassy
         in London the Returns Logistics department stated:


         'CSID cards are  being  phased  out  and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
         National Identification) cards. It is  not  currently  possible  to
         apply for an INID card outside of Iraq.  As  a  result,  the  Iraqi
         embassy in London are advising their nationals in the UK  to  apply
         instead for a 'Registration Document (1957)' which they can use  to
         apply for other documents such as passports or an  INID  card  once
         they have returned to Iraq.


         'The registration document  (1957)  must  be  applied  for  on  the
         applicant's behalf by a nominated representative in Iraq. In  order
         to start the application, the  individual  requiring  documentation
         would normally provide at least one copy  of  a  national  identity
         document [see  paragraph  2.6.24  for  list  of  national  identity
         documents]  and  complete  a  power  of  attorney  (to  nominate  a
         representative in Iraq) at the Iraqi embassy along with the embassy
         issued application forms.  If  they  have  no  copies  of  identity
         documents they also would need  to  complete  a  British  power  of
         attorney validated by the FCO and provide parents names, place  and
         date of birth to their nominated representative in Iraq.


         'Once  issued  the   nominated   representative   will   send   the
         registration document (1957)  to  the  applicant  in  the  UK.  The
         process takes 1-2 months.


         'The HO cannot apply for documentation other than  Laissez  Passers
         on someone's behalf but the embassy is willing to check to  see  if
         the individual  already  holds  documents  and  provide  copies  if
         necessary.'


         2.6.16 Based on the above information, it is highly  unlikely  that
         an individual would be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy
         while in the UK. Instead  a  person  would  need  to  apply  for  a
         registration document (1957) and would then apply for an INID  upon
         return to their local CSA office in Iraq."


116. On the face of it, the  purpose  of  issuing  a  Registration  Document
    (1957) is in order to permit an individual to  apply  for  an  INID  on
    return to Iraq.  Of course, that document can only be  obtained  by  an
    individual  attending  the  relevant  CSA  Office  (which  issues  such
    documents) as  it  is  a  biometric  document.   Mr  Howells,  however,
    submitted that  possessing  a  Registration  Document  (1957)  was  the
    equivalent of possessing a CSID for the purposes of safe  travel  from,
    for example, Baghdad to an individual's home area.

117. The evidence from the Iraqi Embassy set  out  in  the  CPIN  does  not,
    however, contemplate the document's use in this way.  It is  silent  on
    whether the document would allow an individual's safe passage to  their
    home area.  Mr Howells invited me to  infer  that  that  was  the  case
    otherwise why would the Iraqi  Embassy  issue  such  a  document.   The
    answer to that may be that the document is issued in order to allow  an
    individual to obtain an  INID  in  their  home  area.   That  may,  for
    example,  be  Baghdad  itself  to  where  there  may   be   no   travel
    difficulties.

118. More specifically, however,  the  Iraqi  authorities  are  not  issuing
    Registration Documents (1957) in order to facilitate safe passage to an
    individual's home area.  The evidence from the  Iraqi  Embassy  is  not
    concerned with that issue.  In my judgment, it cannot be inferred  that
    is the case on the basis of the limited evidence set out  in  the  CPIN
    from the Iraqi Embassy.

119. The UT in SMO did not express any view on whether that  document  would
    allow safe passage in Iraq.  The UT  in  SMO  was  concerned  with  the
    relevance of a CSID, an INID, a 'laissez passer'  or  a  'certification
    letter'.  Neither of the latter two documents was considered by the  UT
    to allow for such safe  passage  (see  [374]  and  [378])  and,  as  Mr
    Draycott submitted, that view was taken in the face of a  (potentially)
    contrary position taken by the Iraqi Embassy itself.  Here, of  course,
    there is not even a view expressed by the Iraqi Embassy. In SMO, the UT
    referred to with approval the expert evidence that Shi'a  militia  were
    unlikely to find acceptable alternative forms of  identification  to  a
    CSID or INID (see [378]).  In the light of  this  evidence,  I  am  not
    satisfied that even if the appellant obtained a  Registration  Document
    (1957) - and assuming he has not already obtained  a  CSID  as  I  have
    concluded he could - that document would obviate any risk to  him,  for
    example at Shi'a militia checkpoints on  his  journey  home  to  Kirkuk
    Governance.  The evidence in this appeal simply does not make  good  Mr
    Howells' submission as to the potential use of the document  beyond  it
    being a document that allows an individual, once in their home area, to
    obtain an INID.

120. Consequently, I reject the appellant's claim based upon a  lack  of  ID
    documentation  under  Art  3  of  the  ECHR  and  Art  15(b)   of   the
    Qualification Directive.

121. However, for the reasons I  have  already  given  the  appeal  succeeds
    under Art 15(b) of the Qualification Directive and Art 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

122. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal was set aside by my decision dated 6 August 2020.   The  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR  was
    not challenged and stands.

123. I remake the decision (1) dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  asylum
    grounds; but (2) allowing his appeal on humanitarian protection grounds
    (Art 15(b)) and under Art 3 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             2 November 2020
