
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03340/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2018                         |On 5th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  Omid [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  30th  August  2018.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on 26th  September  2017  by
    plane claiming  asylum  at  Stansted  Airport.   The  Appellant's  full
    immigration history is set out in the Secretary of State's bundle.  The
    Appellant's application for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  was
    refused on 25th February 2018.  That application was based on  a  claim
    that the Appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution  in  Iran  on
    the basis of his imputed political opinion.

 2. The Appellant appealed the refusal of the Secretary of  State  and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hussain sitting  at
    Birmingham on 9th April 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on
    27th April 2018 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 16th May 2018 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 4th June 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert  refused  permission
    to appeal.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal
    on 2nd July 2018.

 4. In a very brief reasons Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  granted  permission
    to appeal on 29th October 2018 stating that it was  arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to engage with the evidence before him
    in relation to the Appellant's brother.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Hodson.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Tufan.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Mr Hodson indicated he relies  on  both  sets  of  Grounds  of  Appeal,
    contending  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  provide
    sufficient or sustainable reasons  for  adverse  credibility  findings.
    Those grounds contend that the  fundamental  error  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's analysis was the failure to  consider  the  risk  that
    would be faced by the Appellant if returned from the UK and  that  this
    is wholly different to the circumstances pertaining at the time of  the
    Appellant's return from Georgia in 2015.

 7. Mr Hodson submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination is
    unusual as there is no summary given of  the  evidence  before  him  or
    legal reasoning and no reference is made to the oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing.  He submits that this provides the basis of his concerns.   He
    refers to the background facts,  in  particular  that  the  Appellant's
    brother, Hussein, was granted refugee status in the UK in 2014 and that
    it was accepted that Hussein was considered a spy and therefore at risk
    of persecution.  His submission is that it is inevitable  that  if  the
    Appellant is returned to  Iran  he  would  be  interrogated  about  his
    association with his brother in the UK.  He points out that the failure
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider the risk to the  Appellant
    if returned to Iran is a material error of law.  He specifically refers
    me to paragraphs 5 to 10 of the Grounds of Appeal and the findings made
    at paragraphs 13 to 19 of the  decision  which  leads  to  the  judge's
    conclusions of adverse credibility.

 8. He  submits  that  there  are  two  points  in  the  grounds  that  are
    particularly worth emphasising

      i) The findings set out at paragraph 13 of adverse  credibility  based
         on the fact that the Appellant did  not  suffer  more  problems  on
         return to Iran from Georgia in 2015.  He submits that the  analysis
         of the judge here is  materially  flawed  and  that  the  Appellant
         suffered repeated arrests based solely on the Appellant's  link  to
         his brother and that given his direct contact with his  brother  in
         the UK, the risk of persecution on return is far greater  now  than
         it was in 2015.

     ii) He takes me to paragraph 19 of the decision,  submitting  that  the
         judge needed to assess the Appellant's risk on return from  the  UK
         as a failed asylum seeker and that the judge failed  to  appreciate
         the distinction between the Appellant's return from Georgia in 2015
         and what, he submits, are very different circumstances  that  would
         await him if he returned from spending time with his brother in the
         UK.

 9. He points out that the Appellant would, as a failed asylum  seeker,  be
    questioned and assumed to know something regarding his brother  bearing
    in mind it is accepted that his brother had been  involved  in  spying.
    He submits the judge needed to assess that risk and has failed to do so
    and that the scenario of what happened on return from Georgia does  not
    give a reasonable examination of this.   He  submits  that  it  is  not
    relevant that the judge seems to think that he  has  done  so  and  the
    judge needed to address the  risk  of  the  Appellant  having  been  in
    contact with his brother.

10. Mr Tufan responds by submitting that the judge has considered what  was
    in front of him.  Even on his brother's account is  it  submitted  that
    there is no interest in the Appellant by the Iranian  authorities.   It
    is not in dispute that the Appellant was previously in Georgia and that
    he returned to Iran and that nothing happened when he returned.

11. He submits that the judge considered the Section 8 issues at  paragraph
    18, pointing out the  judge  made  credibility  findings  that  he  was
    entitled to and that the judge has considered what was put to  him  and
    made findings based on that.  He reminds me that at paragraph  20  that
    the judge was also satisfied, nor was it argued on his behalf, that the
    Appellant would face persecution as a failed  asylum  seeker  following
    SSH and HR that if any confirmation of this  was  needed  it  was  only
    necessary to look at the actions of the Iranian  authorities  when  the
    Appellant returned to Iran from Georgia.  He asked me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. This appeal turns entirely on the judge's findings of  credibility  and
    whether the judge has given proper and due weight to the arguments  and
    submissions made that the Appellant would be returning to Iran  as  the
    brother of someone who has been granted asylum in this  country  having
    claimed to be a spy against his own country.  Those facts  are  not  in
    dispute nor is the fact that the grant of  asylum  to  the  Appellant's
    brother predates the Appellant returning to Iran from Georgia  and  the
    fact that he was not detained as a result by the  Iranian  authorities,
    albeit that it is contended at paragraph 5 of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    that the Appellant did suffer repeated arrests.

15. I remind myself that a  proper  approach  to  credibility  requires  an
    assessment of the evidence and of the general claim and that in  asylum
    claims relevant factors would include the internal consistency  of  the
    claim, the inherent plausibility of the claim and  the  consistency  of
    the claim with external factors of the sort typically found in  country
    guidance.  In this case the judge has in extensive paragraphs  gone  on
    to consider all of the evidence that was put before him.  He  has  made
    findings of fact leading to adverse findings of credibility that he was
    entitled to.  In effect the submissions made by  Mr  Hodson  amount  to
    little more than disagreement with the findings of the judge.   It  has
    to be remembered that this is an Appellant  who  is  basing  his  claim
    solely on the fact that he would be returning to Iran as the brother of
    someone who has been granted asylum on the basis that  he  was  spying.
    It also has to be remembered that the Appellant has previously returned
    to Iran in similar circumstances from Georgia.  All these factors  were
    considered thoroughly by the judge.

16. The basis of the submissions made by  Mr  Hodson  and  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal are that the judge was not entitled to make the adverse findings
    of credibility that he did.  I completely refute that submission.  This
    is a judge who has very carefully looked at all  the  facts  that  were
    placed before him.  He has made findings at paragraphs  13  through  to
    paragraph 19 setting out exactly the basis upon which he has  made  his
    findings of adverse  credibility.   He  has  considered  carefully  and
    thoroughly all the evidence that was before him.

17. In such circumstances the submissions made amount to little  more  than
    disagreement with the decision.  The decision is sound and discloses no
    material error of law.  Full reasons are given based  on  the  evidence
    that was before the judge for the findings  of  fact  and  findings  of
    adverse credibility  that  he  has  made.   The  decision  consequently
    discloses no material error  of  law  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 13th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

