
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03613/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 23rd May 2019                 |On the 12th June 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Miss Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He appeals with permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtTJ"), promulgated on
    the 19th February 2019 dismissing his appeal against the decision to
    refuse his protection and human rights claim.


 2. The appellant's history is set out in the decision letter of 4th March
    2018.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 February 2012
    and on the 28th May 2013 applied for further leave to remain as a Tier
    4 student which was granted on the 19th June 2013 to expire on the 29th
    March 2015. In March 2014, he returned to Pakistan for four weeks
    before returning to the UK and on 2 April 2014 curtailment of his leave
    was considered. On the 2 June 2014 his leave was curtailed.  He made a
    claim for asylum on 4th September 2017.

 3. He provided a screening interview and later provided a statement of
    evidence (SEF statement) and was interviewed about the factual basis of
    his claim.

 4. The basis of his claim related to his activities for and membership of
    the Jammu Kashmir National Awami Party (hereinafter referred to as
    "JKNAP"). He stated that he had joined that party in a proximally 2001
    and had been a member since he was a student.

 5. Between 2010 and 2011 he stated that the authorities had come to his
    home once or twice as he was reading songs and anthems and seeking
    support for the JK party. However, they arrested his cousin. The
    authorities did not say that they were from the ISI, but his family
    thought they were from the way that they were asking questions. The
    appellant was not in his home area as he was moving around Mirpur and
    Rawalpindi.

 6. At the end of 2011, the appellant stated that he was arrested while
    giving a speech and singing songs and anthems for freedom. He could not
    remember the date of his arrest, but someone gave a guarantee and he
    was released. He was released on the promise not to undertake any anti-
    government activity in Pakistan.

 7. In 2012 he entered the UK as a student using his own passport but had
    no problems when leaving the airport. He did not claim asylum in 2012
    as he was waiting for the situation to get better.

 8. In 2014, the appellant returned to Pakistan in secret as his mother was
    seriously ill. He had no problems entering Pakistan nor were there any
    incidents whilst he was in that country. Whilst he was there, he also
    got married. It is said that when party members found out he was back
    in Pakistan; he sang a song on 18 April which the police found out
    about through social media activities and lodged a FIR against him. The
    authorities were not able to arrest him as he moved with his wife to
    his relatives and then to Mirpur and Rawalpindi. He had no problems
    leaving Pakistan.

 9. The appellant did not make a claim for asylum on returning in 2014 as
    he stated he was waiting for the situation to improve. In 2015 he
    applied for travel documents to return but withdrew the application as
    his wife and friends told him that the police would still be interested
    in him. He then decided to apply for asylum in 2017.

10. Whilst he has been in the UK, he has been involved with JKNAP UK and
    the local branch; his current role as an organiser for the party and
    being responsible for setting up new units. His support for the party
    has been demonstrated by his attendance at a number of demonstrations
    and protests outside of the Pakistani High Commission. On 22 October
    2017 he gave a speech outside the Commission and also attended a
    further demonstration on 18 April 2018 which was a separate rally and
    protest in Parliament Square on the same day as the PO JK government
    planned a protest against India. It was said that at that protest the
    JKNAP members were attacked by those who were attending the protest on
    behalf of the PO JK. The appellant believed that he was attacked by pro-
    Pakistani supporters who are funded by the Pakistani agencies.

11. The appellant also asserted that the authorities had visited his wife
    and mother at the end of 2018 and his brother in January 2019 as a
    result of his activity in United Kingdom. Furthermore, a FIR (First
    Information Report) dated 13 May 2018 was filed against the appellant
    on the basis that he attended a demonstration in London and that the
    flag of Pakistan and the High Commissions vehicle been damaged; that he
    had been previously involved in antisocial activities and they were
    categorised as treason.


12. In a decision letter dated the 4 March 2018, the respondent refused his
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.


13. The respondent rejected his claim to be a member of the JKNAP in
    Pakistan and at paragraphs 28 - 34 set out the evidence that was
    considered to be inconsistent with his claim support for the party. For
    example, he was unable to provide a reasonable account as to why he
    began to support the JKNAP and the account given that his cousin had
    been martyred was not consistent with the documentary evidence provided
    on his behalf that stated that in fact his cousin had been kidnapped
    (see paragraph 28 of the decision letter). The respondent made
    reference to the appellant's inability to recall the contents of the
    membership card or provide such a document and was unable to provide
    sufficient level of detail concerning the aims of the party consistent
    with someone who would been a member since 2001.


14. As to his membership of the party in the UK, the respondent considered
    his evidence to be vague and lacking in detail expected of someone who
    claimed to be a joint secretary of the party. His claim to have
    travelled to London on five or six occasions to protest had not been
    evidenced and the letter from the JKNAP(UK) was viewed as "self-
    serving". The respondent considered the photographs which had been
    provided but it was unclear what those photographs demonstrated.


15. His claim as to what had occurred in Pakistan was also not accepted for
    the reasons given at paragraphs 40 - 49. As regards his claim that the
    Pakistani authorities first began looking for him between 2010 and 2011
    as a result of his support for the party, it was not deemed credible
    that the intelligence services would be unable to track down or were
    interested in tracking down, a low level JKNAP member (see paragraph
    41).


16. Other credibility issues were outlined in the decision letter which
    included the appellant's inability to recall the date upon which he was
    arrested, his account as to how he could be released from police
    custody given the interest from the ISI (paragraph 44) and that he was
    able to leave the UK via the airport at a time when the intelligence
    services were looking for him. The respondent considered that his
    ability to leave Pakistan was inconsistent with his claim that he was
    of interest to the Pakistani intelligence authorities (see paragraph
    45).

17. As to his return in Pakistan in 2014, was considered to be inconsistent
    with his earlier claim that he had left Pakistan in fear stop
    furthermore it was not deemed credible that he would return in secret
    and continue to publicly make speeches or post on social media.

18. The respondent gave consideration to the documents provided including
    copies of the two FIR's and the "warrant" but in the light of the lack
    of original documentation and in the light of the objective material
    which made reference to the ease upon which. You can be obtained in
    Pakistan waited been attributed to those documents.

19. In determining the asylum human rights claim, consideration was given
    to section 8 of the 2004 act and that his failure to claim asylum
    before being notified of an immigration decision damages credibility
    under Section 8 (5) of the 2004 Act.


20. The appellant sought to appeal that decision and his appeal was heard
    on the 23rd January 2019. In a decision promulgated on the 19th
    February 2019, the FtTJ dismissed the appeal having concluded that the
    appellant had not given a credible or consistent account as to his
    activities in Pakistan for the JKNAP.

21. His findings of fact can be summarised as follows:

      1. The judge rejected his account that he was involved with the JKNAP
         in Pakistan as a member, supporter, agitator or singer or would
         have perceived to have been.


      2. In reaching that finding, the judge rejected the documentary
         evidence of the FIR dated 11 September 2009 (see paragraph 62), the
         FIR dated 20 March 2014 and the "warrant "dated 1 April 2014 on the
         basis that it was inconsistent with his ability to leave Pakistan
         shortly thereafter in April 2014 without any problems and also the
         light of the objective material which demonstrated the ease with
         which  forged documents can be obtained in Pakistan. The judge took
         into account the appellants evidence about people being unable to
         "pin a really big crime on him" but the judge rejected this as
         "lacking in credibility" as he was "accused of treason which by any
         measure is a very serious crime, and background evidence produced
         noted the strength of the ISI"( see [61]).


      3. He rejected the evidence of the witness Mr R in relation to events
         in Pakistan. The judge stated at [60] that Mr R had not been a
         witness to the events in Pakistan and his evidence was based on
         what he had been told by others including the appellant. The judge
         found that he had "plainly been in touch with people in the JKNAP
         in Pakistan "but that no evidence had been produced from anyone in
         that country to confirm what was said about the appellant. In this
         context the judge accepted there was no requirement to obtain
         corroboration but that on the facts of this appeal there was no
         reason why evidence could not have been obtained from someone who
         had personal knowledge of the appellant in Pakistan.


      4. As to the document dated 13 May 2018, the judge took into account
         the report provided by Dr Wali that the FIR was a genuine document
         having seen a colour notarised copy (see paragraph 37). The judge
         found it [69] that he could place little weight on the report as Dr
         Wali had not seen the original document, his ability to comment on
         the authenticity of the document had not been established as
         opposed to talk about the general situation in Pakistan. The judge
         also did not accept that an FIR would be issued in 2018 on the
         basis that the appellant had no profile in Pakistan or that the
         authorities would have known who we was thus the judge concluded
         that he did not find it reasonably likely that the F IR had been
         issued or that the family had been visited by the authorities on
         account of his activities.


      5. The judge accepted that he had attended demonstrations and joined
         JKNAP in the UK based on the evidence of Mr R and Mr M, the
         photographs and the appellant's oral evidence (see [69]) but
         concluded at [70] that


         "70. I am satisfied his JKNAP activity he has been purely to create
             a false asylum claim. If by chance anyone at the airport in
             Pakistan was aware of the creation of this false claim and
             asked why he was there, who would not need to lie as he would
             simply say he tried to create a false asylum claim. He
             therefore does not require police protection or need to
             internally relocate."


         71.  The appellant is not established he is a refugee."

22. The judge therefore dismissed his protection claim. At paragraphs 72 -
    73 the judge conducted an assessment of his Article 8 claim and reached
    the conclusion that it not been demonstrated that there were very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration to Pakistan given his length
    of residence of seven years, his retention of language and cultural
    ties and his family ties to the country and that there were no duly
    harsh consequences which would justify a grant of Article 8 outside of
    the rules. Thus, dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


23. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of appeal were issued
    for permission to appeal and that application was granted by Judge
    Swaney on the 21st March 2019 for the following reasons:

         "The judge accepts that the appellant joined the JKNAP in the
         United Kingdom and has attended demonstrations here. The judge
         accepted the appellant's evidence and the evidence from two other
         mems party. The judge did not give reasons the finding that those
         activities were entered into for the purpose of fabricating an
         asylum claim. In YB(Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360, the Court
         of Appeal held that if the appellant had already been disbelieved
         about is surplus activity, while his motives might be disbelieved,
         the consequent risk on return from his activity sur place was
         essentially an objective question. The judges comment that the
         appellant constantly state that it made a full asylum claim if
         questioned on return does not address the issue of how his
         activities would be perceived in Pakistan or if they would put the
         appellant at real risk of persecution and/or serious harm."

24. It is as a result of that grant of permission that the appeal comes
    before the Upper Tribunal. The grounds advanced by the appellant are
    those originally provided, and Mr Greer, Counsel on behalf of the
    appellant, and who appeared before the FtTJ relies upon the grounds
    which he had drafted.


25. In the written grounds, challenge is mounted to the concluding
    paragraph at [70] in which he set out that the judge was satisfied that
    his activity in the UK had been purely to create a false asylum claim.
    The grounds assert that that was a wholly unreasoned conclusion and
    that it was unclear from the decision how the judge reached that view.
    It had been conceded that the appellant was an active member of the
    party and there had been no examination of the appellant's motivation
    for his involvement in the party before the Tribunal. It was it was
    therefore submitted that the judge's conclusion in respect of his
    motivation was flawed for a lack of reasoning. Furthermore, the judge
    made no finding in respect of the appellant's likely behaviour upon
    return to Pakistan, should his interest be genuine and any wish to
    continue those activities upon return. The finding in respect of his
    ability to evade adverse interest of the authorities by telling the
    truth was similarly flawed.


26. He supplemented them with oral submissions which essentially comprised
    of the written grounds. He submitted that the judge had not given
    adequate reasons at paragraph 70 when reaching the conclusion that his
    motivation in joining the party was to create a false asylum claim. The
    evidence before the judge consisted of oral evidence from a leader of
    the party and the evidence that he had been attending demonstrations
    including photographs. However, the judge appeared to rely upon his
    findings in Pakistan to support the conclusion that his activities in
    the UK were to create a false asylum claim. It is submitted that even
    if that was, so it was not necessarily determinative.


27. Mr Greer further submitted that the judge reached no finding as to what
    the appellant would do on returning Pakistan and if he were changes
    behaviour or act discreetly (see HJ(Iran).



28. He concluded his submissions that paragraph 70 was wholly unreasoned
    and made no reference to the background evidence and in particular the
    Pakistani authorities' attitude to Kashmiri separatists. Thus, he
    submitted it was incumbent on the judge to deal with this issue.




29. Miss Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that even if there
    was a gap in the judge's determination, that had to be viewed in the
    light of the findings of the FtTJ which had not been challenged in the
    grounds. The judge had found that there had been no FIRs issued in
    Pakistan, the judge did not accept he had any profile in Pakistan and
    that his family had not been the subject of any visits by the
    authorities. She submitted that his case was that because he had been
    involved in protests in the UK it had led to the authorities having an
    interest in him and that a visit took place in 2018. However, the judge
    rejected that evidence and there had been no challenge made to it. It
    is against that background that the findings [70] must be viewed as the
    judge found that was no current interest in the appellant as a result
    of him attending any demonstrations or participating in the party and
    there has been no historical profile.


30. The appellant could not point to evidence to demonstrate that he would
    be objectively at risk. Whilst there was documentary evidence relied
    upon by Counsel relating to the situation Kashmir (either Pakistan or
    India) and that it is volatile, he was not able to point to any
    evidence someone with a profile of the appellant would be at risk. She
    therefore submitted that on the basis of his profile and that he had
    not been in Pakistan since 2014, there was nothing to show that he
    would be targeted on return or questioned. Any error would therefore
    not be material.

31. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
    give. I should add that later on in the morning and after the case had
    concluded, the appellant attended at the hearing centre. Mr Greer had
    informed the court that the appellant would not be in attendance and
    thus the hearing had taken place in his absence. No court interpreter
    was present as this was an error of law hearing and the appellant's
    legal representatives had not informed the tribunal that an interpreter
    would be required. The appellant was informed that his Counsel, who had
    represented him in the hearing below, had made full submissions on the
    error of law but that if he had any specific instructions he would be
    able to inform his solicitors who in turn would write to the Tribunal
    setting out those additional matters. I therefore gave an extra seven
    days for any further information to be provided. Counsel was contacted
    by the court staff and was also informed of this. No further
    submissions or any written communications have been received at the
    date of writing this decision.





Decision on the error of law:

32.  Having considered the submissions of the  advocates,  I  am  satisfied
    that the decision demonstrates the making of an error  on  a  point  of
    law. The issue relates to the sur place claim.


33. Paragraph 339P states:

         "A person may have a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted  or  a
         real risk of suffering serious harm  based  on  events  which  have
         taken place since the person left the country of origin or  country
         of return and/or activates which have been engaged in by  a  person
         since he left his country  of  origin  or  country  of  return,  in
         particular where it is established that the activities relied  upon
         constitute  the  expression  and  continuation  of  convictions  or
         orientations held in the country of origin or country of return."

34. There is no challenge to any of the findings of fact made by the Judge
    either advanced in the grounds or the oral submissions made.   As
    summarised in the earlier part of this decision, the Judge made a
    number of adverse credibility findings in relation to his claim to have
    been a member and supporter of JKNAP when resident in Pakistan and
    expressly rejected his claim to have been arrested and detained and to
    have been of interest to the authorities in Pakistan in 2014.
    Furthermore, the judge rejected his account that a FIR had been
    registered against him by the authorities in 2018 as result of his
    attendance at a demonstration or that the authorities had visited his
    family home.


35. Whilst he accepted that the appellant had joined JKNAP in the United
    Kingdom and had attended demonstrations (see findings of fact at [69])
    the judge made no further assessment of the sur place issue.  The judge
    failed to give any reasoning or any adequate reasoning as to his
    finding at [70] that his activity has been purely to create a false
    asylum claim. Even if it could be inferred from the general adverse
    credibility findings made, as set out in Danian [1999] EWCA Civ 3000,
    even if his credibility might be low, it was still necessary to
    scrutinise and assess the new claim (sur place claim). From the
    submissions of Mr Greer, Counsel at the hearing, there does not appear
    to have been any questioning directed to his motivation or directed to
    Mr R who was a member of the party in the UK and had attested to his
    activities there for the party. Part of that assessment would
    necessarily include the commitment shown in the UK, the length of his
    association with the party and any specific activity carried out.
    Beyond the general acceptance of the appellant having attended
    demonstrations, the judge made no assessment of the political activity
    carried out in the UK or in the light of the evidence of Mr R.
    Consequently, there was no assessment of his likely behaviour on
    return.

36. Activities undertaken in bad faith can found a sur place claim but
    careful attention must be given to whether those activities are likely
    to come to the attention of the authorities on return - see the
    reasoning in YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360.  The real
    question in, most cases is would be what followed for an individual
    claimant if any information reached the authorities. This was a
    question of fact for the judge to assess on the evidence before him. He
    accepted that he had attended demonstrations and even if it could be
    inferred that this was solely to found a sur place claim rather than
    any genuine political commitment, he would have to consider whether the
    appellant in his particular circumstances would, as a result of his
    activities coming to the attention of the authorities and be at a real
    risk of serious harm or persecution in Pakistan.  Part of that
    assessment would necessarily include the commitment shown in the UK,
    and whether he would be likely to continue that political activity on
    return.

37. There was no assessment of what part he played in any of the
    demonstrations or the effect of the demonstrations being reported on
    social media.  There is also no assessment of the country materials. I
    would accept the submission made by Miss Petterson that the material
    did not expressly make reference to JKNAP ( save for the Board of
    Canada report) but there was general material concerning the
    authorities view of separatism in the context of Kashmir and an
    assessment of that material in conjunction with assessment  of his
    profile in the UK and how it was likely to be perceived, if it was
    known , was necessary.


38. I am therefore satisfied that the deciosn demonstrate the making of an
    error on appoint of law and it is set aside.


39. As to remaking the decision, given the nature of the errors I accept
    the submission made by Mr Greer that the appeal should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

40. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of
    appeals in this Tribunal. That reads as follows:
    "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to
    re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
    Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
    (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

41. Thus, I have reached the conclusion that it is appropriate to remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

42. As there had been no challenge made in the grounds to the  findings  of
    fact set out at paragraphs 59-69, they shall be preserved  findings  of
    fact. Additionally, the finding made at paragraph 69 that the appellant
    has attended demonstrations and had joined JKNAP in  the  UK  shall  be
    preserved. The issue to determine relates solely to the  issue  of  his
    sur place claim as identified above.



Notice of Decision

43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing in the light of the  issues  set  out
    and with the findings of fact at paragraphs 56-69 being preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


                                Date     10/6/2019

                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
