
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/03032/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On June 30, 2017                         | On July 4, 2017                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                           mr OSAMAH OMAR HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sharif (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeetie (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make  an  anonymity  order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

 2. The appellant is a national  of  Iraq.   He  entered  this  country  on
    October 20, 2015 and claimed asylum the same day. His  application  was
    refused by the respondent on March 23, 2016 under  paragraphs  336  and
    339F/339M HC 395. The appellant appealed that  decision  on  March  24,
    2016 under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 and his appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Gladstone (hereinafter called the Judge) on November 29, 2016 and in  a
    decision promulgated on December 14, 2016 she dismissed the appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on December 28, 2016 arguing there
    had been unfairness to the appellant during the  hearing  in  that  the
    interpreter had spoken to the appellant in the wrong  language  and  it
    was unfair to have continued  the  hearing  once  the  error  had  been
    discovered. It was also argued that the Judge erred by making  findings
    without hearing all of the evidence.

 4. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio found there was an arguable error
    in law on March 17, 2017. In a Rule 24 response the  respondent  argued
    there was no error because the appellant spoke both Sorani  and  Badini
    and he only raised an issue after he had been caught out during  cross-
    examination.  The appellant then chose not give evidence and the  Judge
    made findings open to her.

 5. The matter came before me on the above date.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Sharif relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that the  Judge
    should have adjourned the hearing when she discovered  the  interpreter
    had been interpreting  in  Kurdish  Sorani  as  against  the  requested
    Kurdish Badini. The interpreter should have notified the Judge that  he
    was interpreting in Sorani as against Badini  which  was  the  language
    that had been requested for the interpreter. It was  evident  from  the
    Judge's decision that questions had to be rephrased or  put  again  and
    this emphasised the issue. Having identified the problem there had been
    a request to adjourn the case for a fresh interpreter as the  appellant
    lost faith  in  the  interpreter  believing  the  interpreter  to  have
    deliberately mistranslated what he had said. The  correct  test  to  be
    applied was whether there had  been  unfairness.  Mr  Sharif  submitted
    there was unfairness in this case and the decision should be set  aside
    and the case reheard. The second ground of appeal  followed  the  first
    ground in that by failing to adjourn the Judge made a decision  without
    hearing all the evidence.

 7. Mr McVeetie adopted the Rule 24 letter and submitted  that  whilst  the
    issue was fairness he submitted that the Judge had acted fairly. Whilst
    the appellant had requested a Kurdish Badini interpreter it  was  clear
    that he also spoke the Sorani dialect because at the beginning  of  the
    hearing he spoke to  the  interpreter  in  Sorani  which  was  why  the
    interpreter spoke Sorani. The interpreter stated that  Badini  speakers
    also speak Sorani and the evidence recorded by the  Judge  demonstrated
    that he answered 30 questions put to him by his own representative  and
    he  then  answered  questions  put   to   him   by   the   respondent's
    representative  and  only  complained  when  he  was  caught  out.  The
    questions put to him by his own representative were not straightforward
    questions and he had no difficulty answering those. He now  called  the
    interpreter a liar but there was no  evidence  to  support  this  claim
    apart from his own evidence. He submitted there was  no  merit  to  the
    ground of appeal and there was also no merit to the second  ground  and
    he referred me to paragraphs [107-110] of the Judge's decision.







    FINDINGS

 8. Permission to appeal to me has been given in this case for the  reasons
    set out above. Mr Sharif in submissions referred  me  to  the  Tribunal
    decision of MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  00105  (IAC)  and
    stressed the issue was fairness.

 9. At various times the Tribunal and Court of Appeal  have  stressed  that
    fairness, as against reasonableness, is an  important  factor  in  this
    Tribunal. However, in order for there to be an error in law there  must
    be gross procedural unfairness or a complete denial of natural  justice
    and the question to be asked is whether "there any deprivation  of  the
    affected party's right to a fair hearing?"  In  R  and  Others  v  SSHD
    (2005) EWCA Civ 982 the Court of Appeal made it clear  that  committing
    or permitting a procedural or other irregularity capable  of  making  a
    material difference to the outcome or fairness of the proceedings could
    be unfair.

10. In BM (Re Application for Judicial Review)  2005  Scot  CS  97  it  was
    alleged that there was a problem with the interpreter at  the  hearing.
    The Court of Sessions said  that  leave  to  appeal  should  have  been
    granted notwithstanding that  the  appellant  was  represented  at  the
    hearing  and  no  substantive  issue   had   been   raised   with   the
    interpretation or understanding  of  the  claimant's  evidence  at  the
    hearing because possible issues relating to interpretation  constituted
    a compelling reason why the claimant's appeal should have been heard.

11. The difficulty for the Judge in this appeal is that an interpreter  who
    spoke Kurdish Badini was not only required but had in fact been booked.
    The interpreter who was booked was such  an  interpreter  but  he  also
    spoke Kurdish Sorani. It does not seem  to  be  disputed  that  at  the
    commencement of the First-tier  hearing  the  appellant  spoke  to  the
    interpreter in Kurdish Sorani. The  interpreter  did  not  indicate  to
    those present that this was the language being spoken and during cross-
    examination the issue of language spoken became an issue to the  extent
    that the appellant accused the interpreter of  mistranslating  what  he
    said.

12. The Judge, in my opinion, was placed in an invidious  position  because
    she had taken evidence in chief, from the appellant, apparently without
    any problems but at the beginning of cross-examination an issue  arose.
    The Judge offered the appellant and his representative the  opportunity
    to restart the hearing in the correct language.

13. However, by this time there was a breakdown in confidence  between  the
    appellant and interpreter. Mr McVeetie submitted this  was  because  of
    issues in his answers whereas Mr Sharif  argued  this  was  a  language
    issue.

14. The Judge chose to proceed with the hearing but in light  of  what  was
    being claimed/said and the fact the wrong language was being  spoken  I
    find there was an unfairness with these proceedings.  It  may  well  be
    that the appellant was struggling with his answers but the Courts  have
    continued to stress that proceedings must be seen to be fair and I find
    in these circumstances the Judge should  have  aired  on  the  side  of
    caution and not proceeded on the day. There was potentially a breakdown
    between the appellant and interpreter  and  in  those  circumstances  I
    accept there is an error in law and I set aside the decision.

15. Mr Sharif indicated that this matter should be  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing with no findings preserved.

16. In light of Part 3, Section 7.1 to 7.3  of  the  Practice  Statement  I
    direct the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. I direct that any additional evidence should  be  served  on  both  the
    Tribunal and other party in  accordance  with  the  current  Procedural
    Rules.

DECISION

18. The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

19. A Kurdish Badini interpreter is required.


    Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
