
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03571/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 July 2018                               |On 3 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                             parviz Shirkhanloo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Greater
Manchester
     Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of  Iran,  challenges  a  decision  of  Judge
    Raikes of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 1 May  2018  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 1 March  2018
    refusing his protection claim.

2.   The grounds contend that the judge erred in law in (1) failing to  give
    adequate reasons for rejection of the "Dorodian witness evidence of  Lt
    Brown"; and (2) failing to  properly  consider  whether  the  appellant
    would be at risk of harm upon return as a failed asylum seeker who  had
    gone through an actual Christian conversion [even though disbelieved as
    to genuineness] and exited Iran illegally.

     I am not persuaded by ground 1.  The judge's assessment of  Lt  Brown's
    evidence is set out at paragraphs 32-34 and is summarised at  paragraph
    36 as follows:

     "I find that whilst, as stated, Lt Brown does wish to assist  him,  and
         indeed that she is the Minister of Ellesmere Port Salvation Army, I
         am not satisfied, given not only, in  my  view,  the  very  limited
         period of time the Appellant has been attending her church, and the
         again  limited  number  of  what  she   describes   as   in   depth
         conversations with him, particularly when taking into  account  the
         barriers in respect of language and  understanding  of  each  other
         that clearly exist, that her evidence can be viewed  as  confirming
         that the Appellant is a genuine convert  or  indeed  that  she  can
         attest to that being the case.  Further I have also noted  that  Lt
         Brown was clear that there were prescribed  processes  followed  by
         the Salvation Army as an organisation in respect  of  deciding  who
         became a member of such a church but being baptised  or  undergoing
         baptism was not one of them.  She was also clear that  baptism  did
         not, in their view, need to be undertaken in order to find that  an
         individual was a genuine convert."

3.   Mr Brown contends that the judge failed to take into  account  that  in
    the relatively short period of time the appellant had been  in  the  UK
    (he arrived in late October 2017) he had really done all  he  could  to
    find a place of worship and demonstrate the sincerity of his faith; and
    that over a period of five months the fact that Lt Brown had  had  four
    in-depth conversations with the appellant regarding  his  faith  should
    have been recognised as evidence of close  examination.   However,  the
    task of the judge was to assess the evidence as a whole and as part  of
    that exercise the judge had to consider the appellant's claim to having
    converted to Christianity in all its aspects, including his claim  that
    he became involved with Christianity in Iran and had  narrowly  escaped
    being arrested in a  house  raid.   The  judge  identified  significant
    shortcomings in the appellant's account of  his  experiences  in  Iran,
    including material investigations and lack of detail.

4.   As regards the judge's treatment of Lt Brown, he made  clear  that  she
    had no doubts as to  the  sincerity  of  his  evidence,  but  correctly
    recognised that it was for him to assess the issue of  the  genuineness
    of the appellant's claim to be a Christian  convert  in  light  of  the
    evidence as a whole.  Mr Brown is right to say that the  appellant  had
    not had much time since arrival in the  UK  to  form  connections  with
    places of worship, but it remains that the period of time over which Lt
    Brown had been able to observe the appellant was limited and the  times
    when she had had the opportunity to engage with him in-depth  had  been
    limited (to four).  I consider it was open to the judge to  reduce  the
    weight he felt able to attach to the evidence of Lt Brown for these two
    reasons.  It was also open to the judge to treat the appellant's  quest
    to be baptised, even when  he  had  committed  to  worshipping  in  the
    Ellesmere Port Salvation Army, as incongruous and "as an attempt by the
    appellant  to  evidence  his  claim  in  another  form".    Given   the
    appellant's choice to worship in the Salvation Army, it was also within
    the range of reasonable responses for the judge to attach  significance
    to the fact that "little  evidence  [had  been]  presented  as  to  the
    appellant's genuine wish to proselytize".

5.   The judge also found  at  paragraph  46  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he had exited Iran illegally. Again, I  consider  that
    the judge's findings as regards this issue were sound.  The burden  was
    on the appellant to establish that he had exited illegally and  he  had
    not discharged that burden.  The judge was clearly  aware  when  making
    this finding that the appellant's account was that his passport was  in
    Iran and it had expired and that he had travelled to Turkey by foot.

6.   Mr Brown argues that even on the premise that the appellant  was  found
    not to be a genuine convert, it was not in dispute that he had obtained
    a certificate of Baptism and that he would be obliged when returning to
    Iran (because he could not be expected to lie) to tell the  authorities
    that he had converted to Christianity.  He relies in  this  respect  on
    the proposition (set out, inter alia in RT (Zimbabwe) & Ors v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38) that a claimant cannot
    be expected to lie to the authorities on return.   However,  given  the
    judge's findings that the appellant had not left Iran illegally and had
    not converted to Christianity, the appellant would not, on return, have
    to lie about his religion since it, by default, is  Islam.   I  do  not
    consider that the principle that a claimant cannot be expected  to  lie
    necessitates that the appellant inform the Iranian authorities  of  his
    efforts to maintain he was a Christian convert, but in  any  event,  as
    someone who had not exited  illegally  it  was  open  to  the  judge  -
    consistently with the guidance set out  in  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
    asylum seeker) [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) - to  conclude  that  the  Iranian
    authorities would have no adverse interest in him.

Notice of Decision

7.   For the above reasons, I conclude that the  judge  did  not  materially
    err in law and that his decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must
    stand.

8.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                 Date: 27 September 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
