
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03437/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 April 2018                          |  On 03rd May 2018                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                                    A A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Cleghorn instructed by Halliday Reeves


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Caskie promulgated on 5 July  2017,  allowing
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent made on  22
    March 2017 to refuse a claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.

 2. The appellant's case is that she is a citizen of Somalia who  was  born
    in Mogadishu, living there until 2008 and she, and her family moved  to
    a refugee camp in Kenya.  She later returned and began to work in a tea
    shop acquainted by police officers,  as  a  result  of  which  she  was
    threatened by Al Shabab, having begun to receive threats  by  telephone
    in early 2015.  She did not  leave  her  job,  but  later  two  of  her
    colleagues were killed in August 2016 and she then received  a  further
    threatening phone call, prompting her to leave Somalia.  Prior  to  her
    departure from Somalia she had hid in her father's  home  and  arranged
    for an agent to facilitate her departure.

 3. For the reasons set out in the refusal letter  of  22  March  2017  the
    respondent did not accept the appellant's claim.  It was accepted  that
    she was Somali but it was not accepted that she had  worked  in  a  tea
    shop frequented by members of the local police force  given  the  vague
    description of police officers who she said frequented her work  place,
    contradictory answers regarding her location of the police station, so,
    it was, however, accepted that she had  worked  in  a  tea  shop.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept the appellant had been threatened  as
    claimed but she was unable to give clear or credible reasons as to  how
    they else Al Shabab would have acquired her professional phone  number,
    contradictory answers to the number of threats given, the vagueness  as
    to the nature of the threats and as objective  evidence  did  not  show
    that they would target people of  such  a  low  profile.   It  was  not
    accepted that the appellant's colleagues  had  been  killed.   On  that
    basis she was not satisfied that the appellant was at risk on return to
    Somalia.

 4. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge Caskie found:-

      i) The appellant's evidence was presented in a  clear  and  consistent
         manner [20,] it not being surprising that she did  not  immediately
         flee, the  decision  to  do  so  flowing  from  threats  which  had
         accumulated [20] and that he did not attach significant  weight  to
         the single inconsistency of the appellant's account;

     ii) the overall account of the appellant had  given  was  plausible  in
         light of the background information regarding the targeting of  tea
         shops, the appellant's  account  being  not  simply  that  she  was
         targeted by Al Shabab because she was  providing  services  to  the
         authorities but because she was doing so in close  proximity  to  a
         police station, that the appellant had been  involved  in  avoiding
         the need on the part of the police to arrange  further  from  their
         base in order to obtain services [21], and the opportunity  for  Al
         Shabab to attack the authorities away from their more  secure  base
         therefore being reduced;

    iii) the appellant appeared to be uneducated with limited experience  of
         the world;

     iv) that the appellant's account met  the  low  standard  of  proof  in
         relation to asylum claims [23];

      v) that he was satisfied that Al Shabab would still be  interested  in
         her on return to Somalia as a person who had provided  services  to
         the authorities, and activities that they would wish to deter [24];

     vi) that it would not be reasonable for the appellant's husband  to  be
         required to give up his education in order to avoid  the  appellant
         being entitled to refugee protection; and there was thus  no  basis
         on which the appellant would be able to  relocate  internally  with
         her husband in Somalia [25];

 5. Having regard to Osman v United Kingdom,  and  the  volatility  of  the
    situation in Somalia that there is no  real  prospect  that  she  could
    obtain the protection from the authorities.

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had erred:

      i) in failing to give consideration to  the  submission  that,  having
         actioned which is how the Al Shabab had  left  the  tea  shop,  the
         appellant could no longer be at risk;

     ii) in not noting that had the ultimate goal for Al Shabab had been  to
         kill the appellant they would have done so rather than make threats
         to do so.  She did not comply; and, as she has  now  done  so,  she
         would no longer be at risk;

    iii) in failing to take  into  account  that  fleeing  the  country  and
         leaving her husband rather than just  leave  her  job  is  such  an
         extreme reaction as to be fatal to the appellant's credibility;

     iv) that the judge had erred in his assessment of what would be  unduly
         harsh in  finding  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         appellant's husband to relocate with her.

 7. On 29 November 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission.

 8. The first two points identified are in essence that the judge fails  to
    appreciate that, as the appellant had now complied with what Al  Shabab
    had asked her to do, she would no longer be at risk.  That was a  point
    raised by the respondent in submissions [11].   I  note  Ms  Cleghorn's
    submission recorded at [13] that the appellant's evidence that  once  a
    threat had been made by Al Shabab they would carry it out which was her
    recent experience.  It is clear from the judge's decision  that  having
    recorded the submissions, he took them into account -  see for  example
    the references to Mr Appleby at [20].  The judge  found  [24]  that  "I
    have no doubt that Al Shabab would still be  interested  in  her  as  a
    person who has provided services to the authorities.  I am in no  doubt
    that Al Shabab would view that  as  an  activity  they  would  wish  to
    deter".  That  is,  I  consider,  a  sufficient  consideration  of  the
    respondent's submissions.  Further, the assertion that had the men  who
    wished to kill her that they would have done so, is predicated  in  the
    assumption  as  to  how  Al  Shabab  would  behave  in  the  particular
    circumstances and is  predicated  on  the  knowledge  of  their  actual
    motives, assuming them to be rational in making her cease her  activity
    and that they would not wish to do anything more.  That  too  fails  to
    identify error in the decision of the judge.

 9. The third point is simply an attempt to reargue the case.  There is  no
    indication that this submission was made to  the  judge,  nor  does  it
    merit weight.

10. I do, however, consider that the judge did err in his assessment of the
    reasonableness of internal flight.

11. The fact that the appellant's husband might not be able to continue his
    education is in my view a wholly inadequate basis for considering  that
    relocation would be unduly harsh.  On that basis, the decision involved
    the making of an error of law, and is set aside to be  remade  on  that
    issue. I heard further submissions on that point, both  representatives
    identifying to me the relevant passages set  out  in  the  respondent's
    Country Guidance.

12. I am satisfied that on the basis of the  preserved  findings  of  Judge
    Caskie, generous as they are, that the appellant is  at  risk  from  Al
    Shabaab in her home area,  that  is,  Mogadishu.   While  there  is  no
    finding on what the husband would do, there is no  indication  that  he
    would not be in a position to assist the appellant, and have  therefore
    approached the issue of internal relocation on the basis that she would
    not be a lone female.

13. In assessing whether the applicant could relocate to  another  area,  I
    have had regard to the Home Office's  Country  Guidance  notes  on  the
    Security  Situation  in  Southern  Somalia,  and  on  Al-Shabaab.    In
    addition, it is relevant to consider also  AMM  and  others  (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 45.

14. While I accept that the appellant does not have a high profile, she  is
    at risk in her home area. The question is whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect her to relocate.

15. At section 2.4.4. and 2.4.5 of  the  Security  Situation  note,  it  is
    stated:


    2.4.4 In  AMM  and  others,  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  internal
    relocation to an area controlled by Al Shabaab is not  feasible  for  a
    person who has had no history of living under Al Shabaab in  that  area
    and is in general unlikely to be a reasonable proposition  for  someone
    who  has  had  such  a  history  (paras  598-601)  (see  also  security
    situation, freedom of movement and the country policy  and  information
    note on Somalia (South and Central): Fear of Al Shabaab).


    2.4.5 For areas of south and central Somalia which are  not  under  the
    control of Al Shabaab, in AMM and others the Upper Tribunal  held  that
    internal relocation is in general unlikely to  be  an  option,  if  the
    place of proposed relocation is stricken by famine or near  famine.  In
    addition, family and/or clan connections may have an important part  to
    play  in  determining  the  reasonableness  of  a  proposed  place   of
    relocation. Travel by land across southern and  central  Somalia  to  a
    home area or proposed place of relocation may well,  in  general,  pose
    real risks of serious harm, not only from Al  Shabaab  checkpoints  but
    also as a result of the present  famine  conditions.  Women  travelling
    without male friends or relatives are in general likely to face a  real
    risk of sexual violence (paras 603-605) (see also Freedom  of  movement
    and the country policy and information note on Somalia:  Women  Fearing
    Gender-based Violence).

16. The evidence on the humanitarian situation set out in the  Home  Office
    Guidance produced shows, as Ms Cleghorn submitted, that famine or  near
    famine situations as well as drought over  large  parts  of  South  and
    Central Somalia. Further, I am not satisfied that the appellant or  her
    husband have clan or family connections outside Mogadishu, and  I  note
    also that many are now driven to urban areas, and  it  is  not  at  all
    clear that even were there to be a place other than Mogadishu where the
    appellant could live that she or her husband could  safely  get  there,
    given the checkpoints. Indeed, the map produced to me  in  the  hearing
    shows problems on all the roads out of the Mogadishu area.

17. Taking all of these factors into account, and bearing in mind that  the
    appellant and her husband would effectively be displaced people,  I  am
    satisfied that it would be unduly harsh even as a couple  to  relocate,
    and that accordingly  she  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
    Accordingly, I allow her appeal on that basis.   I  am  also  satisfied
    that, for the same reasons, the risk of serious harm to her  on  return
    would be such that her  removal  would  be  in  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention
    and thus I allowed her appeal on human rights grounds also.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by  allowing  it  on  refugee  and  human  rights
    grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date  30 April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul









