

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03483/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 May 2017                            |On 14 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     RM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Nag, Fountains Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of FtT Judge Butler that  was  issued  on  19  October  2016.
    Judge Butler decided the appellant was not a  refugee  from  Kuwait  or
    otherwise in need of international protection.

 2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction  and  it  is
    appropriate to continue it in the Upper Tribunal.  The full details  of
    my order are set out at the end of this document.

 3. After hearing the competing arguments, I decided the grounds of  appeal
    were made out and the decision and reasons statement of Judge Butler is
    infected by legal error.  I  also  decided  that  I  could  remake  the
    decision, which I did, allowing the appeal against the refusal  of  the
    protection claim.  Thus, I find the appellant is a refugee from  Kuwait
    because he is an undocumented Bidoon.  I announced my decision  at  the
    end of the hearing but reserved my full reasons, which I now give.

 4. Central to my decision is the finding of Judge Butler at [57]  that  he
    attached no weight to the DNA test report because the  different  names
    used in that report from the identity given by the appellant.  Although
    on the face of the report this difference would appear material,  Judge
    Butler failed to have regard to the  other  evidence  that  establishes
    that the subject of the DNA test and the  appellant  are  one  and  the
    same.  I am satisfied this was explained to  Judge  Butler  and  it  is
    repeated in the grounds of application for permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  I do not need to rehearse the arguments here.

 5. Because  his  status  is  established  by  means  other  than  his  own
    testimony, it is immaterial as  to  whether  the  appellant  is  wholly
    credible.  In any event, the truthfulness or otherwise of his  accounts
    should be assessed in the context of all the evidence and the fact  the
    relationship is proven is highly significant.  I must bear in mind also
    that  Judge  Butler  did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be  devoid  of
    credibility.  At [59], for example, he  found  the  appellant  is  from
    Kuwait.

 6. Ms Aboni acknowledged that were I to find the appellant to be the  same
    person who was the subject of the DNA test, then it would be  difficult
    for the SSHD to maintain her refusal.  I know this is not a  concession
    but it is indicative of the relative  importance  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his uncle being proven.

 7. Because I accept that it is reasonably likely that  the  appellant  and
    the person tested are  one  and  the  same,  I  must  accept  that  the
    appellant is the nephew of a person who has been granted refugee status
    by the SSHD as an undocumented  Bidoon  from  Kuwait.   The  fact  that
    relationship is established to the lower standard of proof means it  is
    reasonably likely the appellant also has that status.  This is  because
    he is from the same family group.

 8. Given the background country  information  and  the  country  guideline
    cases of the Upper  Tribunal,  because  it  is  reasonably  likely  the
    appellant is an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait, he must be a  refugee.



 9. It is for these reasons I remake the decision and allow the appeal.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Butler contains an error  on
a point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision  and  allow  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
protection claim dated 23 March 2016 because  I  find  the  appellant  is  a
refugee.

Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"RM".




Signed                              Date         12 June 2017


Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
