
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03825/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 October 2019                            |On 18 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     mf
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Sidhu, Solicitor, Harbans Singh & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hagan  promulgated  on  2  July  2019,  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent dated  5  April
    2019 to refuse his claim for asylum and humanitarian  protection,  made
    on the basis that his conversion to Christianity  would  place  him  at
    risk of persecution in Iran.

Factual background

 2. The appellant, MF, is a citizen of Iran and  was  born  on  14  January
    1971.  The full factual background to his claim is set out  at  [3]  to
    [11] of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 3. The appellant is now 48.  He has three daughters and a wife.  He had  a
    fourth daughter, but very sadly she died in 2016 from  an  overdose  of
    drugs, shortly after a period of what the appellant  considered  to  be
    unjustified detention at the hands of the authorities.  That experience
    led the appellant to question  the  Shia  Islamic  faith  to  which  he
    adhered at the time.  He met an old friend, SJ, whom he had known  from
    his military service.  SJ  had  become  a  Christian  and  invited  the
    appellant to join his house church.  Following a  period  of  approval,
    the appellant attended seven meetings at the house church and  was  due
    to attend an eighth.  He was late.   Shortly  before  he  arrived,  the
    meeting was raided by  the  authorities.   The  appellant  thus  evaded
    arrest.  This led the appellant to decide to leave the  country,  which
    he did shortly afterwards with the assistance of  an  agent.   He  then
    arrived in this country clandestinely, claiming asylum on the same day.
      The appellant's brother also converted to Christianity in  Iran,  and
    sought refuge here, unbeknown  to  the  appellant.   The  appellant  is
    involved in a local church, and spoke at his brother's baptism service.

 4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim to  have  converted
    to Christianity.  She considered that  his  claim  lacked  credibility.
    She did not accept that the appellant's daughter's death would have led
    him to question his faith in the manner claimed.   That  the  appellant
    had participated in church life in the United Kingdom  did  not  assist
    his claim.

 5. Judge O'Hagan dismissed the appellant's appeal as he did not accept the
    central planks of his conversion narrative.   The  judge  rejected  the
    evidence  of  a  Steven  [C],  the  assistant  secretary  at  the   [~]
    Christadelphian Church.  He had provided a letter  in  support  of  the
    appellant and had attended the hearing to give evidence to support  his
    case.  Mr [C] stated that from the first time  he  met  the  appellant,
    throughout the eight months that he had known him by the time  he  gave
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, he had considered  him  to  be
    Christian.   Mr  [C]  described   the   extent   of   the   appellant's
    participation in the Christadelphian Church and the instruction classes
    that he would take on a weekly basis  at  the  Persian  language  Bible
    classes.

 6. The judge accepted that Mr [C] had a leadership role.  He accepted that
    he was a "sincerely devout" man and he said that his  evidence  carried
    weight.  However, there were two aspects of Mr [C]'s evidence which the
    judge did not consider to attract weight.  The first was at [49], where
    the judge noted that there are many asylum seekers at Mr [C]'s  church.
    The judge said:

         "Such people are likely to  include  many  who  will  be  transient
         because of the  practical  challenges  that  face  asylum  seekers.
         These are circumstances which would make difficult the formation of
         close personal relationships.  I do not criticise Mr [C] for  these
         matters, but nor can I ignore them in assessing his evidence."

 7. There was another criticism that the judge had of Mr [C]'s evidence, at
    [50]:

         "When he was asked how he could be sure the appellant was  genuine,
         he said that it was '...quite clear the first time he attended that
         he was a committed Christian.'  I am  conscious  that  someone  who
         forms a view  of  this  kind  from  the  outset  can  be  prone  to
         confirmation bias, viewing all subsequent dealings with the  person
         through the prism of that initial impression of  them.   I  do  not
         know whether that is so here, but it is an obvious possibility that
         I cannot overlook."

 8. The other reasons the judge dismissed the appeal related  to  what  the
    judge  considered  to  be   the   "remarkable   coincidence"   of   the
    circumstances in which the appellant's brother,  also  from  Iran,  had
    claimed asylum on account of his claimed Christian conversion  and  had
    done so successfully.  It was the appellant's case  that  he  had  fled
    Iran independently of his brother and had not discussed his  conversion
    with his brother until he arrived in this country.  In  his  statement,
    the appellant wrote that it was only upon contacting his mother in Iran
    upon his arrival here that he was informed by her that his brother  was
    also in this country and had also claimed asylum on the  basis  of  his
    conversion to Christianity.  The brother was recognised as a refugee by
    the respondent.  The appellant later spoke  at  his  brother's  baptism
    service.  The judge said at [58]:

         "...what I am being asked to believe is  that  these  two  brothers
         both abandoned the Islamic faith, converted to Christianity, joined
         a church, fled the country, and then came to  the  United  Kingdom,
         and that they did all these things independently of one another  at
         almost exactly the same time.  Indeed, on their account they did so
         not only independently of one another, but  in  ignorance  of  what
         each other was doing until after they were both  in  this  country.
         The level of coincidence required for this to be so is very  great.
         Indeed, it might be said that it is so great that it  is  difficult
         to accept that such a thing might happen by mere  chance...  In  my
         view, this is  an  aspect  of  the  case  that  does  substantially
         undermine the appellant's credibility."

 9. The judge was also concerned that the  appellant's  account  of  having
    joined the house church in Iran showed what the judge considered to  be
    a lack of acknowledgement that it was a risky thing to do.  He wrote at
    [61]:

         "The appellant is, as was clear  to  me  on  hearing  from  him,  a
         reasonably intelligent man.  He would have been 47 at the time, and
         his account of himself is that he is a man with experience of life.
          He was, moreover, a man whose account of himself is  that  he  had
         direct experience that the Iranian authorities were to  be  feared.
         That is, after all, the core of his narrative about  the  death  of
         his daughter ... Despite all this, he  apparently  joined  a  house
         church without any particular thought about the  risk  to  himself,
         his wife, or his remaining daughters."

10. The third operative reason the judge gave  for  dismissing  the  appeal
    related to what he  considered  to  be  the  conflicting  accounts  the
    appellant had provided of the checks that were conducted when he joined
    the house church in his evidence on the one  hand  and  in  his  asylum
    interview on the other.

Discussion

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin sitting
    as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in these terms:

         "It is arguable, as asserted  in  the  grounds,  that  the  judge's
         adverse credibility findings are speculative and not based  on  the
         evidence.  No real reasons are given for dismissing the evidence of
         the appellant's brother, a refugee on account of his  Christianity,
         photographic evidence of the appellant taking part in his brother's
         baptism, the appellant's knowledge of Christianity and the evidence
         of the church leader who had seen him at least  twice  a  week  for
         eight months".

    Against that background I consider there to be  considerable  force  in
    the submissions advanced by Mr Sidhu.  Although it is open to the judge
    to ascribe what weight he saw fit to the evidence of  Mr  [C],  it  was
    necessary for the judge to give  clearer  reasons  as  to  why  he  was
    rejecting the evidence in light of the question the judge himself posed
    at [47] of his decision.  There he stated,  "The  real  issue  is  [the
    appellant's] motive for [claiming asylum]; whether it is  a  matter  of
    genuine belief, or a cynical ploy to gain status in this country".

12. The Inner House of the Court of Session recently considered the  weight
    to be attached to witnesses of this nature.  It is common ground in the
    present matter that Mr [C] was a witness qualified to give  expert,  as
    it were, evidence concerning  his  interpretation  of  the  appellant's
    manifested belief in Christianity.  In TF and MA  v  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH  58  at  [60],  Lord  Glennie
    analysed the implications of the rejection of the evidence of an expert
    witness in similar circumstances.  Lord Glennie held at [60]  that  "it
    is legitimate for the Tribunal to regard with suspicion  evidence  from
    church witnesses which is based entirely upon what  the  appellant  has
    told them" (emphasis original).  Lord Glennie continued:

         "But save in a clear case, that exercise is not legitimate when the
         evidence from the church witnesses is based in substantial part  on
         their observations of the appellant when he has been engaging  with
         the activities of the church."

    That is precisely the category into which the evidence of Mr [C] in the
    present matter falls.  Lord Glennie in TF and MA did not rule  out  the
    possibility that there would be circumstances where an appellant in bad
    faith had attempted to convey an impression of genuine belief,  but  in
    doing so had managed successfully to  dupe  everyone  around  him  into
    believing he was a Christian in circumstances when in fact he was  not.
    Lord Glennie continued:

         "The problem with this approach is that it  makes  a  leap  from  a
         finding, on the one hand,  that,  on  certain  other  matters,  the
         appellant has told lies, to a finding, on the other hand,  that  he
         has not only done that but has in effect lived a lie, i.e.  created
         a false persona and lived a  false  lifestyle,  over  a  protracted
         period, and has successfully duped the witnesses from the  [Church]
         into believing that his new faith was genuine when it was not."

13. The judge was clearly live to the possibility that that was  what  this
    appellant  had  done  by  virtue  of  his  reference  at  [47]  to  the
    possibility of the appellant's manifested faith merely being a "cynical
    ploy".  However, the judge did not reach an operative finding  on  this
    issue.  It is clear that the  judge  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    claimed conversion to be genuine, but he did  not  make  the  necessary
    finding that he  had  fabricated  the  entire  narrative  that  he  had
    deployed before the leadership team at the church at which  he  was  an
    active member and that he had managed successfully to  mislead  Mr  [C]
    and the other witnesses who wrote for his support from the  church.   I
    consider that to be a material error.

14. Mr Lindsay submitted  that  the  position  in  the  present  matter  is
    nuanced.  The situation that the Inner House of the  Court  of  Session
    was concerned with was where there had been discrete lies told  by  the
    appellant, which were not related to the fabric of the core claim to be
    a Christian.  In the present case, submits Mr Lindsay,  the  fact  that
    the appellant has fabricated the entire narrative that he had  deployed
    before the church leadership and before the Tribunal meant that it  was
    not necessary for the judge to reach findings in such clear  terms.   I
    reject that submission.  In my judgment, the rationale  of  TF  and  MA
    applies with all the greater force in the present matter,  where  there
    are no peripheral or subsidiary issues which the appellant may properly
    be regarded  as  having  fabricated,  bolstered  or  exaggerated  -  in
    contrast to there being a kernel of truth at the heart  of  his  claim.
    There is essentially one claim made  by  this  appellant,  based  on  a
    single  overarching  narrative.   That  narrative  is  that  he  is   a
    Christian,  that  he  has  attended  Christian   services   and   Bible
    instruction  classes,  that  he  has  participated  in  the  life   and
    fellowship of the church, that he has spoken at the baptism of his  own
    brother who had been accepted as a  refugee  in  this  country  by  the
    respondent without an appeal, and that he has  lived  consistently  and
    pursuant to having made that profession of faith.

15. In the face of that single overarching narrative, the  only  conclusion
    which follows from the judge's rejection of the evidence of Mr  [C]  is
    that the appellant had fabricated everything that he had done with  the
    church: this included regular attendance, Bible classes,  and  speaking
    at his brother's baptism.  There is no halfway  category  whereby  some
    elements of the appellant's narrative could be true and in relation  to
    those aspects Mr [C] may  be  forgiven  for  accepting  them  as  being
    genuine, whereas elements of his conversion elsewhere were not genuine.
     There is no support for that proposition.  Yet in the absence of clear
    conclusions on the point from the judge, the reader of the decision  is
    left speculating as to the reasons why Mr [C]'s evidence was  rejected.



16. In relation to the concerns of the judge that the  coincidental  nature
    of the appellant's brother's claim for asylum and the  appellant's  own
    claim for asylum are such  that  it  is  not  plausible,  it  is  well-
    established that judges in this jurisdiction:

         "should be cautious before finding  an  account  to  be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable  risk  that  [a  judge]
         will be over influenced by his own views  on  what  is  or  is  not
         plausible" (Y v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]
         EWCA Civ 1223 at [25], per Keene LJ)

    It is trite law that judges should be slow therefore to bring their own
    assumptions as to what is likely  to  be  inherently  probable  or  not
    probable to their assessment of asylum  claims.   It  is  necessary  to
    record that the judge had found at [60] of his decision that the  early
    elements of the appellant's conversion  narrative  were  credible.   He
    said at [60]:

         "In my view, that [the account of the appellant's daughter's  death
         leading to his exploration of the Christian faith]  is  a  credible
         account for why someone might abandon their old faith, and  embrace
         a new one.  Had the account ended there, I would have accepted  it,
         certainly to the lower standard of proof which is applicable here."

17. The judge was in the territory,  therefore,  of  having  accepted  that
    elements of the appellant's case were credible.  The  only  basis  upon
    which the judge dismissed the impact and the relevance of the brother's
    accepted conversion to Christianity was because he  did  not  think  it
    would  be  probable  that  two  brothers  would  convert   in   similar
    circumstances, but not talk about it between themselves.   In  reaching
    that finding, the judge did not appear to have regard to the fact  that
    the brothers at that stage were somewhat estranged due to  their  wives
    not getting on with each other and due to the fact as described by  the
    appellant  in  his  evidence  that  the  caution  with  which  he   was
    approaching  his  new  found  Christian  belief  in  Iran,  given   the
    circumstances of the opposition from the authorities, would have  meant
    that he would be less inclined to discuss such matters openly.

18.  In  relation  to  the  judge's  findings  concerning  the  appellant's
    admission to the house church, as described in his asylum interview, it
    is clear that the judge did fall into  error.   The  judge  quoted  the
    answer the appellant had provided to question  94  of  his  substantive
    asylum interview at [63].  The  judge's  quote  records  the  following
    exchange:

         "I note that question 94 reads as follows,

                  'Did you share personal  details  with  the  rest  of  the
         group?'

         That  is,  it  seems  to  me,  a  simple,  direct  question.    The
         appellant's reply is recorded as being,

                  'No, I didn't even have their telephone numbers.   I  only
             had SJ's telephone number.'"

19. It seems that the judge had not considered the impact,  if  any,  of  a
    letter dated 12 March 2019 which may be found at pages 34 to 36 of  the
    appellant's bundle.  In that  letter,  as  is  common  in  many  asylum
    claims, the then claimant for asylum wrote with various corrections  to
    the interview transcript.

20. In relation to question 94 the appellant had provided  a  clarification
    in these terms:

         "I mean I did not share my whole history.  The  house  church  were
         aware of my details as when I  wanted  to  join  SJ  gave  them  my
         details for me to be approved, so at the very least A knew my  full
         details and where I lived, but I was not the one to give it to him,
         it would have been SJ."

    I should note that the asylum interview  took  place  on  5  March  and
    accordingly this letter was  sent  under  a  week  later.   Mr  Lindsay
    realistically accepted in the hearing before me that the judge erred on
    this account and that that error was sufficient to infect the safety of
    his entire credibility assessment.  I agree.

21. The judge had the following  factors  before  him  which  militated  in
    favour of a finding that the appellant was a Christian.  He accepted at
    [60] that the initial narrative concerning the  appellant's  conversion
    featured credible elements.  The appellant's brother  was  a  Christian
    and had been recognised as a refugee by the respondent.  There was  the
    evidence of Mr [C], described by the judge as a sincerely  devout  man,
    who gave evidence that carried weight.  There was the  appellant's  own
    evidence.  The only point at which the judge considered  the  appellant
    to be internally inconsistent was in relation to the  process  for  his
    acceptance into the house church in Iran and as I have already set out,
    the judge failed to have regard to the materially different corrections
    that the appellant issued only five days after the interview.

22. Drawing the above analysis together, the reasons given by the judge for
    dismissing the appeal featured reliance  on  irrelevant  considerations
    (the number of other Iranians,  and  general  believers,  at  Mr  [C]'s
    church).  The judge failed to resolve a material factual conflict:  did
    the appellant live a lie, or was Mr [C] mistaken on some  other  basis?
    He drew upon plausibility findings in circumstances where the remaining
    evidence, as set out in the previous paragraph,  suggested  that  there
    was a core of substance to the appellant's claim.  He  also  failed  to
    take into account material evidence, in the form of the corrections  to
    the  appellant's  protection  claim.   Although  the  judge   correctly
    directed himself as to the applicable standard  of  proof,  it  appears
    that, in reality, the judge applied a higher standard.

23. The judge  considered  at  some  length  the  likely  risk  matrix  the
    appellant would face in light of his findings upon his return to  Iran.
    It is not necessary for me to analyse those findings at this stage,  as
    it is clear that the decision as a  whole  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and therefore the decision needs to be set aside.



24. As the appellant has been denied a fair assessment of the  entirety  of
    his case, the only appropriate remedy is for the entirety of  the  case
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Withdrawal of concession

25. Before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  respondent's  representative  had
    conceded that, if the appellant were successful in establishing that he
    had converted to Christianity, he would be at risk upon return to Iran.
    Mr Lindsay applied to withdraw this  concession  ahead  of  the  matter
    being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   It was common ground  that
    "mere" conversion to Christianity would be insufficient, in  isolation,
    to provide a well-founded fear of being persecuted in  Iran.  Something
    more is necessary, for  example  involvement  in  proselytisation.  The
    position has been summarised in a number of authorities.  For  example,
    see: FS and others (Iran - Christian Converts)  Iran  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
    00303 at [187], AS (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1539 at [36], and the respondent's Country  Policy  and
    Information Note - Iran: Christians  and  Christian  Converts,  version
    5.0, May 2019, at, for example, [2.4.13].

26. Having heard submissions from both parties, I considered  that  it  was
    appropriate to permit the respondent to withdraw the concession. I  had
    in mind the overriding principle of whether it would  be  fair  to  the
    appellant to permit this course of action. The concession was not  made
    in the refusal letter, which maintains the  orthodox  approach  to  the
    risk profile of Christians in Iran. It appears to have been made in the
    course of conduct of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    appellant prepared his case in anticipation of the  proceedings  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  he  would  engage   in
    evangelism, and other activities which entailed a risk upon his  return
    to Iran. See, for example,  paragraph  5  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement dated 19 June 2019 ("I am regularly talking about my faith to
    others, trying to make them feel and see the power of  Jesus'  love.  I
    have evangelised to numerous non-Christians and hope  that  I  will  be
    able to influence people to come to the church and find the  power  and
    love of Christ just as I was fortunate to do.").

27. Permitting withdrawal of the  concession  would  not  thrust  upon  the
    appellant the requirement to present his case in a way contrary to that
    which he has done so thus far.  Rather would simply require the case to
    proceed on the basis which the appellant was initially expecting it  to
    proceed, consistently with the way  he  has  presented  his  claim  for
    asylum so far, which itself is consistent with the country guidance.

28. There is another reason why it is appropriate  for  me  to  permit  the
    concession to be withdrawn. As recently observed by the Court of Appeal
    in the (admittedly different, but nevertheless relevant) context of the
    cessation of refugee status enjoyed by the family  members  of  certain
    persons recognised as refugees, it is necessary for those  who  are  to
    enjoy refugee status to be at risk of being persecuted. If there is  no
    nexus between the Refugee Convention ground claimed for protection,  on
    the one hand, and the likely  risk  profile  faced  by  the  individual
    concerned, on the other, the requirements  of  the  Refugee  Convention
    will not be met.   See, for example, JS (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1670 at [73]:

         "the status of a Refugee Convention 'refugee' is only accorded to a
         person  who  themselves  have  a  'well-founded   fear   of   being
         persecuted'"

    Similarly, as the House of Lords noted  in  R  (oao  Hoxha)  v  Special
    Adjudicator [2005] UKHL 19 at [86]:

     "The [Refugee[ Convention... only avails  those  unable  to  return  to
         their home country who have a present fear of persecution."

29. It would not be appropriate me to  tie  the  hands  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge who  will  deal  with  this  matter  by  insisting  that
    consideration of the appellant's putative refugee  status  takes  place
    otherwise than by reference to whether he does, in fact,  face  a  real
    risk of being persecuted.  Realistically, Mr Sidhu  did  not  have  any
    objections to this approach.  In my  judgment,  it  is  appropriate  to
    exercise my discretion  to  permit  the  respondent  to  withdraw  this
    concession.

Notice of Decision

The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham.

No findings of Judge O'Hagan are preserved.

I permit the Secretary of State to withdraw the concession for  the  reasons
that I have given.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Stephen H Smith                Date 14 November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


