


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      PA/03878/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 16th January 2017                     |On: 18th January 2017            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     FB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:             Mr Aslam, Counsel instructed by SB
                       Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:          Ms Ahmad,  Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born in  1981.   She  appeals
    with permission[1] the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  J
    McIntosh) dated 31st October 2016 to dismiss her protection appeal.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns  a  claim  for  international  protection  involving
    allegations of domestic violence. Having had regard to Rule 14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim to international protection is  that
    she has a well-founded fear of persecution in Bangladesh for reasons of
    her  membership  of  a  particular  social  group,  namely   women   in
    Bangladesh.  The  Appellant  avers  that  she  has  been  subjected  to
    sustained domestic violence by her husband for a number of years.  This
    has been inflicted because she has  "failed"  to  get  pregnant  during
    their marriage.  She left Bangladesh and came to London where  she  has
    embarked on a relationship with another man. She  now  fears  that  her
    husband and/or family will subject her to serious harm because  she  is
    perceived to have impugned their "honour" by  having  an  extra-marital
    relationship.

 4. The Respondent did not accept that the Refugee Convention was  engaged.
    Nor did she accept that there would not be a sufficiency of  protection
    for the Appellant in Bangladesh if she needed it.  In  respect  of  the
    account of domestic violence the Respondent did not  find  this  to  be
    consistent with the fact that the Appellant's husband had permitted her
    to travel to the United Kingdom and that he  had  apparently  taken  no
    steps to divorce her.   The Appellant's evidence that  she  was  living
    with her brother in  the  United  Kingdom  was  inconsistent  with  the
    evidence that her whole family had turned  against  her.  Even  if  the
    Appellant did have concerns, there was nothing to  prevent  her  moving
    elsewhere in Bangladesh.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal in essence, agreed with the Respondent  in  her
    analysis of credibility.  The Judge found the evidence to be vague  and
    contradictory. He noted that the Appellant was not a lone female, since
    she could relocate in Bangladesh with her new partner.  This  gentleman
    was also a Bangladeshi national with no leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appeal was thereby dismissed.

 6. The Appellant now appeals on  two  grounds,  very  helpfully  distilled
    before me by Mr Aslam. First, the Tribunal failed to  consider  whether
    the Appellant - and by extension her partner -  would  be  at  risk  in
    Bangladesh as an adulterer. Second, the determination contains numerous
    mistakes of fact,  or  misapprehensions  as  to  the  evidence.  Whilst
    conceding that not all of these errors were directly material, Mr Aslam
    submits that they demonstrate that the determination was prepared  with
    a lack of care, or anxious scrutiny.  I deal with each ground in turn.



    Ground 1: Failure to Consider Risk

 7. The evidence was that the although the Appellant had left  her  husband
    and entered into a relationship with  another  man,  her  marriage  was
    neither dissolved under Islamic law, by way of talaq or khula, nor  had
    she obtained a civil divorce under the Muslim Family Law  Ordinance  of
    1961. She was therefore, as a matter of fact,  committing  adultery  by
    living with her current partner. That would continue to be the case  if
    the couple were to relocate to Bangladesh.  This would place the couple
    at risk of serious harm  in  the  context  of  a  conservative  Islamic
    society. The remedy  for  this  state  of  affairs  would  be  for  the
    Appellant to seek a divorce from her husband. That would alert him, and
    other hostile family members, to her whereabouts. This was the argument
    put by the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal. It is set  out  in
    the skeleton argument drafted by Counsel, wherein references  are  made
    to supporting information in the country background material.


 8. Before me Ms Ahmad conceded that the determination  does  not  squarely
    address the point as pleaded.  I would  have  to  agree.  Paragraph  35
    notes that both the Appellant and  her  current  partner  can  relocate
    together but there is no consideration of  whether  the  type  of  harm
    mentioned in the country background material - described  at  paragraph
    26 of the decision as 'fatwa violence' including stoning,  beating  and
    whipping - might still be visited upon the  Appellant,  or  indeed  the
    pair of them together. The Judge appears to have  considered  that  the
    type of harm mentioned in the country material  (for  instance  in  the
    Country Information and Guidance document  dated  December  2014)  only
    pertained to women on their own. Whilst some of that material expressly
    does pertain to lone women, there was no justification for reading  all
    of it in that way. I do not know if there was an  evidential  basis  to
    conclude that the Appellant would somehow be protected from mob,  state
    or domestic violence by the presence in Bangladesh  of  her  adulterous
    lover. If there was it is not set out in the determination.  There  was
    a failure to assess this central plank of the Appellant's case.  I find
    ground 1 to be made out.

    Ground 2: Errors of Fact

 9. It is submitted that the  determination  contains  material  errors  of
    fact.   I address the alleged errors, and the submissions made  by  the
    parties, in turn, before reaching a global conclusion on the point.


10. Paragraph 9 of  the  determination  reads  that  the  "Appellant  first
    entered the United Kingdom on 13th May 2015". As a matter of fact  that
    is wrong. There is a long history of  her  having  visited  the  United
    Kingdom prior to this visit.  Mr Aslam submits that in a case where the
    Judge appears to conclude that this was a pre-meditated  asylum  claim,
    this was a material misunderstanding of the evidence. Had the  Tribunal
    had regard to the immigration history it would have seen that  she  has
    had numerous opportunities in the past to advance a false asylum claim.
      Had the tribunal  borne  that  history  in  mind,  it  may  not  have
    concluded that she came here with the specific  intention  of  claiming
    asylum.   For the Respondent Ms Aslam accepts  that  paragraph  9  does
    contain an error, but asks me to find  that  it  was  simply  a  typing
    mistake, since it is evident from  paragraph  30  that  the  Judge  did
    understand the true position: "the appellant last  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on the 13th May 2015" [emphasis added].

11. At paragraph 31 the Tribunal draws adverse inferences from the  alleged
    fact that the Appellant's husband sent  a  threatening  letter  to  the
    Appellant via his sister in London. The Tribunal questions why he would
    have sent the letter there, rather than to the  Appellant  herself,  at
    the address that would be known to him,  because  that  was  where  she
    always stayed when she came to the United  Kingdom.   It  would  appear
    that the Judge understood the letter to have been sent to the husband's
    sister because that is what the Appellant herself said at interview,  a
    matter helpfully brought to my attention by Ms Ahmad. What the Tribunal
    failed to appreciate is that the two houses were one and the same.  The
    'sister' is in fact the wife of  a  Mr  Alauddin,  a  relative  of  her
    husband, who always sponsored the Appellant's visit  visas.    That  is
    where she was staying, and where the letter was sent.

12. At paragraph 6 the Judge records that the Appellant has two brothers in
    the United Kingdom. At paragraph  34  he  deduces  that  their  support
    undermines the claim that her entire family have disowned her. This  is
    factually incorrect.  She has one brother in the  United  Kingdom,  who
    has suffered his own difficult divorce and is living with mental health
    problems.  Mr Aslam argued that this error is material. The  fact  that
    this single brother, with reasons of his own to be dislocated from  the
    family, has offered her support does not contradict the claim that  the
    family in Bangladesh have disowned the Appellant.   Ms  Ahmad  accepted
    that there was only one brother, but  submits  that  one  or  two,  the
    reasoning of the Tribunal was good.




13. In addition, the Tribunal appears  to  have  been  confused  about  who
    certain characters in the narrative are,  for  instance  conflating  Mr
    Shorof Uddin with Mr Alauddin.


14. I accept Ms Ahmad's very well made submissions that not  all  of  these
    errors were directly material to the decision that was reached.   I  am
    however concerned that in a decision which turned on its  facts,  there
    were numerous misunderstandings as to what the evidence  actually  was.
    Such cumulative errors do  arguably  demonstrate  a  lack  of  care  or
    anxious scrutiny.    I consequently find ground 2 to be made out.

15. The parties were in agreement that if the grounds were  all  made  out,
    the decision should be set aside. They were in equal agreement that  in
    those circumstances the matter should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, due to the extensive fact finding required.





    Decisions


16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


17. The decision in the appeal is to be re-made by the First-tier Tribunal.


18. There is an order for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   16th
                                January 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin
on the 28th November 2016

