
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03783/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 9 June 2017                     |On 31 July 2017                          |
|                                   |                                         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                    [d g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, instructed by Marsh & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Albania who  sought  asylum
    because he asserted that he was the subject of an  ongoing  blood  feud
    involving him and his father.  This claim was refused by the respondent
    and the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. His appeal was heard at Harmondsworth on  23  May  2016  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Telford but in a decision which is dated 8  August  2016
    (although apparently not signed) but not promulgated until  20  January
    2017 which is some eight months after the date of  the  hearing,  Judge
    Telford dismissed his appeal.  No explanation has been provided  as  to
    why a decision supposedly made in August 2016 was not promulgated until
    five months later.  Before me on behalf of the  respondent  Mr  Wilding
    very properly conceded that the decision  was  not  sustainable  for  a
    number of reasons.  As he put it, it was difficult  to  know  where  to
    start, whether it was the numerous spelling and  typographical  errors,
    the consideration of factors which actually were not part of the appeal
    (such as EEA Regulations or Sri Lankan documents) or because the  judge
    did not deal with the actual issue,  that  is  what  the  evidence  was
    regarding the appellant's assertion that he was a potential victim of a
    blood feud, the decision simply did not adequately deal with this case.



 3. In my judgement the criticisms which are contained within  the  grounds
    and also accepted by Mr Wilding are well-founded.  The decision  itself
    is only some three and a half pages long, so it is inexplicable why  it
    should have taken so long to produce and it does  not  appear  even  to
    have been proof read because  there  are  numerous  uncorrected  errors
    within it which even a cursory reading would have enabled the judge  to
    correct.  It also does not consider at all in  substance  the  evidence
    given to support the appellant's case; the closest the judge  comes  to
    this is where he says there was  "nothing  to  the  claimed  additional
    evidence [sic]  and  the  background  evidence  does  not  support  his
    contnaions [sic again]".  After this statement  (at  paragraph  10)  at
    paragraph 11 the judge states that he notes "a registration certificate
    for the sponsor for the status of EEA national", although he says that,
    "I have no date upon it".  As there was no such certificate within this
    file and there was no suggestion that the appellant was entitled to the
    status of the EEA national it is hard to understand how this  statement
    came to be made, unless the judge had in mind a wholly different  case.
    The same can be said to his reference at paragraph 12  to  finding  "as
    odd a document headed in both English  and  another  language  which  I
    assume to be Sri Lankan" apparently appearing  in  the  file  "together
    with the certification of translation from Colombo dated 6 April 2015".
     As there was no such document within the file and  the  appellant  has
    absolutely no connection with Sri Lanka at all, again  it  is  hard  to
    understand how this statement came to be made unless  the  judge,  some
    months after the hearing, was confusing  this  case  with  yet  another
    appeal which may once have been before him.

 4. Whatever the reasons it is clear that this appellant's appeal  was  not
    properly considered and it follows that the decision will have to be re-
    made by another judge at another hearing.

 5. Both parties agree with me that as the appellant has  not  had  a  fair
    hearing, the appropriate course is to remit this appeal  back  for  re-
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross,  by  any
    judge other than Judge Telford and I will so order.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Telford  as  containing  a
material error of law and remit the appeal for rehearing  at  Hatton  Cross,
before any judge other than Judge Telford.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2017

