
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03469/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 October 2016                   |On 3 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  s a D R P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy Counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because publishing the appellant's identity
       might be thought to create a risk that would not otherwise exist.

    2. Here the appellant appeals with the permission of an Upper  Tribunal
       Judge a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  7  April  2016  to
       refuse his protection claim.  He is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  and
       claims that he would be at risk in the event of his  being  returned
       to his country of nationality.

    3. I begin by considering  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge.

    4. This shows that the appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
       September 2008 using his own passport and having entry clearance  as
       a student.  His leave was extended in stages until 26 September 2016
       but was curtailed in February 2015 to expire on 25 April 2015.

    5. He was encountered on  22  February  2016  working  illegally  as  a
       cashier at a petrol station in north London.

    6. On 26 February 2016 removal directions were set and the next day  he
       claimed asylum.

    7. It was his case that he had worked in Saudi Arabia, the Maldives and
       later in Dubai.

    8. He became friendly with a Sri Lankan who  I  identify  as  SD.   His
       friend SD introduced him to people looking for  jobs  so  that  they
       could extend their visas  to  remain  in  Dubai.   In  May  2007  he
       resigned from his job and returned to Sri Lanka with  the  intention
       of applying to enter the United Kingdom as a student.

    9. In November 2007 he lived in  Ratmalana  which  is  a  city  in  the
       Colombo district and he was visited  by  members  of  the  Terrorist
       Investigation Department.  He was taken to the TID offices  in  Fort
       Colombo and questioned about his connections with SD and two of SD's
       "friends" who he had helped find work.  The appellant was accused of
       having assisted  terrorists  to  obtain  employment.   He  was  also
       questioned  about  bomb  blasts  in  Colombo  because  the  two  men
       identified were involved in setting off bombs in buses.

   10. The appellant admitted providing jobs for the  men  but  denied  any
       knowledge of any terrorist links. He said he was held for half a day
       and his interview was recorded in  a  statement.   His  brother  was
       later able to obtain a copy of that statement with the assistance of
       an attorney.

   11. He said he left Sri Lanka to study in September 2008 and he returned
       there for a holiday in July 2011.

   12. He was not stopped at Colombo Airport.  He was arrested by  the  TID
       at his home in July 2011.  He was detained for six  or  seven  hours
       and interrogated about SD and the two people he  had  employed.   He
       was asked questions about his passport and particularly why his  old
       passport had been replaced.  He was told by the TID that they had  a
       copy of his passport  and  they  knew  his  address  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   13. He returned to the United Kingdom in August 2011.

   14. Sometime in 2012 his mother  told  him  that  "unknown  people"  had
       visited his neighbours asking about the  appellant's  family.   They
       identified themselves as friends from Dubai  but  he  believed  they
       were TID officers in plain clothes.

   15. He said that in November 2013 his mother informed him that a  notice
       had been sent to his  home  address  requiring  him  to  attend  the
       Colombo Magistrates' Court in January 2014.  He had returned to  Sri
       Lanka on 10 December 2013 planning to attend court but he was taking
       legal advice and was told  that  he  would  have  to  surrender  his
       passport if he presented himself to court  and  he  decided  not  to
       attend.  He returned to the United Kingdom in January 2014.  He said
       that a warrant for  his  arrest  was  issued  because  of  his  non-
       attendance at court.

   16. He said he did not receive notice from  the  Home  Office  that  his
       leave to remain had been curtailed.  He found out about that when he
       was encountered by the Home Office.

   17. He summarised his claim as a fear  of  arrest  and  torture  in  Sri
       Lanka.

   18. His appeal was heard on 23 June 2016.

   19. He served a bundle of papers including  something  identified  as  a
       "police report" identifying the appellant as a suspect and a  notice
       saying the police had issued a warrant for his arrest as someone who
       had "fled the country".  In addition to the notice  telling  that  a
       warrant had been issued there was a copy of the warrant and a letter
       from one Jayatissa Ruhunage who was identified  as  the  appellant's
       attorney and proof of postage of documents.

   20. At the appeal hearing he gave  evidence  supplementing  his  witness
       statement dated 6  May  2016  stating  that  the  police  and  court
       documents had been obtained by his mother who instructed a solicitor
       to obtain them from the court.

   21. Under cross-examination it was his evidence that the documents  were
       only available from a lawyer.

   22. He said that he had been helped to leave Sri Lanka with the aid of a
       politician whose influence was such that people were disinclined  to
       ask questions.  He did not wish to identify the politician but  said
       he was a member of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party.

   23. He said that he did not apply for asylum on his return to the United
       Kingdom in 2014 because his visa was valid until 26 September  2016.
       He accepted that his leave had been curtailed. It was  his  case  he
       did not know about the curtailment.

   24. At paragraph 52 of the decision and reasons the First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge noted that the documents were supported by a letter  from  one
       Jayatissa Ruhunage  dated  17  June  2016.   The  writer  identified
       himself as an "attorney at law".  He  said  he  was  acting  on  the
       instructions of the appellant's mother to  obtain  court  documents.
       He said that he had posted them to  the  appellant's  solicitors  in
       London.  He gave  no  details  of  how  he  had  obtained  them  but
       identified himself as a Member of the Bar Association of Sri  Lanka.
       The documents had been sent to the Tribunal with a  covering  letter
       from Nag Law on 21 June 2016.  The comprised a copy of a warrant  of
       arrest issued by  the  Magistrates'  Court  at  Colombo  naming  the
       appellant.  The warrant identified the offences as "breach  of  bail
       condition" and "aiding and abetting the terrorists".  It was  signed
       and dated 22 January 2014.

   25. At paragraph 53 of the decision and reasons the judge noted that the
       appellant had claimed to have been released on bail.  He said simply
       that he had been released.  The appellant claims to have  been  told
       when he was released that he "could  go  but  they  would  come  and
       question me  further  if  necessary".   The  judge  found  that  the
       description of being released in this way was  not  consistent  with
       his claim to be in breach of bail conditions.  The judge  looked  at
       the evidence as a whole and the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  plainly
       found the evidence as a whole to be unsatisfactory.

   26. At paragraph 63 of his decision and reasons the judge said:

  "I take the view that the appellant has not given a clear and  consistent
  account of the circumstances which caused him to  leave  Sri  Lanka,  the
  type of questioning he was subjected to and the  ill-treatment  which  he
  suffered.  He was released from detention on both occasions and not  held
  overnight.  He said he was mentally tortured but was not  specific  about
  this.  He did not mention being bailed to return for further  questioning
  and did not refer to any conditions of bail.  Despite  this  the  warrant
  for his arrest which he has produced for his appeal hearing  states  that
  he is accused of being in breach of bail conditions.   I  find  that  his
  account of the accusations made against him were not  described  clearly.
  At interview he could not remember the name of one  of  the  men  he  was
  supposed to have helped and when asked  about  it  again  at  the  appeal
  hearing he still did not know."

   27. He went on to note that the lawyer's letter  sent  with  the  papers
       from the court did not explain in detail how they were obtained.  It
       was the appellant's case that his mother had moved house but she was
       not approached by the police or security officials  or  asked  about
       him and he was not required to report after being interrogated.  The
       judge  regarded  it  as  normal  practice  for  persons  accused  of
       terrorist activity to be required to report  regularly.   The  judge
       considered the appellant's evidence that  he  had  returned  to  the
       United Kingdom in January 2014.  He had said variously that  he  was
       assisted by an agent  and  by  an  unnamed  politician.   The  judge
       regarded these as different accounts.  The judge was  not  concerned
       that the warrant did not specify  an  offence  because  he  accepted
       evidence that warrants can be used during the investigation  process
       but he did find it surprising  that  the  warrant  (not  the  police
       report) mentioned a breach of bail conditions.   The  appellant  had
       never claimed that he was on bail.

   28. At paragraph 68  of  his  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       directed himself, correctly, that the appellant only  had  to  prove
       his case on the basis of a reasonable likelihood.  He then  went  on
       to identify parts of the account that he found unsatisfactory.

   29. He factored into his assessment that the potentially helpful  papers
       purportedly from a lawyer in  Sri  Lanka  were  obtained  only  just
       before the hearing and served on the day before the hearing.

   30. He found there to be a "significant  delay"  between  the  appellant
       returning to the United Kingdom in January  2014  and  his  claiming
       asylum after he was caught working as a cashier  in  February  2016.
       He said he had not taken advice from a solicitor.  The  judge  found
       it damaging to his credibility that  he  had  not  taken  advice  or
       obtained any information about the court hearing from  his  original
       lawyer in Sri Lanka sooner than he did.

   31. He also found the documents themselves to be less than satisfactory.
        It did not help that the attorney's letter  did  not  give  a  full
       account of how they were obtained or indeed what  exactly  what  was
       obtained.  He repeated his concern about the alleged breach of  bail
       conditions which is unexplained and not supported by the appellant's
       own account.

   32. He reminded himself of the  well-known  decision  in  Tanveer  Ahmed
       [2002] UKIAT 00439 and he did not believe the core  claim.   Against
       that finding the decision to dismiss the appeal was inevitable.

   33. Although Mr Murphy addressed me helpfully he also relied on  grounds
       drawn by Counsel who appeared  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
       consider them now.

   34. The grounds begin with an appropriate and long  quotation  from  the
       decision in PJ V SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1011.   The  decision  in  PJ
       concerned another example of  cases  being  supported  by  documents
       produced by local lawyers.  The grounds are particularly focused  in
       criticising  the  Secretary  of  State  for  not  applying  for   an
       adjournment to consider the documents.

   35.  According  to  the  grounds  the  respondent  has  "straightforward
       procedures in place to conduct checks of such documents and  decided
       not to do so".  The grounds contend that,  allegedly  following  PJ,
       that there is a duty of verification as the documents  were  central
       to  the  appellant's  case  and  the  verification   procedure   was
       straightforward.

   36. It is emphasised that in this case  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       expressed no doubt that the documents were  indeed  produced  by  an
       independent Sri Lankan lawyer.  Further, it is well understood  that
       Sri Lankan lawyers can obtain documents in their  official  capacity
       that are not available  to  members  of  the  public.   The  grounds
       further contend that there was no particular utility in  the  lawyer
       explaining in detail how the documents were obtained because  it  is
       known that lawyers can obtain documents  from  courts.   The  judge,
       according to the grounds,  wrongly  made  a  weighty  point  out  of
       something that was merely a fact and not a fact that illuminated the
       merits of the case one way or the other.

   37. The grounds also  suggest  that  the  judge  was  at  fault  in  not
       considering the possibility that falsely obtained documents to order
       would not have made reference to the appellant being  on  bail  when
       that had never been his case.

   38. In essence, the thrust of the grounds, and the thrust of Mr Murphy's
       argument, was that  although  the  decision  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  was
       acknowledged it did not really meet the justice of the  case.   This
       was a  case  where  the  appellant  had  relied  (he  said)  genuine
       documents produced by an independent Sri Lankan  lawyer,  albeit  at
       the last minute, which had tended  to  show  that  he  would  be  in
       trouble on return and they should not have been  set  aside  without
       clear findings and a proper explanation.

   39. The second ground attacks the credibility findings generally but  it
       can be summarised as being no more than  a  disagreement.   It  adds
       nothing to the point already made.

   40. Also the grounds contend the judge made a mistake of  fact  when  he
       said at paragraph 60 of his decision that there had been  no  direct
       contact between the appellant and the attorney in Sri Lanka when  it
       was the appellant's case that he had indeed spoken to the lawyer  by
       phone and asked him to make the arrangements.  The mistake was  said
       to have been material because the judge  had  wrongly  relied  on  a
       claim that there was no  direct  contact  to  undermine  credibility
       because the attorney said he had been instructed by the appellant.

   41. I am unimpressed by this ground of appeal.  It is not  clear  to  me
       why the judge made any reference to their being "no  direct  contact
       between them" but it seems to me this is a correct state of affairs.
        The lawyer was not the lawyer who represented the appellant earlier
       but someone contacted to make enquiries of the  court.   To  elevate
       this to an error of law on the part of the Tribunal is to  read  too
       much into a phrase which might be an  inaccurate  description  of  a
       minor point.  I do not agree that the judge  relied  on  the  "fact"
       that the appellant had never spoken to the lawyer  as  a  reason  to
       disbelieve the documents.   Whilst  accuracy  is  to  be  encouraged
       Decisions are not to be construed as if they were statute law.

   42. Ms Brocklesby-Weller, appropriately, referred me to the decision  of
       the Court of Appeal in MA (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  175.
       However, I am concerned at the potential importance of the  evidence
       purportedly provided from the Sri Lankan courts.  If  that  evidence
       is  reliable  then  it  is  good  evidence  that  the  appellant  is
       positively wanted by the authorities in Sri Lanka for  interrogation
       concerning terrorist matters.  It may not be a very huge  leap  from
       that state of affairs (if it exists) to his being a refugee.

   43. The judge has not made any clear findings on the  evidence  provided
       by the lawyer so I do not know if he thought it was  provided  by  a
       dishonest lawyer or a person pretending to be a lawyer  and  had  no
       evidential value whatsoever or if  it  was  provided  by  an  honest
       lawyer who had been given it by a  corrupt  court  official  and  so
       again it had  no  evidential  value  whatsoever  that  assisted  the
       appellant.  He clearly did not consider it to be good evidence  that
       the appellant was wanted by the authorities  but  has  not  given  a
       reason which shows proper regard to the potential importance of  the
       evidence.

   44. I have to consider the position from the prospective of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge.  He was asked to  determine  an  appeal  and  a
       potential important document was produced at the last minute.   When
       I read the papers in preparation for the hearing I did not  think  I
       would be making the decision that I am.  I  have  reflected  on  the
       submissions and particularly on the Court of Appeal decision in  PJ.
       Cynicism comes  easily  to  judges  and  the  arrival  of  allegedly
       important documents from a Sri Lankan court a few  days  before  the
       hearing might  have  the  predictability  and  plausibility  of  the
       arrival of the cavalry over the hill on the last roll of a B  movie.
       However it is, sometimes, good evidence that somebody is  in  really
       serious trouble and that cynicism must be suppressed and replaced by
       reason.

   45. It would seem that there are enquiries the Secretary of State  could
       make which would  help  the  judge  determine  the  authenticity  or
       otherwise of the document.  I am satisfied that if it is potentially
       of such importance  the  Secretary  of  State  should  be  given  an
       opportunity to consider it and give further evidence, if she wishes,
       to assist the Tribunal. However I do not accept that the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law  by  failing  to  adjourn.  Judges  have  wide
       discretion in considering  adjournment  applications  and  litigants
       should comply with directions rather than complain if  the  Tribunal
       does not adjust its timetable to their convenience.

   46. Nevertheless, I am persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal erred. The
       documents are  potentially  important  and  the  Judge  should  have
       explained why he was not impressed by them.

   47. In all the circumstances I am persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal
       did err in law by not  giving  proper  consideration  to  the  court
       documents.  I set aside its decision and I direct the case be  heard
       again in the First-tier Tribunal. I decline to give  any  directions
       about the conduct of the  Secretary  of  State.   I  have  indicated
       clearly here the sort  of  enquiry  that  might  be  made.   If  the
       Secretary of State chooses to do  it  I  hope  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal will give any reasonable time  that  is  needed  which,  of
       course, might be available simply by reason of the time it will take
       for the case to be re-listed.  Conversely, if the Secretary of State
       chooses to do nothing she may find it very hard to resist  criticism
       and adverse inferences but that will be a matter for  the  judge  in
       the First-tier Tribunal in due course.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed to the extent that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside and I direct the case be heard again.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 3 November 2016                |





