
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03298/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2019                  |On 14 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Osprey Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsey, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Oxlade (the judge) who, in a decision  promulgated  on  24
         May 2019, dismissed the appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
         appeal against the respondent's decision of 22 March 2019 to refuse
         his protection and human rights claim made on 26 June 2018.



Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born in February  1988.  He
         entered the UK on 7 March 2010 as a Tier 4  (General)  Student.  He
         applied for further leave to remain in the same capacity, but  this
         was refused and an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed
         on 26 June 2012. Further applications that did not attract a  right
         of appeal were also refused.

      3. In 2015 and  2017  the  applicant  made  applications  for  an  EEA
         residence card on the basis of  his  durable  relationship  with  a
         female EEA national. An  application  made  on  22  June  2015  was
         refused on 23 December 2015 and an  appeal  dismissed  on  3  April
         2017. A further application was also refused on 10 August 2017.

      4. In his protection claim made on 26 June 2018 the  appellant  stated
         that he was gay and that he held a well-founded fear of persecution
         in Pakistan as a result of his sexual orientation. I summarise  the
         appellant's account. He was raped at the age of 14 by  a  caretaker
         of the mosque. He was attracted to both boys and girls and had  two
         boyfriends in Pakistan, S and K. His relationship with S lasted for
         one year and occurred when the appellant was 18.  His  relationship
         with K lasted for 8 months and occurred when the appellant was  19.
         The appellant's father beat him with a bat because he suspected the
         appellant was gay after being alerted that the appellant and K were
         seen kissing and touching each other in a public park.

      5. When the appellant came to the UK he lived with cousins for 4 years
         and concentrated on his studies. He commenced a relationship with a
         female EEA national but did not  find  the  physical  side  of  the
         relationship to be satisfying and when she  went  away  in  January
         2017 he went to several clubs and had two one-nightstands with men.
         After this he realised that he could not be with a woman and wanted
         to be with men. The relationship ended in October 2017.

      6. In November 2017 the appellant joined Outcome,  Islington  Mind,  a
         LGBT mental health service. In May 2018 The appellant got  chatting
         on-line with AG via an app designed  for  gay  people.  They  would
         masturbate to each other via an internet connection. Unknown to the
         appellant AG videoed the appellant  masturbating  while  naked  and
         later sought to blackmail the appellant threatening  to  share  the
         videos online through the appellant's  Facebook  account  with  his
         family. AG carried out his threat by sharing  the  video  with  the
         appellant's brother. On 15 June 2018 the  appellant's  father  told
         the appellant that he was a disgrace and that he would be killed if
         he returned to Pakistan. The appellant received  threatening  texts
         from his family. He reported the blackmail to the police but  there
         was, at the time the  hearing,  no  outcome  as  a  result  of  the
         reportage.

      7.  Around  December  2018/2019  the  appellant  had  a  brief  sexual
         relationship with Sergio [C], a gay Portuguese national residing in
         the UK. Although the relationship  ended  they  remain  friends.  A
         family friend, IN, travelled to Pakistan for a family  wedding  and
         spoke to the appellant's father who indicated that he had seen  the
         video footage and remained furious and ashamed and believe that the
         appellant should be killed because of his conduct.

      8. The respondent did not accept the appellant gave a credible account
         of being gay. The respondent  pointed  to  inconsistencies  in  the
         appellant's evidence relating to when he first became aware of  his
         sexual orientation and rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  his
         relationship with S. The respondent  found  other  aspects  of  the
         appellant's account incredible and  inconsistent,  particularly  in
         relation to his relationship with the EEA national and his dealings
         with AG.

      9. The appellant exercised his right  of  appeal  under  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     10. The judge had before her a bundle  of  documents  prepared  by  the
         appellant's  legal  representatives  running  to  208  pages.  This
         included  a  witness  statement  from  the  appellant,  a   witness
         statement from SC, a witness statement from  IN  and  letters  from
         Islington Mind, Hounslow IAPT, the NAZ and MAT Foundation, a letter
         from the Metropolitan Police  Service,  translated  text  messages,
         screen-prints of the messages allegedly sent between the  appellant
         and AG, and background country evidence. The appellant additionally
         relied  on  a  witness  statement  from  Dr  Philip   Gatter,   the
         appellant's counsellor. Dr Gatter, a psychotherapist, had written a
         letter of support on 7  November  2018  issued  on  Islington  Mind
         letter-headed paper.

     11. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, Dr Gatter, PC and
         IN. The judge summarised the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  and  the
         submissions by  the  Presenting  Officer  and  by  the  appellant's
         Counsel. The judge  properly  directed  herself  according  to  the
         correct burden and standard of proof [35].

     12. In the section  of  her  decision  headed  'Discussion'  the  judge
         indicated that she took into account the treatment  being  received
         by the appellant for depression  and  that  she  considered  him  a
         vulnerable witness. The judge additionally  directed  herself  that
         delay in making an asylum claim based on one's  sexual  orientation
         could only carry limited weight.

     13. At [38] the judge stated,

             "I accepted the point made by Dr Gatter, that in  individual's
             "sexual biography" (his words) is often not straightforward; a
             complicated path may arise for a number of reasons, which  can
             involve    societal     or     parental     expectation     or
             approval/disapproval, personal  development,  or  exposure  to
             certain experiences or influences.  What  comes  to  mind,  is
             those who marry a person of  the  opposite  sex  in  order  to
             conform with to what is expected of them/self-preservation and
             as a cover for what they believe to be their  sexuality;  this
             marriage/union would betray their real sexuality, so be a poor
             barometer of it. Furthermore, he made the point  that  sex  is
             not an identifier of sexual identity. So, I accept  the  point
             which can be made, that having a sexual  relationship  with  a
             woman,  is  not  necessarily  determinative   of   the   man's
             heterosexuality or even  bisexuality;  the  converse  is  also
             true, that men who have  sex  with  men  are  not  necessarily
             homosexual. This would mean in the Appellant's case  that  his
             relationship with [the female EEA national], would not  define
             him. I further accept the point which can be  made,  which  is
             that a man having sex with a man does not  necessarily  define
             him as homosexual: indeed it is fairly well accepted  that  in
             some Muslim societies, men who have sex  with  men  ("MSM"  of
             which Mr [C] spoke), do so because women are not available  to
             them in a conservative society, and so the act of having  such
             sexual contact with men does not define  them  as  homosexual.
             So, in the Appellant's case, his having  sexual  relationships
             in Pakistan and  the  UK  with  men,  do  not  define  him  as
             homosexual. Further, it is commonly known that sexual identity
             may fluctuate and develop over time, so it is not "fixed" at a
             specific age or time in life as is awareness and recognition."

     14. At [39] the judge recognised that there was a "valid argument to be
         made" that the appellant's failure to have any sexual relationships
         with men whilst in the UK from 2010 to 2017, his relationship  with
         the EEA national from 2014 to 2017, and his late claim for  asylum,
         showed a complicated sexual  biography  and  were  not  necessarily
         indicators of a person seeking to fabricate an asylum  claim.  then
         at [40] the judge stated,

             "In order for me to conclude that he [sic] Appellant's  sexual
             biography supports his claim to be homosexual and at  risk  on
             return - rather than being evidence of a constructed  claim  -
             it relies on his credibility, but for the following reasons, I
             did  not  accept  as  credible  his  claim  to  have  suffered
             persecution, to be gay, or for there to  be  a  real  risk  of
             persecution on account of his claimed sexuality if returned to
             Pakistan."

     15. At [41] the judge identified  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
         evidence  relating  to  when  he  became  aware   of   his   sexual
         orientation. At [42] the judge drew an adverse inference  from  the
         fact that  the  appellant  made  two  further  EEA  residence  card
         applications after his one-night stands  in  December  2016/January
         2017. The judge also pointed to an inconsistency in the appellant's
         account given that, in his interview, he said at one stage that  he
         wanted the EEA national "physically."

     16. At [43] the judge did not find credible the appellant's account  of
         why he got involved with AG and why he shared  his  family  details
         with AG in light of the appellant's other evidence  concerning  his
         involvement with and support by the LGBT organisations and in light
         of the obvious risk that "the two sides of his life would come into
         contact with one another."

     17. At [44], whilst accepting that corroboration was  not  needed,  the
         judge declined to attach weight to the printout of  exchanges  with
         AG, the report of the crime to the police and the texts  purporting
         to come from the appellant's brother. The printouts  did  not  show
         who the senders or recipients  were,  the  police  report  did  not
         contain information about  what  was  reported  to  them,  and  the
         appellant had lost the phone containing the text messages  although
         he had not reported the loss to  the  police.  There  was  also  an
         inconsistency in his oral evidence and his witness statement as  to
         whether he offered the phone itself to the interviewing officer  at
         his interview or  merely  offered  up  copies  of  the  information
         contained on the phone.

     18. At [45] the judge found that the evidence from  Outcome,  Islington
         Mind  did  not  suggest  that  the  appellant  had   informed   the
         organisation of the blackmail events  and  the  subsequent  threats
         from his family. The judge found DR Gatter's evidence  relating  to
         his 1-2-1 meetings with the appellant to be  muddled  and,  in  any
         event, the disclosure to him of the blackmail event and the threats
         from his family were not around the  time  of  the  blackmail.  The
         letters from Outcome, Islington Mind dated 14 November 2018 and  27
         November 2018 did not specifically speak of  blackmail.  The  judge
         stated, "By the end of the evidence, it appears that Dr Gatter  was
         clear that he had not known about this  [sic]  parents  threats  to
         kill him until the day of the hearing."

     19. At [46] the judge said she found no  support  for  the  appellant's
         claim that it was Islington Mind who encouraged him to claim asylum
         and there  was  no  supporting  evidence  from  the  Naz  and  Matt
         Foundation as to when he first consulted them. The judge  found  it
         odd that the appellant did not consult with them  contemporaneously
         with the events given the clearly built-up relationship he had with
         them.

     20. At [47] the judge explained why she found IN to be  "partisan"  and
         to  have  "adopted  a  hostile  stance   to   answering   perfectly
         appropriate questions." There was no evidence that IN had been  out
         of the country  at  the  relevant  time  and  the  judge  found  he
         exaggerated or misstated what the appellant's father had said.  Nor
         did the judge find it credible that the  appellant's  father  would
         have discussed the appellant's conduct at a wedding.

     21. At [48] the judge stated,

             "The Appellant relied on the evidence  of  Paul  [C],  who  is
             active  in  gay  rights,  and  closely  associated  with   the
             Pakistani/Asian community, who attend  the  club  that  he  is
             involved in running. His opinion was that the Appellant was  a
             gay man,  and  confident  in  this  when  they  started  their
             relationship, though he was  not  put  forward  as  an  expert
             witness; in cross-examination he clarified  this  saying  that
             they had two sexual encounters, and thereafter became friends.
             He accepted as he had in another case before me, that not  all
             men who attend gay clubs (including his club, Disco Rani)  are
             gay, and that there is a well-recognised aspect of  sexuality,
             given the acronym "MSM", which means men  who  have  sex  with
             men, which does not equate to a sexual identity as a gay  man.
             In the final analysis, I  found  that  the  evidence  of  this
             witness partisan, exaggerated in parts, and I place no  weight
             on his opinion on whether the Appellant is gay."

     22. At [49] the judge stated,

             "I should add that Dr Gatter offered an opinion in his witness
             statement, of the Appellant's homosexuality  but  it  was  not
             argued by Ms Ferguson that Dr Gatter - though  a  person  with
             professional qualifications - was called as an expert witness,
             whose opinion could be relied upon."

     23. Having found a further  discrepancy  in  the  dates  the  appellant
         claimed to have started to harm himself by reference  to  the  time
         his family found out about his sexuality, the judge  did  not  find
         the appellant to be credible in his account of his sexual  identity
         and the events that caused him to  claim  asylum.  The  appeal  was
         dismissed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     24. The written grounds are  poorly  particularised  and  difficult  to
         follow. They variously contend that the judge  overlooked  a  large
         amount of  evidence  that  the  applicant  was  part  of  the  LGBT
         community and that she acted in an unfair or irrational  manner  by
         declining to  treat  the  evidence  of  Dr  Gatter  as  that  of  a
         professional witness. Dr Gatter did not know  the  appellant  in  a
         personal capacity, he gave his professional address and his witness
         statement  started  by  listing  his  qualifications.  The  grounds
         asserted that Dr Gatter was "an expert on sexual identity" and that
         he had had seen the appellant over  the  course  of  more  than  18
         months and had found  his  account  to  be  credible.  The  grounds
         contend that the ideas about MSM "seems stereotypical  and  do  not
         address why these men continue to have sex with men once  they  are
         in the UK." It was submitted that the judge approached  the  appeal
         on the basis that the appellant was MSM at most.

     25. The judge was criticised for  holding  against  the  appellant  his
         inconsistencies concerning how he  chose  to  characterise  himself
         with respect to his attractions despite accepting Dr Gatter's point
         that some individuals may have a more tortuous journey to arrive at
         the final  view  of  their  sexual  identity.  The  judge,  it  was
         submitted, was not entitled  to  hold  against  the  appellant  the
         inconsistencies in his evidence given her  acceptance  that  sexual
         identity can change  over  time.  The  grounds  offer  a  different
         interpretation of the appellant's evidence in  his  interviews  and
         oral evidence.

     26. The grounds additionally took issue with the judge's assessment  of
         Dr Gatter's evidence and contended that the  appellant  raised  the
         blackmail letter with him in November 2018.  Counsel  who  appeared
         for the First-tier Tribunal and who drafted  the  grounds  did  not
         however provide any contemporaneous  record  of  the  hearing.  The
         grounds contended that the  judge  was  not  entitled  to  draw  an
         adverse inference from the appellant's evidence that he offered his
         phone to the interviewing officer  during  his  substantive  asylum
         interview as the relevant guidance  made  clear  that  interviewers
         were not to accept evidence that might be sexually explicit  or  to
         ask any inappropriate or intrusive questions.

     27. The grounds contend that the judge  misunderstood  the  appellant's
         evidence relating to how AG was able  to  contact  the  appellant's
         family  through  Facebook  and  inappropriately  applied  her   own
         standards of  what  was  reasonable  or  understandable  behaviour.
         Although the judge accepted the appellant's vulnerability  she  did
         not appear to consider that this might amount to evidence  of  past
         persecution or a well-founded fear of future persecution. The judge
         applied the wrong standard by using the term "I am not  sure"  when
         assessing the appellant's self-harm by reference  to  the  parental
         rejection and threats.  The  grounds  further  contended  that  the
         Presenting Officer asked  questions  "with  incredulity"  and  that
         "from the outset the witness was treated as if he was  lying  about
         everything including being a British citizen." It was alleged  that
         the respondent adopted a partisan and hostile approach.

     28. In granting permission Judge P J M Hollingworth stated,

             "It is arguable that  the  Judge  has  fallen  into  error  in
             relation to not treating Dr Philip Gatter as an expert witness
             given  that  which  Dr  Gatter  states  with  regard  to   his
             qualifications and practice. It is further  arguable  that  Dr
             Gatter having seen the Appellant since December 2017 was in  a
             position to provide a professional view. It is  arguable  that
             the credibility analysis has been affected."

The error of law hearing

     29. Mr Easty, who did not appear before the First-tier Tribunal and who
         did not draft the grounds  of  appeal,  amplified  the  grounds  by
         submitting that the judge erred in law by failing to  set  out  the
         oral evidence given at the hearing, at least in summary form.  This
         failure prevented a clear understanding  of  the  reasons  why  the
         appeal was dismissed. Ms Easty submitted that the judge  failed  to
         make necessary findings in respect of the appellant's relationships
         with S and K, materially relevant  to  the  central  issue  of  the
         appellant's sexual  orientation.  Expanding  upon  the  grounds  of
         appeal it was submitted that the judge failed to  take  account  of
         relevant evidence including the evidence  from  Outcome,  Islington
         Mind and failed to adequate consider the evidence from the Naz  and
         Matt Foundation. The judge was said to have erred in law in failing
         to  consider  Dr  Gatter's  evidence  as  a   psychotherapist   and
         counsellor dealing with gay men who have experienced trauma.

     30. Mr Lindsay submitted that the  criticism  of  the  decision  was  a
         disagreement  with  factual  findings  open  to  the   judge.   The
         references to MSM was said to be a 'red herring' and the judge  was
         plainly entitled to find that a person who has sex with someone  of
         the same  sex  did  not  make  them  gay.  The  judge  reached  her
         conclusion principally based on adverse  credibility  findings  and
         the grounds did not effectively challenge those findings. The judge
         gave cogent reasons for her conclusions, particularly  at  [41]  to
         [44]. Although the judge did not record all the oral evidence  from
         the witnesses it was open to the appellant to have requested a copy
         of the judge's notes and/or the  Presenting  Officer's  notes.  The
         judge was not obliged in any event to  set  out  all  the  evidence
         given. The judge did refer to evidence from Outcome, Islington Mind
         and the Naz and Matt Foundation and was entitled to  conclude  that
         that evidence was not central to the determination.

     31. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     32. The judge's decision is  well-structured,  setting  out  first  the
         basis of the appellant's claim and identifying  the  evidence  upon
         which he relied, and then setting out the respective  positions  of
         the parties. It is unfortunate  that  the  judge  did  not  however
         provide a summary of the oral evidence given at the hearing. Whilst
         the judge does refer to some of the oral evidence in her  reasoning
         it is not always easy to discern what the  relevant  oral  evidence
         was and there is a general  danger  that  material  evidence  given
         during   the   hearing   may   be   overlooked.   The   appellant's
         representatives did not however request from the Upper Tribunal the
         judge's notes of  the  hearing  and  they  have  not  provided  any
         contemporaneous note from counsel then representing the appellant.

     33. The judge was clearly aware of  the  appellant's  vulnerability  as
         someone suffering from mental health issues and  appeared  to  make
         appropriate allowance [36], and she was demonstrably aware  of  the
         guidance relating to late disclosure of asylum claims from  members
         of the LBGTQ+ community [37]. At [38] and [39] the  judge  accepted
         that a person's "sexual biography"  (coining  a  term  used  by  Dr
         Gatter) was not straightforward  and  accepted  that  the  fact  of
         marriage or the nature of a person's sexual  relationships  do  not
         necessary  reflect  their   sexual   orientation,   especially   in
         conservative societies. In so doing the judge was entitled to refer
         to the term "MSM" and to observe that sexual relationships  between
         men did necessarily mean that those men defined themselves as  gay.
         The  judge  recognised  that,   in   principle,   the   appellant's
         relationship with the female EEA national, his  late  asylum  claim
         and the absence of any sexual relationships with men  between  2010
         and 2017 did not mean that the appellant was not gay.

     34. At [41] the judge gave cogent and legally sustainable  reasons  for
         drawing an adverse inference based on discrepant evidence from  the
         appellant relating to when he first became aware of his  sexuality,
         and at [42] the judge was  entitled  to  rely  on  a  contradictory
         explanation given by the appellant as to why he  made  two  further
         EEA residence card applications in 2017  even  after  realising  he
         could not be with  a  woman.  At  [43]  the  judge  was  unarguably
         entitled to her concerns flowing from the appellant's evidence that
         he gave AG access to his Facebook account. It was  rationally  open
         to the judge to find it incredible that the  appellant  would  have
         done so given his family's stance on homosexuality  and  given  the
         other support available to the appellant. At  [44]  the  judge  was
         again  rationally  entitled  to  her  expressed  concern  that  the
         printouts of the messages allegedly between the  appellant  and  AG
         did not disclose the identity of the sender or recipient, and  that
         the report of a crime to the police contained  no  details  of  the
         crime alleged. It was also open to the judge to note the absence of
         any reference  in  the  asylum  interview  to  an  attempt  by  the
         appellant to give either his phone or  copies  of  the  information
         contained on his phone to the interviewing  officer.  At  [47]  the
         judge explained, by way of an example, why she  found  IN  to  have
         exaggerated his evidence and why he adopted a  hostile  stance.  In
         the  absence  of  any  statement  from  counsel  representing   the
         appellant in the First-tier Tribunal or any contemporaneous  record
         from counsel there is no merit in the ground asserting that it  was
         in fact the Presenting Officer who adopted a hostile approach.

     35. Despite the reasoned adverse credibility findings  noted  above,  I
         nevertheless have  concerns  with  other  aspects  of  the  judge's
         approach to the issue of credibility.

     36. At [46] the judge stated that there was nothing in  the  supporting
         evidence from the Naz and Matt  Foundation  (a  registered  charity
         working to end religious and cultural homophobia) as  to  when  the
         appellant first consulted them. The judge found it "extremely  odd"
         that the appellant failed to consult  them  contemporaneously  with
         "the events" in light of the trust he had in them. The letter  from
         the Naz and Matt Foundation dated  19  November  2018  did  however
         indicate when  the  appellant  first  consulted  them.  The  letter
         stated, "[the appellant] first contacted Naz and Matt Foundation on
         4th September 2019 requesting support."  The  judge  was  factually
         wrong to  state  that  the  appellant  already  had  trust  in  the
         Foundation and had built up a relationship with the  Foundation  by
         the time of the events that he claims caused him to make his asylum
         application. The appellant only approached the Foundation after the
         events. There was therefore no basis  for  the  judge  to  find  it
         "extremely odd" that the appellant failed to consult the Foundation
         contemporaneously with the events. To this  extent  the  judge  has
         attached weight to irrelevant matters when  finding  the  appellant
         incredible.

     37. At [48] the judge places "no weight" on the evidence of Sergio  [C]
         (who  the  judge  wrongly  identifies  as  'Paul  [C]'),  and   had
         previously made the same mistake at [18])  because  she  found  his
         evidence "partisan" and "exaggerated in parts." The  judge  however
         fails to explain which parts of Mr [C]'s evidence was  exaggerated,
         or how the evidence was exaggerated. There is a  distinct  lack  of
         reasoning in respect of this aspect of the judge's finding.  It  is
         incumbent on judges to give clear, albeit brief, reasons in respect
         of all material findings.  The  reasons  given  by  the  judge  for
         attaching no weight at all to Mr  [C]'s  evidence  are  inadequate.
         Nor is it entirely clear why the judge found Mr [C]'s  evidence  to
         be "partisan". The Judge noted that  Mr  [C]  was  "active  in  gay
         rights and closely associated with the Pakistani/Asian  community",
         that Mr [C] had previously given evidence in  another  case  before
         the judge, and that he was involved in running a club the appellant
         attended. The mere fact of being an activist does

     38. Nor were there any clear findings of fact in respect  of  Mr  [C]'s
         evidence regarding his relationship with the appellant. Following a
         brief intimate relationship Mr  [C]  maintained  that  he  and  the
         appellant were good friends, that they got to know each  well,  and
         that the appellant would often break down when  talking  about  his
         previous experiences. Whilst the judge was not  obliged  to  accept
         that the appellant was being truthful in his  interaction  with  Mr
         [C] there was no suggestion that Mr [C]'s evidence was  untruthful.
         Nor are  there  any  clear  factual  findings  as  to  whether  the
         appellant and Mr  [C]  had  a  brief  sexual  relationship.  Whilst
         mindful of the fact that a same sex relationship  cannot  define  a
         person's  sexual  orientation,  and  having  full  regard  to   the
         abbreviation 'MSM', whether the appellant had in fact been intimate
         with Mr [C] was still a relevant factor that had to  be  considered
         in the round.

     39. There is similar lack of necessary findings by the judge in respect
         of the appellant's claimed relationships with S and K.  It  is  not
         clear from [38], indeed or the decision read as  a  whole,  whether
         the judge accepted or rejected the appellant's claim  to  have  had
         relationships with S and K in Pakistan. At [38] the judge discussed
         the term 'MSM' and properly noted that simply because a man has sex
         with a  man  does  not  necessarily  define  the  person  as  being
         homosexual. But if the appellant had actually had relatively  long-
         term intimate relationships with two men  in  Pakistan  this  would
         still be a relevant factor in determining whether the appellant may
         be gay. If the judge was suggesting that  the  appellant  did  have
         relationships with S and K in Pakistan but that  the  relationships
         was due to  the  unavailability  of  women  in  a  religiously  and
         culturally  conservative  society,  then  she  needed  to  make  an
         explicit  finding  to  this  effect.  If  the  judge  rejected  the
         appellant's claimed relationships with S and K, she again needed to
         make a clear finding in respect of this relevant issue. By  failing
         to make clear findings  of  fact  in  respect  of  this  particular
         assertion the judge erred in law.

     40. I am additionally satisfied that the judge failed to  take  account
         of relevant evidence including the evidence from Outcome, Islington
         Mind detailed in the letter dated 23 April 2019. Although the judge
         mentioned this letter at [15] and referred in general terms to  the
         evidence from  Outcome,  Islington  Mind  at  [45],  there  was  no
         adequate engagement with the content of the April 2019 letter. This
         letter  indicated  that  the  appellant  had  been  attending   the
         organisation since November 2017, significantly before his  alleged
         involvement with AG in May 2018 and his asylum  claim  made  on  26
         June 2018. The letter indicated that appellant's active involvement
         with the organisation in respect of discussions and  workshops  and
         his participation in day trips. The letter also stated that it  was
         the organisation's experience  of  supporting  LGBTQ+  people  with
         mental health problems over 20 years that heterosexual people  felt
         uncomfortable in an environment that  was  so  clearly  defined  as
         LGBTQ+ and where people referred to same sex  relationships  freely
         and  naturally.  As  the  appellant  attended  the   organisation's
         services for  almost  17  months  and  was  actively  involved  and
         appeared to feel comfortable engaging in conversations about LTBTQ+
         relationships, it was believed that the appellant was  a  gay  man.
         This was clearly  relevant  evidence  in  determining  whether  the
         appellant was gay. Although the judge was not bound to  accept  the
         assertions in the letter  she  was  required  to  engage  with  the
         assertions.

     41. The assertion in the written grounds that Dr Gatter was "an  expert
         on  sexual  identity"  have  no  foundation.   Dr   Gatter   is   a
         psychotherapist and counsellor at an organisation assisting members
         of the  LBGTQ+  community  suffering  from  mental  health  issues.
         Neither his statement nor his letter dated 27 November 2018 suggest
         that he is an "expert on sexual identity." Although  there  was  no
         challenge, either at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  or  in  the
         'error of law' hearing, to his standing as an expert dealing  with,
         inter alia, gay men who experience mental distress, Dr  Gatter  did
         not, at least in his brief written evidence, give an explanation as
         to why he believed the appellant was gay based on his  professional
         experience. The judge did not summarise Dr Gatter's  oral  evidence
         and it is unclear whether he was asked to give his opinion  of  the
         appellant's sexual orientation by reference to  his  experience  in
         dealing with gay men with mental health issues.  The  grounds  were
         not accompanied by any  statement  or  record  of  hearing  by  the
         appellant's representative.  The  judge  appears  however  to  have
         attached no weight to Dr Gatter's opinion of the appellant's sexual
         orientation even though he had been seeing the appellant in general
         counselling  sessions  and  1-2-1  sessions  since  December  2017.
         Whilst not an "expert on  sexual  identity"  Dr  Gatter's  opinion,
         based on his interaction with the appellant in the specific context
         of a LBGTQ+ organisation, and as a psychotherapist  and  counsellor
         dealing with gay men who have experienced  trauma,  may  have  been
         worthy of at least some weight, a point considered  by  the  First-
         tier Tribunal when granting permission.  To  the  extent  that  the
         judge appears to have attached no weight  at  all  to  Dr  Gatter's
         opinion because she believed he was not giving his evidence  as  an
         expert witness, I find that the judge failed  to  take  account  of
         potentially relevant evidence.

     42. At [45] the judge stated, "By the end of the evidence,  it  appears
         that Dr Gatter was clear that he had not  known  about  this  [sic]
         parents threats to kill him until the  day  of  the  hearing."  The
         judge did not summarise the oral evidence given by Dr  Gatter  than
         supported this conclusion. Moreover, it is unclear how this can  be
         reconciled with the letter from Dr Gatter dated  27  November  2018
         where he states, "I understand that [the appellant] is now known to
         be a gay man to his family who have threatened to kill  him  if  he
         returns to Pakistan and he feels he will never be accepted as a gay
         man in Pakistan." Nor did the judge appear to  take  into  account,
         when making an adverse credibility finding at  [45]  based  on  the
         absence of contemporaneous  disclosure  by  the  applicant  of  the
         blackmail allegation, that the disclosure would not  have  occurred
         in the general counselling sessions and that the appellant did  not
         have a 1-2-1 session with Dr Gatter until November 2018.

     43. I have found this a difficult decision to make. I bear in mind  the
         various adverse credibility findings reasonable open to the  judge.
         I am however ultimately satisfied that the errors  of  law  I  have
         identified may have resulted in a different conclusion had they not
         occured. I am consequently satisfied that the decision must be  set
         aside.

     44. Given that the errors of law  relate  to  the  adverse  credibility
         findings made by the judge, which were pivotal  to  her  conclusion
         that the appellant's protection claim was not made out, I  consider
         it appropriate to remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal
         for a fresh hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and requires the decision to be set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)
hearing, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Oxlade.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum   10 October 2019

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
