
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03821/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 6 October 2016                    |on 20 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    AMAS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph instructed by A. Seelhoff Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a judgment of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Coaster promulgated ion the 24 May 2016,  following  a  hearing  at
        Newport on the 16 May 2016, in which the Judge dismissed the appeal
        on all grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant is a national  of  Libya  born  in  March  1986.  The
        appellant's family live in Libya in an area approximately 40  miles
        southeast of Tripoli.  The appellant entered the UK lawfully  as  a
        student in 2009.  His  leave  was  extended  to  August  2015.  The
        appellant returned to Libya in April 2014 for a visit returning the
        UK at the end of that  month.  The  appellant  graduated  from  the
        University of South Wales with an MBA in August 2015.
     3. The basis of the asylum claim is that of imputed  politic  opinion.
        The Judge noted the two  elements  of  the  claim,  at  [27-29]  in
        relation to membership of the Revolutionary Committee at  the  time
        of Colonel Gadhafi and, at [30], the issue of the appellants arrest
        at Tripoli airport in April 2014.
     4. The findings can be summaries as follows:

   a. The  appellant  has  not  established  his  credibility  and  has  not
      established to the required lower standard of proof that (i) he was  a
      member or former member of the Revolutionary Committee, nor (ii)  that
      he  was  arrested  for  being  a  member  of  former  member  of   the
      Revolutionary Committee. [45]
   b. The appellant had not established that an agent retrieved his passport
      from the militia who he claims arrested, tortured  and  then  released
      him [46].
   c. Even if the appellant had been a member of the Revolutionary Committee
      he would still be of no interest to  the  militia  or  authorities  in
      Libya [47].
   d. The appellant had failed to make out that he is entitled to a grant of
      humanitarian protection [48].
   e. The appellant has failed to make out that Articles  2  or  3  will  be
      breached [49]
   f. As no protection issues had been proved in the appellant's  home  area
      the issue of internal relocation does not arise. The appellant is  not
      at risk in Libya [50].
   g. No issue in relation to family or private life has been raised [51].

     5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  another
        judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  granted  on  a   renewed
        application by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill, limited to paragraphs 13-
        15 of issue 2 and issue 3 of the  grounds  only.  These  provisions
        assert:


        Issue 2 - Implausibility of detention and torture


        ........


        13. The judge returns to this issue at paragraph  46  (although  he
        refers to it as the third issue). Here he states the Appellant  did
        not:


             "provide details of  the  location  and  persons  to  whom  he
             reported to during the weeks after he was released, nor did he
             confirm that he had provided those details  to  the  agent  to
             assist with the retrieval of his passport from the militia"


        14. This is simply incorrect.  In his statement at paragraph 16 the
        Appellant explained:


             "I was detained in Tripoli, and when I was released it was  in
             Tripoli ad I was given instructions to report  at  the  police
             station in Tripoli.   I told the agent that  and  he  said  he
             could use that information  to  start  looking  for  where  my
             passport might be through his contacts".


     6. Issue 3 is pleaded in the following terms:


        Issue 3 - Possession of Two Passports


         16.  Prior  to  leaving  Libya  the  appellant  obtained  a  second
         passport, but also claims to have taken steps to have the agent  he
         used retrieve his old passport from those who had detained him.


        17. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the  obtaining
        of the second passport was consistent with his asylum claim.


        18. The judge discounts the second passport as supporting the claim
        by speculating with no apparent basis that:


             "in having a second newly issued passport has  the  "insurance
             policy" of a current passport with a lengthy,  distant  expiry
             date in the event that he may reside  for  some  time  in  the
             United Kingdom or some other place, but wishes at a later date
             to be free to return without complication to Libya  after  the
             expiry of his first passport"

         19. The judge's alternative explanation is nonsensical  given  that
         the Appellant surrendered both passports to the  Home  Office,  and
         that passports can readily be renewed in  the  UK.   The  Appellant
         could not possibly have benefitted from having a second passport if
         he surrendered both to the UK authorities.

         20. The judge has further erred by speculating  as  to  the  reason
for having a second passport.

         21. The First-tier judge suggested that this was not an error as it
        was only an assessment of the "likelihood of the  account".   Given
        that the judge's alternative explanation for the  possession  of  a
        second passport was entirely illogical in the context of  the  case
        it cannot be relevant to the "likelihood" of the  original  account
        being true.


     7. What must be noted is that permission to appeal was not granted  on
        Ground 2. Issues 1-3 form part of  Ground  1.  There  has  been  no
        challenge to the limited scope of the grant of permission.   Ground
        2 asserted that the conclusion of the Judge at  [47]  was  "plainly
        nonsense". At [47] the Judge found:


         47.  I have considered whether, if the Appellant were a  member  of
             the Revolutionary  Committee,  anything  would  change  in  my
             conclusions.  I find that they would not.  The Appellant could
             have  been  a  member  of  the  Revolutionary  Committee   and
             benefited  from  State  bursaries  for  study  in  the  United
             Kingdom; he could also have been arrested on  19  April  2019,
             but my conclusion, if that were the case remain  unchanged  in
             that he would be of  no  interest  to  the  militia  or  other
             authorities in Libya and is therefore not at risk on return.


     8. It is accepted that the reference  to  2019  is  in  error  as  the
        correct date  is  2014.  The  finding  in  the  alternative  is  an
        unchallenged finding save by disagreement for which  permission  to
        appeal was not granted.




Error of law


     9. It is necessary to focus on the key elements of the appeal that the
        appellant maintained will place him at risk of  return.  The  first
        element is a  risk  on  return  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
        membership of the Revolutionary Committee. The Judge refers to  the
        appellant's evidence in this respect of this issue  at  [11-12]  in
        the following terms:


         11.  The Appellants adopted his statement and was  cross  examined.
             His case can be  summarised  as  follows:  The  Appellant  was
             educated in Libya between 1991 to 2003. He attended Al  Mergeb
             University in Tarhuna between 2003-2007 graduating in  English
             Language.  Between 2008-2009 he worked as an English  language
             teacher in a private college in substitution  for  conscripted
             military service.  In March 2009 he came to the United Kingdom
             as a student, studying English for 16 months and extending his
             visa once.   He undertook an MSc in 2010, graduating in  2012.
             He applied for a Post Study Work Visa and in February 2014  he
             started an MBA at the University of South Wales, graduating in
             August 2015.


         12.  In the Appellant's last years at Al Mergeb University in  2007
             he joined the local  office  of  the  Revolutionary  Committee
             because of the  social  advantages  being  a  member  brought,
             rather than any strong political or  religious  motivation  or
             interest.  The Appellant co-ordinated cultural events  at  the
             university and was well known  in  student  circles.   He  was
             promoted to membership of the Tarhuna Revolutionary  Committee
             officially in May 2007.  His contribution to the Revolutionary
             Committee did not involve  security  activities  or  reporting
             other citizens to the Revolutionary Committee. One he  started
             teaching in 2008 he [had] no further involvement in  cultural,
             educational  activities  for   the   Revolutionary   Committee
             although  he  retained  his  membership.   The   Revolutionary
             Committee provided a bursary  for  his  study  in  the  United
             Kingdom.


    10. Although the Judge found the appellants claim to have been a member
        of the Revolutionary Committee to be no more than a bare  assertion
        this is arguably not the case.
    11. The relevant case law of the Upper Tribunal reflects  the  changing
        nature of the conflict in Libya. In AT  and  Others  (Article  15c;
        risk categories) Libya [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC), which now needs to be
        read in line with  FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016]  UKUT  413
        (IAC), it had been held (i) having regard to the generally  hostile
        attitude of society to the former regime,  the  following  are,  in
        general, at real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment  on
        return to Libya: - (a) former high  ranking  officials  within  the
        intelligence  services  of  that  regime;  (b)   others   with   an
        association at senior level with that regime; (ii)   As  a  general
        matter, the closer an individual was to the centre of power  within
        the former regime, the more likely that the individual will be able
        to establish a risk of persecution or Article  3  ill-treatment  on
        return; (iii) the majority of the population of Libya either worked
        for, had some association with, or has a member of the  family  who
        worked for or had an association  with  the  Gadhafi  regime.  Such
        employment or association alone is not sufficient  to  establish  a
        risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on return;  (iv)  in
        general, family members of those described in (i)  and  (ii)  above
        are not at risk of persecution  or  a  breach  of  their  protected
        rights on return. It is possible, however, that an individual  will
        be able to  establish  such  a  risk  but  this  will  need  to  be
        demonstrated by specific  evidence  relating  to  the  individual's
        circumstances. Mere assertion of risk by association  as  a  family
        member would not be sufficient without  fact-specific  evidence  of
        the risk to that particular family member.
    12. The Judge relied upon the decision in AT and Others which,  at  the
        date of the hearing and promulgation, was a county  guidance  case.
        The decision in FA(Libya) replaced AT  and  Others  in  respect  of
        assessment of the article 15(c) risk. It was not  made  out  before
        the Judge  that  the  appellant  fell  within  the  specified  risk
        categories  as  (a)  former  high-ranking  officials   within   the
        intelligence services of  that  regime,  or,  (b)  others  with  an
        association at senior level  with  that  regime.   The  appellant's
        evidence was that he joined his local  Revolutionary  Committee  at
        the  University  for  pragmatic  reasons  to  enjoy  the   benefits
        following on from membership of the same. It is  accepted  by  this
        Tribunal that to be able  to  leave  Libya  to  study  abroad  with
        funding from the Libyan State  the  appellant  is  likely  to  have
        needed to be recognised as a person who supported the aims  Colonel
        Gadhafi's 'peoples revolution'. What was not established before the
        Judge was that the appellants profile was of a person close to  the
        centre of power within the former regime such as to  place  him  at
        risk for this reason on return, or that he  will  be  perceived  as
        having such a profile, especially in light of the fact  his  active
        role in the Revolutionary Committee ended in  2007  and  that  from
        2009 to 2014 he was in the United Kingdom as a student.
    13. It is also the case that the appellant has  returned  to  Libya  on
        five occasions following the fall of the Gadhafi regime.  The  same
        militia group have been in  control  of  Tripoli  airport  yet  the
        appellant does not claim to have faced any  risk  on  return  as  a
        result of his previous activities, until  the  most  recent  visit.
        This supports the  Judges  finding  in  the  alternative  that  the
        appellants profile is not one that  will  place  him  at  risk,  in
        accordance with the country guidance case law.
    14. The second element of the claim is referred to in paragraph  13  of
        the decision under challenge where the Judge finds:


         13. Since the fall of the Gadhafi regime in 2011 the Appellant  has
         returned to Libya on five occasions. On his fifth and  last  visit,
         on arrival at Tripoli airport in 19 April 2014  the  Appellant  was
         arrested by the militia controlling the airport  at  the  time  and
         taken to an interrogation centre where he  was  held,  interrogated
         and subjected to  beatings  and  torture.   The  Appellant  had  no
         knowledge of his whereabouts.  His passport was taken away.  He was
         told it was his time to be punished for "his  activities",  meaning
         his membership of the Revolutionary Committee.  He was released  on
         the 21st April.  He went to his uncle's house in  Tripoli  and  had
         instructions to report weekly.  The  Appellants'  family  travelled
         from Tarhuna to meet him there.  He and they were  afraid  for  his
         life. The Appellant reported once at a local police station  before
         leaving the country with the assistance of an agent on  30th  April
         2014. The agent  took  the  Appellant  to  Tripoli  airport  having
         obtained a renewed passport for him.  The Appellant asked the agent
         to try and retrieve his original passport, taken from him  when  he
         was arrested, because it  contained  his  current  Post-Study  Work
         Visa.  Before his departure, the agent  also  handed  over  to  the
         Appellant this original confiscated  passport.  The  Appellant  was
         guided to the plane, circumventing normal passport control and took
         the flight to the United Kingdom.  On arrival he continued with his
         studies, hoping the political situation  in  Libya  would  improve.
         The Appellant was informed that members of the militia went to  his
         uncle's house on a number of occasions looking for him.   According
         to the Appellant's father, no paper work has been left for him.


    15. According to BBC news reports the international airport at  Tripoli
        was under control of the Zintan militia in 2014. In  July  2014  it
        was reported that two days of fighting had ensured, which  resulted
        in the closure of the airport, between militia  wishing  to  impose
        Islamic law and the Zintan militia who control the airport.  Zintan
        are an anti-Islamist militias that operate especially in  the  west
        of Libya and support  the  internationally-recognised  authorities.
        They have clashed on numerous occasions with  Libya  Dawn,  another
        militia group, and continue to detain Saif-al-Islam al-Gaddafi, the
        son of the former leader who was sentenced to death in Tripoli last
        year, in the western city of Zintan, while most  other  Gaddafi-era
        officials are held by pro-Islamist forces in Tripoli.
    16. The appellant claims to have arrived in April 2014 before the later
        assault and understandable heightened tension that  followed  which
        may have led to the  arrest  of  those  thought  to  support  rival
        groups, so this  does  not  assist  the  appellant.  The  appellant
        accepts he was able to return to Libya and leave on  four  previous
        occasions when the Zintan militia  were  also  in  control  of  the
        airport, and to have passed through the same without difficulty.
    17. The appellant claims that he was detained on the fifth occasion but
        his profile is not that of a person who falls  within  any  of  the
        recognised risk categories. As stated above, it is arguable that if
        any risk arose based upon his past profile it  would  have  existed
        and put him at risk previously, yet it did not.
    18. The appellant also claims that notwithstanding his being at risk of
        harm, he was released to an  uncle's  house  with  a  condition  of
        reporting. The militia groups in Libya  are  not  known  for  their
        adherence to international standards of human right observances and
        it is arguably implausible that a person with a profile  sufficient
        to create a real risk for them on return would have  been  released
        into the community which is a non-secure environment.  It  is  more
        plausible that in the  environment  of  inter-militia  conflict  in
        Libya that a person suspected of supporting an opposition group  or
        of concern is more likely to be detained or even killed.
    19. The fact the appellant was released shows the low level of interest
        in him if his account was credible, which the Judge did not find to
        be the case.
    20. The appellant claims  he  reported  once  and  then  absconded  and
        returned to the United Kingdom. He  claims  an  agent  secured  his
        original passport and that he also obtained a replacement passport.
          There are established procedures for obtaining passports in Libya
        which involve the need to submit all the required documents (now at
        the Libyan  Passport  and  Nationality  Department  office  at  the
        University  of  Sirte).    Required  documents  ordinarily  include
        passport application forms which  include  details  of  the  Family
        Registry Number and the Family Booklet  Number,  three  photographs
        taken against a light background, the Family booklet or a  copy  of
        the family booklet, or an administrative certificate related to the
        birth of the applicant issued by Civil  Registration  in  Libya,  a
        true  copy  of  the  Libyan  ID  and  a  true  copy  of  the  birth
        certificate. It is not clear if the same  information  if  required
        for a duplicate passport, and it may not be if this information  is
        already held,  but  the  act  of  making  the  application  in  the
        appellants name did not result in any action  being  taken  against
        him by the authorities or a refusal to issue the passport which  is
        indicative of a lack of interest in him by the issuing authorities.
    21. The appellant also claims an agent was able to secure the return of
        his original passport from the militia. It is 'odd' that those  the
        appellant claims have detained and ill-treated  him  and  who  have
        insisted he reports to a nominated police station would then return
        to him a document by which he is able to leave the country,  if  he
        was of any ongoing concern to them. The appellant  also  claims  he
        was able to by-pass security at the airport as he  was  'guided  to
        the plane'. The appellant claims to have left on 30 April 2014  yet
        not to have received any documents relating to his being wanted  by
        the militia despite claims  that  here  have  been  visits  to  his
        uncle's and parent's house.
    22. Even if the appellant was stopped and questioned by members of  the
        Zintan militia on one occasion in 2014 that does not show  he  will
        face a real risk of return in 2016. The finding that the  appellant
        does not possess a profile that will place him at risk on return is
        one reasonably open to the Judge on  the  evidence.  The  fact  the
        appellant was able to enter  Libya  without  difficulty  previously
        supports such a finding. The implausibility of a  person  suspected
        of possessing a profile that will place him at risk being  released
        casts doubt upon the credibility of the claim that he  will  be  of
        ongoing interest to the militia on return.
    23. The issue in relation to the two passports has not been shown to be
        material to the key risk factors relied upon in the claim  even  if
        the Judge's findings are tainted by speculation in relation to this
        element.
    24. No arguable legal error material to the decision is made  out.  The
        decision shall stand.

Decision

    25. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such an order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




              [pic]
Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 October 2016

