
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03168/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 29th April 2019                 |On the 16th May 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     N O
                         (Anonymity direction made)


                                     AND
                                                                   Appellant
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E. Fitzsimmons, Counsel instructed on behalf of
the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He appeals with permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtTJ"), promulgated on
    the 9th October 2018 dismissing his appeal against the decision to
    refuse his protection and human rights claim.


 2. The appellant's history is set out in the decision letter of 19
    February 2018 and summarised in the decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs
    6 - 9. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 September 2015
    and made a claim for asylum on that date. It is said that he left
    Afghanistan in approximately April/May 2015, having spent time in
    Turkey before travelling on foot to Bulgaria where he stayed for about
    five days. He travelled via Serbia and Hungary before arriving in Italy
    where he was caught on the border and fingerprinted. He then left the
    country by travelling to France and lived in Calais before travelling
    to the United Kingdom.

 3. Upon arrival he provided a screening interview and later provided a
    statement of evidence (SEF statement). He further underwent an age
    assessment in August 2016, which concluded that his date of birth
    should be set as 1 January 2000. He was therefore a minor on arrival.

 4. The basis of his claim related to his fear of the Taliban and that
    members of his family were in the national army and that this resulted
    in adverse attention from the Taliban. He made reference to an incident
    in the village where the house was hit by bullets.  His father was
    asked by the Taliban to send the appellant for "Jihad" and it was
    decided to send the appellant out of the reach of the Taliban and
    therefore he left Afghanistan with the assistance of an agent.

 5. In a decision letter dated the 19 February 2018, the respondent refused
    his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. Whilst his
    nationality was accepted as was his age, the respondent made as a
    decision not to grant him leave as an unaccompanied child because he
    was 17 � years of age at the date of the decision. In respect of his
    claim, the respondent accepted that the recruitment of children did
    occur and that they had a presence in the province where the appellant
    originated from. However, it was concluded that the appellant had given
    inconsistent evidence concerning the interest in him by the Taliban.
    The respondent considered that he could return safely to Kabul and
    could reasonably be expected to return there. Furthermore, there was no
    breach of Article 15 (c) (applying the decision in AK (Article 15 (c)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163.

 6. The appellant sought to appeal that decision and his appeal was heard
    in September 2018. In a decision promulgated on 9 October 2018, the
    FtTJ dismissed the appeal having concluded that the appellant had not
    given a credible or consistent account as to his fear of the Taliban in
    his home area and would not be at risk from them. The judge also found
    that there were no grounds for a grant of humanitarian protection based
    on the argument that there was indiscriminate violence to the level to
    reach the appropriate threshold in the province from which the
    appellant originated. As the appellant could return to his home area,
    where the judge found he had remaining relatives, no assessment was
    made as to relocation to Kabul.


 7. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of appeal were issued
    for permission to appeal but on 31 May 2017 the First-tier Tribunal
    refused permission. On renewal, the application for permission was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on the 28th December 2018 for
    the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that Professor Katona at para 8.4 of the report
         assessed what is capable of amounting to a "clinically sufficient
         explanation" as distinct from expressing his opinion about
         causation. It is arguable the judge therefore erred when concluding
         at [42] that he "has exceeded the bounds of his clinical
         expertise." There was merit in the grounds insofar as they relate
         to the judge's assessment of the medical evidence (grounds one and
         two). I am persuaded that it is arguable that the judge did not
         have proper regard to the evidence of the social worker and housing
         adviser (ground four). There is less merit in the remaining grounds
         as stand-alone grounds, however, permission is granted on all
         grounds."



 8. It is as a result of that grant of permission that the appeal comes
    before the Upper Tribunal. The grounds advanced by the appellant are
    those originally provided, and Ms Fitzsimmons, Counsel on behalf of the
    appellant, and who appeared before the FtTJ relies upon the grounds
    which she had drafted. She supplemented them with oral submissions
    which essentially comprised of the written grounds.


 9. Mr Tufan and behalf of the respondent relied upon the Rule 24 response
    dated 14th January 2019 in which it was stated that the judge directed
    himself appropriately and that the challenge to the decision was no
    more than a disagreement with a reasoned decision. In his oral
    submissions, Mr Tufan submitted that contrary to the grounds, the
    weight to be attached to the medical evidence was a matter for the
    judge and that it was open to the judge to criticise the report at
    paragraphs 42 - 44 and the judge properly gave reasons as to why little
    weight was given to the experts view as to causation of the appellant's
    PTSD. He further submitted that the judge did consider his
    vulnerability as evidenced by paragraph 29. As to the risk of suicide,
    the judge's conclusions were made out; it was not mentioned in the
    social worker's report and therefore he could not satisfy the threshold
    for breach of Article 3. In his submission he conceded that internal
    relocation to Kabul was not considered although he recognised that the
    respondent had proceeded on the basis that he would be returned to
    Kabul. However, he submitted, he would not be at risk in Kabul and thus
    it was not material to the outcome.


10. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
    give.



Decision on the error of law:

11. Having had the submissions of the advocates and in the light of the
    issues raised in the papers before the Tribunal, I am satisfied that
    the decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a point
    of law. I shall set out my reasons for reaching that conclusion.


12. I find no material error of law that relates to ground 2 in respect of
    the issue of risk of suicide. It was open to the judge to reach the
    conclusion at [58] that there was no evidence of previous threats other
    than what the appellant had told the psychiatrist. Contrary to the
    grounds, the judge did accept what the appellant had told the
    psychiatrist but went on to consider the risk of suicide as a stand-
    alone Article 3 risk in the context of the decision in J v SSHD and Y
    (Sri Lanka). The conclusion reached at [62] was that the psychiatrist
    had accepted at face value what the appellant told him, without
    referring to the other health professionals or social workers and
    without carrying out any tests to objectively quantify any risk of this
    occurring. In addition, the judge observed that no account of
    protective factors (such as religion) had been considered and that he
    did not been established that there was a current risk on the basis of
    the opinion which did not consider risks and protective factors. In
    particular the effective means on the part of the removing state and
    the protective factor of family members.


13. The grounds at paragraph 12 misconstrue the judge's findings at [62].
    Where the judge made reference to the psychiatrists report not
    referring to "other health professionals who assessed the appellant"
    the judge was referring to this solely in the context of the issue of
    risk of suicide and not in relation to the report as a whole. The
    report clearly sets out the psychiatrist had considered the letter from
    the paediatrician and evidence in the social worker and housing
    officer. That was not in dispute. However, as a judge stated the other
    professionals involved did not make mention of concerns in this area
    (see [44]).

14. Notwithstanding my assessment of that issue, I am satisfied that the
    judge fell into error when considering the medical evidence overall.
    The judge considered the psychiatric report at [42-44]. Ms Fitzsimmons
    submitted that the report not been challenged by the respondent but
    that the judge considered that the expert had "exceeded the basis of
    his clinical expertise" when stating his opinion at paragraph 8.4 that
    the appellants PTSD been caused by his traumatic experiences in
    Afghanistan and on the journey to the UK. The judge went on to state
    "while he might well have diagnosed PTSD, no expert can deduce from
    that what might have caused the PTSD". The judge considered that this
    was not a matter for the medical expert and that he had strayed into
    conclusions as to credibility. At [43] the judge had recorded that they
    had been a large number of traumatic events during the appellant's
    journey to the United Kingdom and that this had not been referred to in
    the conclusions reached at paragraph 8.4. Ms Fitzsimmons submits that
    at paragraph 8.4 the psychiatrist did consider the traumatic events and
    the psychiatrist was aware of the adverse credibility assessment
    reached by the respondent but based his conclusions on an objective
    clinical observation. Whilst Mr Tufan submits the weight given to an
    expert report is a matter for the judge concerned and that it was open
    to the judge to give little weight to the report, I accept the
    submission made by Ms Fitzsimmons. Reading paragraph 8.4, the
    psychiatrist considered the causation and diagnosis made of PTSD. I
    observed that the community paediatrician who also had seen the
    appellant earlier had formed an opinion that the appellant did have
    symptoms associated with PTSD and a further witnesses called on behalf
    of the appellant provided evidence as to his presentation and his
    vulnerabilities as viewed by them in the United Kingdom. I am satisfied
    that the psychiatrist did consider whether PTSD had been caused by his
    experiences in Afghanistan and also other traumatic events which
    included family separation and stress of his immigration circumstances
    and the journey to United Kingdom. However, having considered those
    issues, the psychiatrist went on to state that those stresses did not
    provide a clinically sufficient explanation for what he described as
    the "core PTSD symptoms" (see 8.4). The psychiatrist and set out why
    the appellant met the appropriate diagnostic criteria. That diagnosis
    was not made on the appellant's evidence alone but on the clinical
    observations and also based on the evidence of those who had known the
    appellant in United Kingdom based on his presentation to them.
    Consequently whilst the judge considered the psychiatrist had not made
    reference to other traumatic experiences (that is his journey) that is
    not made out and I therefore accept the submission made by Ms
    Fitzsimmons that the conclusion finally reached that the little weight
    should be placed on the psychiatric opinion  and evidence overall  was
    flawed.

15. As to credibility, the judge properly referred to the appellant as a
    vulnerable witness and considered whether his age, vulnerability and or
    sensitivity was an element in any inconsistencies in the evidence (see
    paragraph 29). However, there is no reference in the assessment of
    credibility of the evidence of the two witnesses who gave evidence on
    his behalf, both of whom had experience of the appellant when living in
    United Kingdom in a professional capacity as a social worker and
    housing officer. They gave evidence concerning his cognitive
    difficulties and his vulnerability. This evidence had relevance when
    seen alongside the evidence of the psychiatrist and the issue of
    return. I do not accept the submission made by Mr Tufan that the
    reference at paragraph 16 was sufficient- the judge was not analysing
    the evidence in the assessment of credibility or in the assessment of
    the medical evidence. I do not ignore that the  judge did make what
    could be seen as adverse credibility points taken from inconsistent
    evidence given in his screening interview relating to family members
    and their profile but I accept the submission made that this did not
    take into account the evidence of the psychiatrist and the social
    worker as to his presentation, his cognitive difficulties and whether
    he could provide a consistent account as a result of those issues.



16. I have also considered the argument set out in the grounds at 6-8, that
    the judge was wrong to follow  the  current  country  guidance  without
    giving sufficient regard to the  further  evidence  about  the  claimed
    deterioration of the situation in Afghanistan and  in  particular,  the
    home area of the appellant in Laghman Province.

17. It had been argued before the FtTJ that there would be  an  Article  15
    (c) risk in Laghman Province (see skeleton argument at paragraphs  [49-
    57]).  This  was  based  on  a  deterioration  in  the  conditions   in
    Afghanistan as set out in the European  Asylum  Support  Office  report
    "Country Guidance; Afghanistan -Guidance Note and Common Analysis (June
    2018) ("EASO"). The Tribunal was therefore invited to depart  from  the
    CG decision in AK in view of the  increasing  levels  of  violence  and
    insurgency in the province and find that the threshold was met. In  the
    alternative it was submitted that on the facts of the appellant's case,
    in the light of  his  vulnerability  (  his  cognitive  impairment  and
    diagnosis of PTSD) he would  succeed   by  reason  of  special  factors
    particular to his personal circumstances  (  see  the  "sliding  scale"
    approach in Diakite v Comissaire general aux refugies et aux  apatrides
    (CJEU -C-285/12) at [32] and Elgafaji v  Staatssecretaris  van  Justite
    [2009] ECR 1-921 at [39]40]).

18.  Mr Tufan submitted that whilst the respondent  accepted  there  was  a
    Taliban presence in the area, it had been open to the  judge  to  reach
    the conclusion that there was no Article 15 (c) risk in the area.

19. The FtTJ considered this issue at paragraphs 53-54 of the decision. The
    judge cited the relevant case law and cited AK  observing in that  case
    that the level of indiscriminate violence was not at the level to reach
    the threshold of risk and that recent country material in the  form  of
    the Home office Country of origin report  dated  June  2016  at  2.3.17
    examined trends in violence between 2010-2016  and  found  an  increase
    over the years but that the  decision  in  AK  whilst  considering  the
    situation in 2011, nevertheless concluded on the  evidence  that  there
    was not such a high level of violence  as to  amount  to  a  real  risk
    justifying humanitarian protection. The judge went on to state "AK  has
    been recently re-affirmed by AS (Safety in Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]
    UKUT 00118(IAC). There is nothing in the country evidence which  causes
    me to differ from its conclusions. While I note the view  of  the  EASO
    report I find that AS (Afghanistan) is so recent an authority, and that
    it considered evidence over the same timescale as the EASO report,  and
    therefore I should not differ from its conclusions."

20. At the date of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal there  were  two
    country guidance decisions of potential relevance to this  appeal.  The
    first was AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  163(IAC)  in
    which it was held that the level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  the
    country, even in the  worst  affected  provinces,  was  not  such  that
    Article 15 (c) of the Qualification Directive  was  generally  engaged.
    The second was AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  118
    (IAC) in which the Tribunal  re-evaluated  the  security  situation  in
    Kabul, and considered the city's reasonableness as a place of potential
    internal relocation. The Tribunal  held  that  although  the  level  of
    violence had increased it had not yet reached Article 15(c) levels; nor
    could it be said that in general,  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  a
    healthy adult male to relocate to Kabul, although  each  case  required
    consideration of the individual's personal circumstances.

21. As set out in the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  a  country
    guidance case is authoritative in any subsequent appeal so far as  that
    appeal relates to the country guidance issue in  question  and  depends
    upon the same or similar evidence. In SG (Iraq) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940,
    the Court of Appeal, having considered the purpose of country  guidance
    determinations, said that decision  makers  and  Tribunal  judges  were
    required to take them into account and to follow them unless there were
    strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to justify their not  doing
    so [47].

22. Judges should therefore only depart from country  guidance  cases  when
    there are cogent reasons for doing so.  However,  the  more  time  that
    passes after the issue of a country guidance decision, the more  likely
    it is that there may need to  be  a  consideration  of  how  subsequent
    events have affected the conclusions reached and the guidance given  in
    that decision.  AK was issued in 2012 and the situation in  Afghanistan
    has been volatile. The Tribunal in AK commented on the  possibility  of
    the situation there deteriorating once the Allied forces had  left  and
    at [248] said that while the guidance  given  would  continue  to  have
    validity for the immediate future there would be a  need  to  keep  the
    situation in the country under careful review over the next few years.

23. In this appeal there  was  further  evidence  which  arguably  shows  a
    significant deterioration in the security  situation  and  should  have
    been taken into account by the judge when considering its impact on the
    guidance in AK. The assessment of the  security  situation  in  Laghman
    province in May/June 2018 in the EASO Country  Guidance  Report  is  as
    follows:


           " Looking at the  indicators,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the
           indiscriminate violence taking place in the province of  Laghman
           reaches such a high level that minimum individual  elements  are
           required to  show  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  a
           civilian, returned to the province, would face a  real  risk  of
           serious harm in the meaning of article 15(c) QD."


24.  In the EASO COI of May 2018, it is recorded that there  was  a  strong
    presence of insurgent groups, especially the Taliban, in some parts  of
    Laghman.  Clashes between the Taliban and ISKP were reported.  Military
    operations are being conducted in  the  province  including  airstrikes
    resulted in the deaths of insurgents, there are  also  clashes  between
    insurgents and security forces and attacks  by  insurgent  groups  have
    been on the rise in recent years. It recorded that leading  causes  for
    civilian  casualties  were  ground  engagements,  IED's  and   targeted
    /deliberate  killings.  Further  impact  on  civilian   life   included
    temporarily closed healthcare facilities, impeded  humanitarian  access
    reportedly due to fighting and illegal checkpoints,  large  numbers  of
    IDP's and returnees to the province and lack of adequate shelter.

25. Whilst the judge made reference to the report at  [35]  and  that  EASO
    considered that  there  was  indiscriminate  violence  across  most  of
    Afghanistan, the judge also considered it was  in  the  context  of  AS
    (Afghanistan) as being so recent that there should be no departure from
    AK. T In my view, the judge needed to give  reasons  why  this  further
    evidence did not affect that  guidance.   At  [58]  of  AS,  the  panel
    recognised the weight and reliability of  the  EASO  reports,  and  the
    judge did not give weight  to  the  evidence  about  events  since  the
    guidance in AK or give sufficient reasons by reference to the  material
    as to why there should be no departure from AK.

26. In the alternative, I accept the submission made that  the  judge  also
    did not have regard to the appellant's medical conditions and cognitive
    impairment  when  considering  whether  he  would   be   at   risk   of
    indiscriminate violence. The medical report had not been challenged  by
    the respondent and notwithstanding the  assessment  of  the  FtTJ,  the
    appellant has a number of individual characteristics, and in particular
    his mental health and general vulnerability, which puts him at  greater
    risk than other members of the population. This has not formed part  of
    the assessment.

27. Whilst the FtTJ made reference to the decision in AK, the judge did not
    look beyond the general guidance given. In particular the Tribunal made
    no reference to the acknowledgement in AK that travel between Kabul and
    smaller towns  and  villages  may  be  dangerous,  with  indiscriminate
    dangers  such  as  pressure  mines,  Taliban  presence   and/or   other
    insurgents. In AK the Tribunal held that such dangers would have to  be
    evaluated on a case-by-case basis.  As it had been  accepted  that  the
    Taliban were active in the appellant's home area, it was necessary  for
    some analysis of  whether it would be safe for the appellant to try and
    make the journey from Kabul ( where he would be returned  to)   to  his
    home area, taking into account his vulnerabilities.

28. Mr Tufan conceded that the appellant would be  returned  to  Kabul  and
    that the judge had not gone on to consider his ability to relocate  and
    whether it would be unduly harsh for him  to  do  so.  I  am  therefore
    satisfied that in the light of the above matters that the judge made an
    error on a point of law that would be material to the outcome.

29. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the  errors  identified  in  the
    grounds are made out. As those  errors  go  to  findings  of  fact  and
    analysis of evidence, I set aside the decision and do not preserve  any
    of the findings.

30. As to remaking the decision, given the nature of the errors I accept
    the submission made by Ms Fitzsimmons and Mr Tufan that further
    evidence will be required and further clear findings made, including
    updating evidence relevant to the appellant's circumstances. Both
    advocates submit that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal.

31. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of
    appeals in this Tribunal. That reads as follows:
    "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to
    re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
    Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
    (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

32. Thus, I have reached the conclusion that it is appropriate to remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all matters.  In the
    light of the diagnosis set out in the report, consideration will be  be
    given to the guidance given in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ
    1123 at the hearing.





Notice of Decision



33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


                                Date     14/5/2019

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds




