
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03351/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 September 2017                       |On 3 October 2017               |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                          Mohammed Rahayef Alanizy
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms H Naz, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated 13.1.17, dismissing on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    20.3.16, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pullig  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    24.4.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Rimmington granted permission to  appeal
    on 1.6.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 25.9.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

 5. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Rimmington  found  it  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to:

      a)  adequately address the issues raised in the skeleton argument;

      b) reflect in the findings the background information in COIR 19.24  &
         CIG 2.3.7, and apply NM (documentation/undocumented  Bidoon:  risk)
         Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 003656, relating to obtaining documentation;

      c) Made factual errors relating to the appellant's attempt  to  secure
         documentation relating to his age; and

      d)  Failed  to  address  adequately  the  evidence  of  the   brother,
         recognised as an undocumented Bidoon.

 6. For the appellant, Ms Naz simply relied on the grounds and made no oral
    submissions at the appeal hearing, except in response to  those  of  Ms
    Ahmad. I refused permission for Ms Naz to raise without advance  notice
    further grounds not relied on in the submitted grounds of appeal.

 7. It is not necessary for a judge to refer to each  and  every  piece  of
    evidence relied on by an appellant,  provided  it  is  clear  from  the
    decision that the judge had considered the background material and  the
    evidence as a whole. That is evident from a reading of the decision  as
    a whole, particularly [5], [12] and [13] of the decision.

 8. There was an error at [13(d)] as to the age of the appellant at a  time
    when the Bidoon had a further opportunity to  obtain  documentation  in
    1996, he was not 17 or 18, but only 8.  However,  the  mistake  is  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

 9. [7] of the grounds purports that the judge's statement at [13(k)]  that
    one of the  two  brothers,  the  appellant  and  his  brother  who  has
    previously been accepted as an  undocumented  Bidoon,  is  lying,  must
    logically mean  that  the  other  is  telling  the  truth.  This  is  a
    misconceived argument of rationality. It may have been  better  if  the
    judge had said that either or both of them are lying, when pointing out
    significant inconsistencies in their respective accounts. However,  the
    conclusion of the judge, who was satisfied that the appellant  was  not
    telling the truth, was open to him on the reasoning  pointing  out  the
    inconsistencies in account. Ms Naz sought to put an  interpretation  on
    the oral evidence of the brother, suggesting that  he  was  not  saying
    that the appellant had been arrested at the house, but it  was  clearly
    open to judge to conclude that the brother had said the  appellant  had
    been  arrested  at  the   house,   particularly   when   the   apparent
    inconsistency was put to the brother by  the  presenting  officer,  the
    appellant having said that he had been arrested at  the  demonstration.
    The judge  detailed  clear  reasons  why  he  concluded  there  was  an
    inconsistency and that the appellant was lying. It is  clear  from  the
    decision that the judge did take  into  account  the  evidence  of  the
    brother, but notwithstanding his accepted status  reached  a  different
    conclusion in relation to the appellant.

10. In a related vein, Ms Naz sought to argue that if one brother has  been
    accepted as an undocumented Bidoon, it must follow that  the  other  is
    also an undocumented Bidoon. That is an attempt to reargue the  appeal,
    and I do not accept the premise as  being  well-founded.  It  might  be
    supportive evidence, but the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  to  assess
    the evidence as a whole and it is possible  for  a  judge  to  reach  a
    different but justifiable conclusion to another judge or an officer  of
    the Secretary of State as to a different person. If Ms  Naz's  argument
    is correct, then there would be no purpose in having a hearing at  all,
    as in falling domino fashion, one undocumented  Bidoon  would  lead  to
    another. I reject this argument.

11. Several of the grounds of appeal are no more  than  disagreements  with
    the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  For  example,  it  is
    suggested that at [13(l)] the judge confused date of  disappearing  and
    date of leaving Kuwait. The analysis of the inconsistencies set out  at
    that part of the decision was open to the judge, including the findings
    that there was an inconsistency between the appellant's account and his
    brother. From [13(m)] it is clear that the judge was fully aware of the
    appellant's claim to have been in hiding for a  year  and  five  months
    before leaving Kuwait.

12. [10] of the grounds is again a mere  disagreement,  but  one  involving
    speculation as to why the  appellant's  knowledge  of  others  arrested
    might be limited. The findings and reasons at [13(j)] were  fully  open
    to the judge.

13. It was also open to the judge to  conclude  that  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to leave Kuwait from the airport undermined his claim  to  be
    wanted by the authorities. The finding remains open, even on the  basis
    of the background evidence that  there  is  no  fingerprinting  at  the
    airport.

14. Ground [29] falls away once the judge has concluded that the  appellant
    is not an undocumented Bidoon.

15. In the circumstances, the grounds fail to establish any material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusion & Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make a no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

