
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03032/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 9th August 2019                   |On 16th September 2019ll             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Mavis [B]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Mohzan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge J.
P. Groom, promulgated on 4th March 2019, following a hearing at Nottingham
Justice Centre on 18th February 2019.  In the determination, the judge
dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently
applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana, was born on 12th December 1980, and is
a female.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent, refusing
her claim for asylum and for humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph
339C of HC 395, in a decision letter dated 13th February 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she cannot be returned to
Ghana because she is a lone woman, who has been a victim of human
trafficking from Ghana, for the purpose of sexual exploitation, and is at
risk of ill-treatment and persecution upon return.

The Judge's Findings

The judge began by considering that the Respondent Secretary of State had
challenged the Appellant's credibility with respect to her claim.  However,
the Appellant did have three children in the UK.  The judge observed that,
"I find that the Appellant is leading a family life with her three
children.  I find that the Appellant has been leading a private life in the
United Kingdom" (paragraph 42).  The judge then went on to say that, "I
apply Section 117" (paragraph 42).  Having done all of this, the judge came
to the conclusion, after a review of the expert reports (see paragraphs 44
to 46) that the Appellant could not succeed.  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

The grounds of application state that the judge had attached weight to the
fact that the Appellant had not given evidence herself.  However, the judge
had failed to consider whether the Appellant was a vulnerable person, given
that she had severe mental health problems (see paragraphs 28 to 36 of the
findings).  Secondly, the judge failed to consider whether any of the
Appellant's three children were children who had been in the UK for over
seven years and therefore was a "qualifying" child, such as to have the
application of paragraph 117B(6) come to her assistance.  The judge made no
finding in relation to this.  The judge did not consider paragraph 19 of KO
(Nigeria) [2018] 1 WLR 5273.

On 12th June 2019 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it
does appear that, if the birth certificates of the children are considered,
that at least one of the children was over 7.  That being so, the judge had
arguably failed to give proper consideration to Section 117B(6).

Submissions

At the hearing before me on 9th August 2019, there was agreement between Mr
Mohzan, appearing as a solicitor on behalf of the Appellant, and the Home
Office Senior Presenting Officer Mr A. McVeety, that the judge had not
considered the application of Article 8 in the context of the fact that at
least one of the children was a "qualifying child".  Mr McVeety for his
part stated that the judge had failed to consider Section 117B(6), even
though it was the case that there had been a reference to Section 117B
considerations having been taken into account.  That being so, Mr McVeety
said that he had to agree that there was an error of law and that this
matter should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remake the decision as follows.
This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined by
a judge other than J. P. Groom, pursuant to paragraph 7.2(b) of the
Practice Directions.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th September 2019







