
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03878/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (Via Skype)                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 December 2020                            |On 11 January 2021             |
|                                               |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SMR
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr T Hussain instructed by Collingwood Immigration
Services.
For the Respondent: Mr C Howells Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Myers ('the Judge') who in a decision promulgated on
        10 July 2019 dismissed the appellant's protection appeal.






Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  15  August  2000  who
        arrived in the United Kingdom on or around  27  November  2018  and
        claimed asylum.
     3. The Judge, in addition to the documentary evidence, had the benefit
        of seeing and hearing the appellant give oral evidence.
     4. The Judge noted at [6] that it was confirmed at the  start  of  the
        hearing that the sole issue was the credibility of the appellant.
     5. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [19] of  the  decision  in
        which the Judge rejects the appellant's account, finding  at  [26]:
        "In conclusion, even applying the lower standard of  proof  I  find
        that the Appellant has fabricated his account and I do  not  accept
        that he is at risk from the  Iranian  authorities  because  of  his
        political activities in Iran. He would thus be returning to Iran as
        a failed asylum seeker of Kurdish ethnicity."
     6. The Judge considered whether the appellant will face a real risk as
        a result of his ethnicity but concludes at [28] that it  would  not
        be a case of the appellant being regarded as having  been  involved
        in any low-level political activity or anything that created a real
        risk for him on return.
     7. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  on  18
        November 2019, the  operative  part  of  the  grant  being  in  the
        following terms:


        3.   The grounds claim that the judge erred because  she  conflated
             plausibility with credibility  in  assessing  the  appellant's
             claim, failed to  take  into  account  relevant  evidence  and
             failed to give adequate reasons.


        4.   The judge arguably assessed the claim  according  to  her  own
             subjective and speculative expectation.


        5.   The Judges  entire  analysis  of  the  evidence  in  terms  of
             credibility is at [21] - [25] and is arguably inadequate.


        6.   Whilst the judge said that she  had  taken  into  account  his
             tender age and lack of education, she appeared to  have  given
             him no credit in that regard.


        7.   The judge's conclusions in  finding  that  the  appellant  has
             fabricated his account arguably inadequate.


        8.   The grounds disclose an arguable error of law.



Error of law


     8. Before the Upper  Tribunal  Mr  Hussain  relied  upon  the  pleaded
        grounds asserting the Judge has supplemented her subjective view of
        things which impacted upon the  adverse  credibility  findings.  Mr
        Hussain  specifically  referred  to  [23]  which  he  submitted  is
        infected by legal error as  it  contains  a  subjective  assessment
        based upon the Judges own view and not as  a  result  of  a  proper
        assessment of the evidence.
     9. At [23] the Judge writes:


        "I find he has fabricated his claim because I do not accept that he
        put himself at risk by distributing leaflets in  Iran  despite  his
        lack of interest in politics and his fear of discovery which is  so
        consuming that it affects his activities in the UK. In addition, he
        could not answer several questions about the party  at  his  asylum
        interview and was vague about his motives for wanting to  help.  If
        the appellant had been genuinely motivated to do something to  help
        the Kurdish cause I would expect him to  take  the  opportunity  to
        continue his political activities once he was in a safe country."


    10. Mr Howells in his response referred the Tribunal  to  the  need  to
        look at [21] and [22] when assessing the merits,  or  lack  of,  in
        relation to this aspect of the challenge. In these  paragraphs  the
        Judge wrote:


        21.  The Appellant stated in his asylum interview  at  question  73
             that he did not know which political party  was  in  power  in
             Iran and did not "interfere in politics", and at questions  93
             to 95 he said he did not get involved in politics, he did  not
             have a lot of information about the government and because  of
             his age it was  not  good  to  get  involved  in  politics  or
             government issues. He confirmed in his oral evidence  that  he
             was scared to get involved with the Kurdish Freedom Party  and
             that he knew that people were at  risk  of  execution  if  the
             authorities were aware of their involvement.


        22.  Since arriving in the  UK  he  has  had  no  involvement  with
             Kurdish political causes. He states that this  is  because  he
             does not have much money to live on let alone travel to  party
             events, and because of language problems, he cannot  find  out
             whether there are any party branches near to where  he  lives.
             In cross examination he said that he had not asked other Kurds
             for help or information because he was scared  to  talk  about
             his  involvement  even  in  this   country.   He   could   not
             satisfactorily explain why he would be scared  to  talk  about
             Kurdish politics in the UK when I asked him to clarify he told
             me that he did not mean that he was in fear in the UK but that
             his fear was in relation to what he had  heard  about  actions
             against Kurdish political opponents in Iran.


    11. The Judge clearly took into account the information relied upon  by
        the appellant in both written and oral form. The  Judge  noted  the
        appellant's age but also that the appellant was an adult  when  the
        claimed core events he seeks to rely upon occurred. Paragraphs  [21
        - 23] have not shown to be findings  outside  the  range  of  those
        available to the Judge on the evidence or to be an assessment based
        upon the Judges own personal beliefs contrary to the evidence  that
        was made available.
    12. Mr Hussain also submitted the Judge failed  to  take  into  account
        evidence from the appellants asylum interview at questions  117-120
        in relation to the appellants involvement with a Mr Ali,  in  Iran,
        which had it been factored in could have resulted  in  a  different
        decision being made by the Judge.
    13. Mr Hussain also submitted the finding at [24] was not open  to  the
        Judge as it reflects the Judge impression of a member of the party,
        which is not the case. The  appellant  has  described  his  limited
        involvement in that he was transporting papers and was not claiming
        to be a member of the Kurdish Party. Mr Hussain submitted this  was
        an unpermitted assumption by the Judge.
    14. At [24] the Judge wrote:


        "The Appellant said at his screening interview that he was a member
        of the party and that if he returned to Iran he would be hanged. He
        also said that he might be able to  obtain  a  reference  from  his
        political party.  However, at his asylum interview he said  he  was
        not a member, merely as supporter. The explanation he gave for this
        inconsistency is that he only became aware of  the  distinction  of
        being a member and being a supporter when his  solicitor  explained
        it to him.  I do not accept this; by stating he might  be  able  to
        get a reference form his party I find the  Appellant  attempted  to
        give the impression that he was a member of the party. He  has  not
        satisfactorily explained  why he has made  no  attempt  to  contact
        anybody in the party, merely stating  that  he  could  not  contact
        people in Iran because it could put them in danger and he  has  not
        been able to contact the party in the UK because he was  unfamiliar
        with the culture and language. He told me that he had not asked his
        solicitor to help him  contact  the  party.  In  my  judgment,  the
        Appellant has changed his account to  say  that  he  was  merely  a
        supporter  because  he  has  learnt  that   membership   could   be
        confirmed."


    15. As submitted by Mr Howells, the grounds do not dispute the accuracy
        of the Judge's finding  that  the  appellant  changed  his  account
        between claiming he was a member of the Kurdish party  to  being  a
        supporter. The Judge clearly considered  the  explanation  provided
        and it has not been shown to  be  outside  the  range  of  findings
        reasonably  available  to  the  Judge  to  find   the   explanation
        unsatisfactory. The  sources  referred  to  by  the  Judge  in  the
        decision  have  not  challenged  as  being  inaccurate  nor  is  it
        established that the Judge failed to take relevant aspects  of  the
        evidence into account. This is not a case in  which  the  screening
        interview was conducted immediately after  arrival  in  the  United
        Kingdom. Case law establishes the proper approach to such evidence.
         It is also the case that at the outset of his asylum interview the
        appellant adopted the replies  given  in  his  screening  interview
        indicating the Judge was able to place due weight  upon  the  same.
        Whilst it was submitted by Mr Hussain that the  appellant  had  not
        claimed to be a member of the Kurdish party the finding he  had  so
        claimed, by inference if not specifically, has not been shown to be
        a finding not open to the Judge.
    16. The Judge is also criticised by Mr Hussain for  referring  at  [25]
        the a finding that it was not accepted  the  appellant  would  have
        used his real name if he was frightened of identification,  as  the
        evidence was that he used his real name to Mr Ali who was a  family
        friend and to whom he would have been known in any event.
    17. Mr Hussain also submitted the Judge has not demonstrated  a  proper
        grasp of the facts and supplemented assumptions when the  objective
        and  subjective  evidence  was  available  and  showed  the  Judges
        conclusion are wrong. It was submitted  the  appellant  had  always
        said he is not a political animal.
    18. At [25] the  Judge  makes  three  plausibility  findings.  In  that
        section of the decision the Judge writes:


        25.  I do not accept his account of his escape. In oral evidence he
             said that he had helped distribute leaflets on about seven  or
             eight occasions. I find this inconsistent with his claim  that
             he was inexperienced and therefore the other  members  of  the
             group put him towards the back of the convoy.  Furthermore,  I
             do not accept that the Appellant would have used his real name
             if he was frightened of identification. I do not  accept  that
             he escaped when the convoy came under armed attack or that  he
             looked back and witnessed other members of  the  convoy  being
             detained despite being at a distance of 300 to 400m away.


    19. The appellant claimed he ran away from the scene of the attack upon
        the convoy making it a plausible finding that he would be  unlikely
        to be able to  see  what  was  happening  behind  him.  Mr  Howells
        accepted in his submissions that the other plausibility findings in
        this paragraph are somewhat weaker but that did not make any  error
        material.
    20.  Having  considered  the  evidence  provided,  the  decision  under
        challenge, and the written and oral submissions made in support  of
        the error of law  challenge,  I  do  not  find  the  appellant  has
        established legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering in this
        matter further.
    21. Whilst the  appellant  disagrees  with  the  Judge's  findings  and
        clearly wishes to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  some  of  the
        allegations made amount  to  criticism  of  style  rather  than  of
        substance. Whilst it was accepted that some of the points raised at
        [25] are weaker than others I do not find these are  sufficient  to
        undermine the Judge's overall conclusion set out at [26] which  has
        not been shown to be  outside  the  range  of  findings  reasonably
        available to the Judge on the evidence.

Decision

    22. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31 December 2020












