
[pic]

Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
PA/03601/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|on 14 June 2017                          |on  23 June 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jones instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Watson ('the Judge') promulgated on 1  November  2016  following  a
        hearing at Birmingham in which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's
        appeal on both protection and human rights grounds.




Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who claimed his  date  of
        birth was 6 August 2000, although age was disputed.

     3. The Judge records procedural aspects of the decision in [5 - 6]  of
        the impugned decision in the following terms:

             "5.  The appellant's identity and  age  are  in  dispute.  The
                  appellant arrived in the UK in 2011.  He  claimed  asylum.
                  This claim was refused, but he was found to  have  been  a
                  victim of forced labour in Bangladesh.  His  claimed  name
                  and date of birth is [SA], 06.08.00. On  this  account  he
                  was 12 on arrival in the UK. He was placed in the care  of
                  Birmingham City Council and a care order was made  in  the
                  name of [SA]. His discretionary leave, granted  under  the
                  name of [NU], expired on 03.12.15.  Prior to the expiry of
                  that leave he submitted an application for  further  leave
                  to remain based upon his family and private  life  in  the
                  UK. A fingerprint report  from  the  Home  Office  records
                  noted that the fingerprints of [SA] were matched to  those
                  of a [NU], date of birth 03.06.98. The respondent  refused
                  his application for discretionary leave finding  that  the
                  appellant was in fact [NU] and was therefore 18 as at  the
                  date of decision made.

             6.   The  decision  was  made  on  23.03.16.  The  appellant's
                  representatives applied for an adjournment of the  hearing
                  on 04.10.16 on the basis that Birmingham City Council  had
                  not  provided   an   age   assessment   report   and   the
                  representatives  were  going  to  issue  Judicial   Review
                  proceedings  to  require  them  to  do  so.  A  pre-action
                  Judicial Review letter was  attached  to  the  adjournment
                  application. This application  was  refused  and  detailed
                  reasons are in the file.  Briefly  the  Judge  found  that
                  there was no legal requirement for Birmingham City Council
                  to carry out an assessment; there was no explanation  from
                  the representatives as to why they had not taken steps  to
                  obtain an independent assessment themselves."

     4.  The  adjournment  application  was  renewed  by  the   appellant's
        representatives before the Judge, the representative also  conceded
        that the application for Judicial Review appeared misconstrued. The
        Judge refused the application for reasons previously given.

     5. Having set out details of the issues,  respective  cases,  a  basic
        chronology, and the evidence made available, the Judge sets out the
        findings of fact from [27] of the decision  under  challenge  which
        may be summarised in the following terms:

   i. The appellant has been inconsistent about basic  details  in  his  two
      interviews in 2012 and 2013 even accepting he was very young and found
      to have been a victim of forced child labour [27].

  ii.   Even   making   allowances   for   the   appellant's   presentation,
      inconsistencies in his family composition claiming to have no siblings
      in one interview and then three in another, the work he was forced  to
      do,  claiming  one  interview  it  was  mainly  at  a  restaurant  and
      occasionally in a car wash yet in another interview at a car wash only
      and other matters are  said  to  be  inconsistencies  undermining  his
      credibility [27].

 iii. The appellant claimed that the person named S A was a cousin and  that
      it was coincidental he ended  up  staying  in  his  home.  In  another
      interview the appellant referred to this person as  uncle  when  asked
      about relatives in the United  Kingdom  and  in  a  further  interview
      claimed he had met a person  once  in  Bangladesh  but  was  otherwise
      unknown to him. The Judge rejected as not credible the claim that  the
      appellant's stay with SA was a coincidence [28].

  iv. In his oral evidence, the appellant initially  stated  when  he  first
      arrived in the UK his mother did not have a phone but now she had  one
      which is followed  by  what  is  described  as  "a  very  unconvincing
      attempt" to deny having mentioned  the  phone.  The  Judge  found  the
      appellant inconsistent and that his  explanation  for  mentioning  the
      phone was not credible even to lower standard of proof [29].

   v. The  appellant's  initial  witness  statement,  which  is  translated,
      carries  an  independent  interpreter  signature  and  refers  to  the
      appellant as aged 15 in 2013 which is the age given in  the  documents
      for NU. The Judge found that statement records the accurate age of the
      appellant which is why it was signed by him as it then stood [30].

  vi. The appellant lacks general credibility. It was not shown that he  was
      16 at the date of the hearing and the Judge found he was aged 18 [31].

 vii. The appellant accepted his fingerprints had been taken  in  Bangladesh
      but the Judge did not accept they were taken in the way claimed, by  a
      person who visited the appellant on one occasion at  home.  The  Judge
      found they were taken for the purposes of  a  visit  visa  application
      which  was  made.  The  appellant's  true  identity  is  NU  and   the
      fingerprint print report which identifies him as such is correct [32].

viii. The Judge took account of the Birmingham City Council  care  order  in
      the name of SA in which the date of birth he gave the authorities  was
      accepted and that  the  school  found  nothing  suspicious  about  the
      appellant's appearance or his actions and accepted at face  value  the
      information presented to them. The Judge found the difference in  ages
      - 16 and 18 - is not such a person could  not  pass  one  off  as  the
      other. There was no evidence the appellant is of the  younger  age  he
      claimed,  apart  from  his  self-serving  claim.  The   appellant   is
      unreliable in his evidence had not shown to the lower standard he is a
      minor. The appellant was 18 years of age at the date  of  the  hearing
      [33].

  ix. The appellant has been found to be a victim of forced  labour.  It  is
      his case that it was his father who forced him to work. The  appellant
      has not proved his at risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason
      [34].

   x. The appellant could relocate to another area Bangladesh if  he  wished
      to avoid his parents. He speaks the language and follows the  majority
      religion. He is not at risk of  inhumane  treatment  or  torture.  The
      appellant can look for and find work. He is healthy and has  benefited
      from some UK education and speaks English. The appellant had not shown
      he is at risk of ill-treatment pursuant to Articles 2 or 3 [36].

  xi. The appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules [37].

 xii. Paragraph 276ADE(vi) is the only paragraph  relevant  with  regard  to
      private  life  but  there  were  no  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
      reintegration to Bangladesh on return. The  appellant  is  in  contact
      with his mother based upon his oral evidence and has access to her via
      telephone. He has not lost cultural ties to the country and speaks the
      language and can re-establish his private life in Bangladesh [38].

xiii. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, having followed a  structured  approach
      and considers section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration, and  Asylum
      Act 2002 the decision is proportionate in all the circumstances [39  -
      49].

     6. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
        which was granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 23
        November 2016 in the following terms:

             "... the respondent relied on  a  positive  fingerprint  match
             suggesting the appellant was two years older than he  claimed.
             As far as I can see, no evidence of the match was produced  by
             the respondent and the FtTJ appears  to  have  relied  on  the
             assertions made in the reasons for refusal letter.  The  Court
             of Appeal explained in SH (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA  Civ  1284
             that where only one party relies  on  such  evidence  fairness
             requires the other party to be  able  to  submit  evidence  to
             counter it. Whilst here had been delay  on  the  part  of  the
             appellant,  there  was  evidence  before  the  FtTJ  that  the
             appellant had been pursuing the matter  and  was  prepared  to
             issue judicial review proceedings."

     7. The Secretary of State opposes  the  application  in  her  Rule  24
        response in which, inter-alia, it is stated:

   i. In relation to the adjournment application to enable an age assessment
      to be undertaken, there  was  no  unfairness  to  the  appellant.  The
      appellant was represented and informed the judge that he had  been  on
      notice for six months prior to the hearing of  the  hearing  date.  No
      steps had been taken to obtain an independent age  assessment  and  as
      conceded by the appellant's representative, the  judicial  review  had
      been misconstrued.

  ii. The Judge  had  made  allowances  for  the  appellant's  vulnerability
      bearing in mind the small gap in dispute as to the age.

 iii. Critically, there had been no challenge in the grounds  of  appeal  to
      the other credibility findings made by the FtTJ.

  iv. The appellant did not dispute that his fingerprints were taken and his
      explanation as to the dates and times did not stand  up  to  scrutiny.
      The grounds of appeal take  no  issue  with  the  failure  to  provide
      evidence which it stated was  inappropriate  for  the  judge  granting
      permission to raise as an additional point  not  relied  upon  by  the
      appellant.

     8. A previous hearing listed for the purposes of  allowing  the  Upper
        Tribunal to consider whether  an  error  of  law  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss  the  appeal  had  been  made  out  had  to  be
        adjourned on 19 May 2017 as  it  appeared  to  Mr  Jones,  who  was
        representing the appellant on that occasion too, that  neither  the
        appellant nor his accompanying social  worker  were  aware  of  the
        content of the Judge's decision and thought they were attending the
        Tribunal for the purposes of the decision being handed down.

     9.  During  the  short  adjournment  period  Mr  Jones  was  able   to
        investigate matters further resulting in a letter written by  Hasan
        Solicitors, dated 13 June 2017, explaining the situation  and  that
        what occurred on 19 May 2017 was as a result of the  appellant  and
        those assisting  him  having  forgotten  that  the  solicitors  had
        explained the decision and the nature of these proceedings.

    10. This Tribunal does not consider there is a need to take the  matter
        any further as clearly a misunderstanding has arisen which has  now
        been adequately resolved.

Error of law


    11. The appellant has provided the Upper Tribunal with a copy of an age
        assessment undertaken by Birmingham City Council which had not been
        disclosed to the Judge. At [17] of the ground seeking permission to
        appeal to the Upper Tribunal it is written "We ask you  to  further
        note BCC  completed  the  age  assessment  on  9/11/2016  and  have
        accepted the appellants  date  of  birth  as  he  has  always  been
        claiming being 03/06/2000 and  have  confirmed  that  he  has  been
        accepted as a 16-year-old.

    12. It was accepted at the earlier  hearing  that  the  age  assessment
        report is not Merton compliant.

    13. Mr Jones submitted that two issues require  consideration  at  this
        stage being (1) should the adjournment have been  granted  and  (2)
        would it have made a material difference. Mr Jones referred to  the
        judgment of the Court of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan) at  [17]  where
        that court suggested that in their case "The question,  I  suggest,
        for us is whether the evidence that the appellant is over 18 is  so
        overwhelming that it is pointless to remit the matter  to  a  First
        Tier Tribunal notwithstanding the errors of approach  of  both  the
        First  Tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   which   I   have
        identified". Mr Jones submitted  that  in  this  case  that  was  a
        relevant issue.

    14. The  Judge  was  aware  that  the  appellant  was  seeking  an  age
        assessment  report  and  contemplated   issuing   judicial   review
        proceedings to have the same  expedited,  even  if  the  same  were
        arguably without merit. It was known there was evidence relied upon
        by the Secretary of State of a passport  and  fingerprint  evidence
        showing the appellant was older than he was claiming to be.

    15. The submission the Judge should have accepted the appellant was the
        age he claimed to be as the earlier date of birth had been accepted
        by both Birmingham City Council and the appellant's school  has  no
        arguable merit. Both those institutions were entitled to form their
        own opinion as to what age  they  thought  the  appellant  was,  in
        relation to Birmingham City Council to ascertain whether they had a
        statutory obligation to him as a child in need of care and, if  so,
        the nature and extent of such care, and in relation to  the  school
        into what class or age group the appellant should be placed for the
        purposes of proper administration of their educational  duties  and
        obligations.  It  is  clear  that  the  position  adopted  by  both
        institutions was to accept the appellant's statement regarding  his
        age. It is not made out that any form of detailed investigation was
        undertaken by either body at that time and it may  have  been  that
        they accepted what the appellant said as that was the best evidence
        they had at that time.

    16. This matter was, however, a contested issue before  the  Judge  who
        was required to consider all the evidence made available  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny and  give  proper  reasons  for
        conclusions that had been reached in the decision.

    17. The submission by Mr Jones that the appellant  travelled  with  two
        people previously and this may provide an  explanation  as  to  why
        documentation was in his name was accepted as not  being  a  matter
        before the Judge and there is no evidence in the appeal bundle that
        the appellant sought to rely upon this explanation. It cannot be an
        error of law for a judge not to take into account  or  factor  into
        the decision-making process something of which they are not aware.

    18. Mr Jones repeated on more than one occasion that what had  occurred
        could explain why the documents have been obtained as they were,  a
        short time before the appellant's period of travel, and that if the
        Judge had investigated the matter or allowed the appellant  further
        time to do so, there could have been a more detailed  investigation
        which could have provided an explanation for the  documents  relied
        upon by the respondent.

    19. In relation to the age assessment, Mr  Jones  accepted  it  is  not
        Merton compliant and that  the  age  assessment  was  written  when
        enquiries had not been made of the Home Office  of  the  nature  of
        those outlined in the Joint Working Guidance between ADCS  and  the
        Home  Office.  As  a  result  of  the  failure  to  undertake  such
        enquiries, the author of the report is stated to have arrived at  a
        conclusion on the balance of probabilities.

    20. Mr Jones submitted it was not a case of the author  of  the  report
        not being aware of the requirement to consult if an age  assessment
        was being undertaken, but allegedly  of  attempts  to  contact  the
        asylum  offices  at  Liverpool  and  Newcastle  not  eliciting  any
        response. It was accepted that communication with the  Home  Office
        may have made a material difference but  that  the  author  of  the
        report did not have the benefit of this.

    21. In any event, Mr Jones returned to his theme that the Judge  should
        have granted a short adjournment to enable the agencies to complete
        a proper age assessment.

    22. Mr Jones submitted that in light of the credibility issues referred
        to in the reasons  for  refusal  letter,  that  the  appellant  had
        responded  to  in  his  witness  statement,  the  lack  of  an  age
        assessment and absence of further enquiries, this is not  a  clear-
        cut case which, according to  the  passage  from  SH  (Afghanistan)
        quoted above meant the matter needed to be remitted to  the  First-
        tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade.

    23. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Mills submitted that it  was
        open to the Judge to find the period of time that passed  was  more
        than adequate to enable the appellant to produce evidence from  the
        Home Office and Social Services combined.

    24. Although an age assessment report is now available it was submitted
        it makes no difference to  the  Judge's  decision  based  upon  the
        evidence considered at the date of the First-tier Hearing.

    25. The author of the age assessment in the conclusions at pages  13  -
        15 of the report placed no weight upon the appellant's passport  or
        the fingerprint evidence relied upon by the Secretary of  State  as
        it was stated there was no evidence the passport relied upon by the
        appellant was authentic.

    26. Mr Mills noted the statement on page 11 of the report claiming  the
        author had attempted to contact the Home Office, but was unable  to
        understand why telephone calls were made to Liverpool and Newcastle
        by Birmingham City Council when they knew the appellant's case  was
        being dealt with by the asylum team at Solihull in  Birmingham.  It
        was submitted there was no evidence of any attempts to contact  the
        correct office regarding this matter. The fact of  the  matter  was
        that there was no consultation.

    27. It was submitted the appellant's passport  was  accepted  as  being
        genuine by an Entry Clearance Officer.

    28. In reply Mr Jones submitted that in relation to the  passport  this
        was not a determinative issue as further  consideration  of  why  a
        person chose to leave the country with a  particular  document  was
        required as the document have been obtained near  to  the  date  of
        travel. It is noted this may be so, but  the  appellant  gave  oral
        evidence and it is not clear why, if this is a  relevant  fact,  it
        was not advanced. It is also the case that evidence  Mr  Jones  was
        referring to was not included in the bundle and the explanation  he
        now seeks to provide does not appear to  have  been  given  to  the
        Judge by the appellant's previous barrister Mr Martin.

    29. Mr Jones submitted there  was  no  evidence  to  support  Mr  Mills
        submissions regarding calls made or not made and that is likely the
        age assessment report  was  produced  as  Birmingham  City  Council
        thought they needed to expedite the same. It was submitted that  if
        the age assessment report is short it  is  not  the  fault  of  the
        authors of that document.

    30. I find the Judge was aware of the procedural history as noted above
        and the adjournment made by Mr Martin which was  refused  as  there
        been adequate time to obtain an age assessment.  The  issue  to  be
        borne in mind by the Judge when considering the adjournment request
        was the fairness of the decision to either allow refuse  the  same.
        Not only had the appellant  had  a  considerable  period  of  time,
        during all of which he was represented, in which to prepare an  age
        assessment report it is recognised that in a disputed  age  case  a
        judge is required to  consider  the  evidence  available  from  all
        sources which includes oral and written evidence in addition to any
        age assessment report.

    31. The Judge set  out  the  correct  self-direction  at  [12]  of  the
        decision  that  the  main  issue  to  be  determined   related   to
        credibility. The Judge  considered  the  documentary  evidence  and
        noted at [26] that the appellant gave oral evidence and that,  even
        making allowance for his young age, found the appellant not  to  be
        truthful and to be inconsistent on details that it  was  reasonable
        for him to know, regardless of his young age.

    32. A reading of the  decision  as  a  whole  does  not  establish  any
        arguable unlawfulness or irrationality in the Judges conclusions in
        relation to the evidence made available and the  resultant  adverse
        credibility findings.

    33. It has not been made  out  that  the  refusal  of  the  adjournment
        request by the Judge is infected by arguable  legal  error  on  the
        basis that the decision  to  refuse  the  adjournment  request  was
        unfair.

    34. The  first  of  the  questions  posed  by  Mr  Jones,  whether  the
        adjournment should have been granted, is answered in  the  negative
        as no arguable legal error has been made out in  relation  to  this
        aspect of the claim.

    35. The second question, requiring consideration  of  whether  the  age
        assessment report now available made a  material  difference,  such
        that the decision needed to be set aside and the  appeal  remitted,
        requires consideration of the evidence as a whole.

    36. The Judge found  the  appellant  to  be  18  years  of  age  having
        considered all the available evidence. Without considering all  the
        available evidence the author  of  the  age  assessment  found  the
        appellant's age to be consistent with that he claimed and  that  he
        was therefore 16. It is known that within any age assessment  there
        can be a margin of error of between plus or -2 to 5  years  and  so
        there is the possibility, applying the margin of  error,  that  the
        author of the age assessment places the appellant  within  the  age
        range established by the Judge on  the  evidence.  This  aspect  in
        isolation is not therefore determinative.

    37. It is also necessary to appreciate the seriousness of  the  failure
        to produce a Merton compliant age assessment. The  Merton  judgment
        was handed down by Burnton J in the High Court on 14th  July  2003,
        and gives 'guidance as to the requirements of a  lawful  assessment
        by a local authority of the age of a young asylum  seeker  claiming
        to be under the  age  of  18  years'.  All  local  authorities  are
        required, following the  Merton  judgment,  to  ensure  that  their
        assessments are full and comprehensive, and that  the  process  for
        assessing age is clear, transparent and fair.

    38. A Merton Compliant assessment will normally include a  face-to-face
        meeting with the young person; set out the  general  background  of
        the applicant, and adhere to standards of fairness. Some of the key
        points noted by the court were:

    . The decision maker must explain to an applicant  the  purpose  of  the
      interview;

    . Except in clear cases, the decision-maker cannot determine age  solely
      on the basis of the appearance of the applicant;

    . In general,  the  decision-maker  must  seek  to  elicit  the  general
      background  of  the  applicant,  including  the   applicant's   family
      circumstances and history, educational background, and the applicant's
      activities  during  the  previous  few  years.  Ethnic  and   cultural
      information may also be important. If there is  reason  to  doubt  the
      applicant's statement as to their age, the decision maker will have to
      make an assessment of the applicant's credibility, and he will have to
      ask questions designed to test the applicant's credibility;

    . If the decision-maker forms the provisional view that the applicant is
      lying, the applicant must be given  the  opportunity  to  address  the
      matters that have led to that view;

    . Adequate reasons must be  given  for  a  decision  that  an  applicant
      claiming to be a child is not a child (though these need not  be  long
      or elaborate);

    . Cases vary, and the level of inquiry required in one case may  not  be
      necessary in another;

    . A local authority may take into account information  obtained  by  the
      Home Office, but it must make its own decision, and  for  that  reason
      must have adequate information available to it.

    . A failure to adhere to the guidelines may result in an assessment that
      is neither full, transparent, fair or lawful.

    39. To prevent  scope  for  misunderstanding  and  to  improve  working
        practices the Age Assessment Joint  Working  Guidance  dated  April
        2015 was agreed between the Home Office and Local  Authorities  and
        in England and Wales, the local authority's  and  local  government
        associations being represented by the Association of  Directors  of
        Children's Services.

    40. The guidance sets out contacts and  referral  points  in  the  Home
        Office and local authorities which is stated to usually be  between
        the Home Office member of staff or social worker managing the case,
        provides for the local authority to request  information  from  the
        Home Office  and  that  the  local  authority  must  aim  to  refer
        documents such as travel, identity documents or birth  certificates
        to the  Home  Office  contact  to  be  verified  before  the  local
        authority conduct their age assessment. This  latter  issue  is  of
        importance for, as noted  by  Mr  Mills,  the  author  of  the  age
        assessment excluded  from  the  information  being  considered  the
        passport and fingerprint document relied upon by both the Secretary
        of State and the Judge. This is a material omission.

    41. Mr Mills made available to the  Upper  Tribunal  several  documents
        including an application for leave to enter the United Kingdom  for
        six months as a visitor dated 24 August 2011 in the name of NU with
        a date of birth 3 June 1998. The application has  a  photograph  of
        the  applicant  and  it  is  noted  that  the  same  applicant  had
        previously been refused entry on 19 July 2011 in the same name with
        the same date of birth,  and  that  appropriate  biometrics,  which
        included fingerprints, were taken.

    42. There is within the documents provided a photocopy of a Bangladeshi
        passport containing a photograph of a person appearing  to  be  the
        same person as that who made the Visa applications, albeit slightly
        older, in the name of NU with a date of birth of 3 June 1998.

    43. Mr Mills has also provided  documents  confirming  the  fingerprint
        match, two in the name of SA with a date of birth of 6 August  2000
        with a biometric recording date of  5  April  2012  at  the  Asylum
        Screening Unit (ASU) showing  three  matches  to  the  fingerprints
        taken being that at the ASU, and two Visa applications in Dhaka  in
        Bangladesh. The other two documents are in the name of  NU  with  a
        date of birth of 3 June 1998 showing biometric recording  dates  of
        19th July and 24 August 2011 in Dhaka.

    44. Although the names and claimed dates of birth are different what is
        clear is that a biometric fingerprint sample taken  in  the  United
        Kingdom on 25 April 2012 matched two previous  fingerprint  samples
        taken in Bangladesh in 2011 which also matched each other.

    45. The Entry Clearance Officer does not  make  any  finding  that  the
        passport relied upon in support of the visit Visa applications  are
        forged and this is  clearly  evidence  that  deserves  considerable
        weight being attached to it to support a finding that SA and NU are
        one and the same person and the person identified in the  passport,
        a valid travel document issued by the authorities in Bangladesh who
        would have been able to verify  the  applicant's  personal  details
        including their date of birth, which is given as 3 June 1998.  This
        places the person with this date of birth as being of the age found
        by the Judge.

    46. If one is weighing up the evidence as a whole,  it  is  clear  that
        with an age assessment report on which very little  weight  can  be
        placed for the reasons set out above and the appellant's  assertion
        on the one hand, yet the substantial weight of evidence proving the
        appellant has been deceitful and deliberately misled not  only  the
        Home Office  but  also  those  who  sought  to  assist  him  within
        Birmingham City Council and the educational services both  of  whom
        deserve greater respect with regard to his age, but also the First-
        tier Tribunal, it is clear that the balance of the  evidence  comes
        firmly down in favour of the finding of the Judge.

    47. It has not been made out that any material element has since arisen
        following  the  publication  of  the  age  assessment  report  that
        warrants this matter being set aside and the appeal remitted.

    48. The Judge arrived at findings that were reasonably available  based
        on the evidence  and  no  arguable  legal  error  material  to  the
        decision that the appellant was 18 years of age, or in relation  to
        the dismissal of the appeal, has been made out.

Decision

    49. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    50. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22 June 2017
