
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/03574/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 May 2021                     |On 03 June 2021                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     FA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr R Dar of Trojan Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is a national of Bangladesh with date of birth given
    as 2.4.88, has appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  5.9.19  (Judge
    Aujla), dismissing on all grounds his appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State, dated 28.3.19, to refuse his late claim made in
    January 2019 for international protection.

 2. In reality, the single ground of appeal is  that  it  was  procedurally
    unfair for the First-tier Tribunal to proceed to decide the  appeal  in
    the appellant's absence, given the medical evidence provided.

 3. The application for permission to appeal  was  not  admitted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin on 2.3.20, it being lodged some 4 months  out  of
    time. However, when the application was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson extended time to admit the application and
    granted permission on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to  properly  consider
    the appellant's request for an adjournment of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal hearing on grounds that he was not fit to attend court  to  give
    evidence, resulting in inadequate and inappropriate  findings  made  in
    the appellant's absence and any appellant's bundle, and leading to  the
    dismissal of the appeal.

 4.  Whilst  Judge  Jackson  criticised  the  failure  of  the  appellant's
    representatives to attend the hearing, she considered that,  "the  real
    issue in this case is one of procedural fairness to the  appellant  and
    it is arguable that in all of the circumstances,  particularly  medical
    evidence from  the  end  of  July  2019  that  he  was  suffering  from
    depression with a PTSD element and feels unable  to  attend  court  and
    give evidence; that he has not had a fair opportunity to participate in
    his appeal."

 5. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. This matter should have been heard by the Upper Tribunal in the  remote
    hearing listed before Upper Tribunal Judge  Norton-Taylor  on  14.1.21.
    However, technical difficulties deprived the respondent from  accessing
    any of the documents at the and in the interests of justice the  matter
    was adjourned, with a number of  directions  designed  to  clarify  the
    procedural history as to what was put before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and when, and why neither an appellant's bundle was served  in  advance
    of the hearing nor why a representative failed to attend the hearing on
    behalf of the appellant. The appellant's representative's responses  to
    those directions are set out in their document dated 5.5.21, to which I
    have had regard.

 7. At [14] of the impugned decision, the judge noted  that  there  was  no
    explanation  for  the  absence  of  the   appellant   and   his   legal
    representative. The judge was satisfied that notice of the hearing  had
    been provided and, given the correspondence history, it is  undoubtedly
    the case that both the appellant and  his  legal  representatives  were
    fully aware of the hearing date, time and location.

 8.  The  appellant's  representatives  made  their  first  a   pre-hearing
    application on 12.8.19 for adjournment, which was refused, as the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was aware. They admit that the GP  letter  was  not
    included when the adjournment application was renewed on 30.8.19, which
    was poor practice on their  part.  This  second  application  was  also
    refused, and the representatives accept that they received this  second
    refusal. They state that they made yet another adjournment  application
    on 2.9.19, the day before the  hearing,  this  time  enclosing  the  GP
    letter and imply that as they heard nothing in response by 3.9.19  they
    felt entitled not to attend. A more likely  explanation,  but  just  as
    inadequate, for their absence at the hearing is provided in that it  is
    stated that the appellant had not instructed  them  to  attend  due  to
    costs implications. It is further  stated  that  they  were  unable  to
    prepare for the hearing in the space of one day. It is  further  stated
    that they were unable to provide a bundle as the appellant  was  unable
    to instruct them because of the health issues referred  to  in  the  GP
    letter.

 9. After considering their responses to directions, I find that there  was
    no  adequate  or  reasonable  explanation  for  the  failure   of   the
    appellant's representatives to attend the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
    hearing on his behalf on 3.9.19. As has already  been  suggested,  they
    could, at the very  least  have  renewed  the  adjournment  application
    orally, and ensured that all relevant evidence in  support  of  it  had
    been provided. The reality appears to be that the case  was  not  ready
    for hearing and had not been prepared despite adequate  advance  notice
    of the hearing having been provided. It was  also  arrogant  to  assume
    that the application would be granted.

10. The  GP  letter  of  31.7.19  relied  on  to  justify  the  adjournment
    application  was  entirely  inadequate.  Other  than   describing   the
    appellant's conditions, it provided no medical opinion  as  to  whether
    the appellant was in fact unfit to attend the hearing  as  he  claimed.
    Insofar as his fitness to attend the hearing is concerned,  the  letter
    was no more than a reflection of the appellant's instructions  that  he
    did not "feel" ready  to  attend.  Nor  was  there  any  adequate  time
    estimate within which it was anticipated the appellant  would  be  well
    enough to attend. The letter suggests rather speculatively only that he
    "may be more resilient to engage with  the  appeal  process  in  a  few
    months." Perhaps he would not. The GP letter does not indicate that the
    appellant was so unwell as to be unable  to  give  instructions  or  to
    prepare and sign  a  witness  statement  in  response  to  the  refusal
    decision.

11. In the circumstances, the medical evidence did not  adequately  support
    the application so that even had it been seen  and  considered  by  the
    judge I am satisfied that as drafted it would have made  no  difference
    to the refusal to adjourn. Moreover, I am satisfied the GP  letter  did
    not  in  any  way  excuse  the  lamentable   failure   of   appellant's
    representatives  to  attend  the  hearing,  merely  assuming  that  the
    repeated adjournment request would be granted because of  inclusion  of
    the letter.

12. I make clear that no fault is attributable to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision to proceed in the appellant's absence. The  judge  had
    to bear in mind that fairness applied to the respondent as well  as  to
    the  appellant,  and  the  case  could  not  be  allowed  to  drag   on
    indefinitely with no indication as to when the appellant might feel fit
    to attend.

13. However, I must bear in mind that this was a protection claim with  the
    prospect of the  appellant  being  returned  to  Bangladesh,  where  he
    claimed a fear of persecution or serious harm, so that his life or well-
    being may be put at  risk.  Although  the  judge  had  an  outline  and
    indication of the appellant's case from the  respondent's  bundle,  the
    evidence  was  effectively  all  one-sided,  without  the   appellant's
    explanation in response to the refusal decision and without being  able
    to hear from and assess  the  credibility  of  the  appellant  and  his
    account.

14. Very fairly, Mr Tan  did  not  resist  the  appeal  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, given the explanations provided and the possibility that the
    appellant was genuinely too unwell to  attend  the  appeal  hearing  on
    3.9.19, even though the GP was inadequate to demonstrate  that  he  was
    unfit to attend.

15. In fairness, despite the criticisms made above and from which I do  not
    resile, I am satisfied that the  appellant  should  be  afford  a  fair
    opportunity to present his case to the First-tier Tribunal and  that  a
    decision made without that opportunity was and  would  be  procedurally
    unfair and, therefore in error  of  law.  He  must  ensure  that  those
    representing him have full instructions, including a witness  statement
    and appellant's bundle, and that he attends the hearing, whether or not
    he feels able to give oral evidence.

16. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    set it aside to  be  remade  de  novo.  Consistent  with  the  Practice
    Direction, the appropriate venue to remake  this  decision  is  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside with  no  findings
    preserved.

    The making of the decision in the appeal is remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House with a time estimate of 3 hours.

    The appellant must confirm with the First-tier Tribunal the  number  of
    witnesses  to  give  oral  evidence  and  whether  any  interpreter  is
    required.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       21 May 2021



Anonymity Direction


I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       21 May 2021





