

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: pA/03033/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 3 April 2017                       |On 10 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     d a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Neale, instructed by the Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is an Iraqi national. He entered the United  Kingdom  on  8
   May 2015 and claimed asylum on the same day. The Respondent  refused  his
   application to be recognised as a refugee on 6 November 2015 and  made  a
   decision to remove him under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act
   1999. The Appellant appealed against this decision under  section  82  of
   the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  his  appeal  was
   dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rouke in a decision  promulgated
   on 13 October 2016. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal against this decision and permission was granted by First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Grant on 9 November 2016. The  reasons  for  granting
   permission were  that  the  findings  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  were
   'remarkably brief and unreasoned'. Permission was granted on all grounds.




2. There are four grounds of appeal.  The  first  ground  asserts  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons  and  take  material
   evidence into account. This ground contends that the First-tier  Tribunal
   gave inadequate reasons for finding  that  the  Appellant's  Ministry  of
   Culture ID card was fake in view of the fact that the Appellant's  expert
   Julia Guest established through her enquiries that he did work there  and
   in view of the fact that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
   account the Appellant's evidence as to why the date of issue  on  the  ID
   was after he left Iraq. The second ground is that the First-tier Tribunal
   did not give adequate reasons for rejecting Ms Guest's report. The  third
   ground is that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  into  account  the
   evidence of Dr Law's  psychiatric  report  in  reaching  his  credibility
   findings. The final ground  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
   adverse finding  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  work  for  the  Iraq
   Journalist's Establishment which was not based on the evidence.


   The Hearing


3. At the hearing Mr Neale expanded on his grounds of appeal  and  submitted
   that the decision was vitiated by multiple errors of law  and  should  be
   remitted.


4. Mr Hibbs relied on the Rule 24 Response which sets out  the  Respondent's
   position that adequate reasons had been given for material  findings  and
   that as the evidence in respect of which findings  was  set  out  in  the
   decision more detailed reasons were not required. Mr Hibbs submitted that
   there was many credibility issues and the Appellant had admitted  he  had
   lied. Dr Law's report did not make it clear that he  would  lie  for  the
   reasons given that he thought he would have a better  chance  of  getting
   asylum. The Judge did not to make a large number of adverse findings.  He
   simply did not believe his account because he lied. The Judge dealt  with
   Dr Law's evidence. Further, the Ministry would not give out  an  ID  card
   after an individual had left  as  this  would  be  a  serious  breach  of
   protocol because it would put those there at risk. The Judge  found  that
   the ID could not be a genuine one because of the spelling mistake and  he
   did deal with Ms Guest's report. He did not need to make a finding as  to
   whether the Appellant worked at the Ministry  because  he  found  it  not
   credible that the documents would be dropped off. He could be excused for
   being brief.


5. In reply Mr Neale argued that Mr Hibbs was trying to rescue the  decision
   by filling in reasons the Judge did not give. The Judge  did  not  engage
   with Ms Guest's report and she by way of her contact  had  verified  that
   the Appellant did work at the Ministry of Culture. It was the Appellant's
   account in his witness statement that this was a reissue of the  ID  card
   and this would explain why a date postdating his departure  would  appear
   on it. The fact the Appellant had lied about one thing did  not  mean  he
   would be lying about the other. A Judge who found that the  evidence  was
   consistent and plausible could have believed him notwithstanding his lie.
   The Appellant was not bound to succeed but had the Judge dealt  with  the
   evidence adequately and he could have reached a different conclusion.  He
   brushed the points off with excessive brevity.


   Discussion


6. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
   credible witness. His reasons for this finding are at paragraph 27 of his
   decision. The reason with which the Appellant takes issue in Ground 1  is
   set out at paragraph 27 iii of the decision:


      "His supplying of a clearly fabricated ID card from  the  Ministry  of
      Culture - putting aside the misspelling of 'Culture',  it  is  clearly
      dated, on either of his accounts, as issued either fifteen,  or  three
      months after his departure from Iraq. It also does not correctly  show
      his name".


7. The  Appellant,  however,  had  provided  a  witness  statement  for  the
   purposes of the hearing in which he explained at paragraph 22 (A5 of  the
   Appellant's bundle) that the card was a replacement of his  ID  card  and
   that he had asked his brother to see if they could get hold of proof that
   he had worked there because he had lost his ID on route. He says that the
   ID was what they had sent him and that it was issued after he left.   The
   First-tier Tribunal made no reference to this  explanation  and  gave  no
   reasons for rejecting it as an explanation  for  the  fact  that  it  was
   issued after his departure. This evidence was clearly  material  and  the
   First-tier Tribunal was required to take into account.

8. The First-tier Tribunal also concluded that the Appellant  did  not  work
   at the Ministry of Culture. In so concluding, one of  the  reasons  given
   was that, despite Ms Guest's report, his fake ID belied  this  (paragraph
   28 (ii)). I find that this did not  amount  to  an  adequate  reason  for
   rejecting the report.  Ms Guest is a journalist and filmmaker. It was  of
   course open to the First-tier Tribunal to decide not to accept she was an
   expert. However, the First-tier Tribunal did not opine on her  expertise.
   She provided evidence at paragraphs 5 to 7 of her report that in order to
   establish if the Appellant worked at the Ministry of Culture, she  passed
   copies of his ID documents to ZS who had been her translator  whilst  she
   worked in Iraq. He was  now  a  correspondent  in  America  but  retained
   contacts in Iraq. According to Ms Guest he had contacted the Ministry  of
   Culture and spoken to the office manager who confirmed that the Appellant
   worked at the Ministry.


9. It follows from my findings in respect of  the  first  ground  that  this
   further finding cannot stand. In any event I  find  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal did not give sufficient reasons for rejecting  the  evidence  in
   report that the Appellant had worked for  the  Ministry  of  Culture.  Ms
   Guest's report was,  on  the  face  of  it,  independent  evidence  which
   corroborated a core plank of the Appellant's case. The evidence  that  Ms
   Guest had verified the Appellant's employment through a chain of contacts
   was not engaged with no answer was provided as to why it did not  support
   the Appellant's case.


10. I find that both of these errors are sufficiently material to warrant  a
   remittal to the First-tier Tribunal  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
   O'Rouke.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated : 3/05/2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray



