
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03819/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 September 2017                      | On 17 October 2017               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     P F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because this is a protection case and there is invariably a  risk  in  cases
of this kind that publicity will itself create a risk.

This is an appeal by a citizen of Iran against the decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary
of State that he is not entitled to international protection.

There is really only one point in this appeal.  It  is  that  the  appellant
attended the hearing of the First-tier Tribunal expecting to be  represented
by Counsel and Counsel did not appear.  We know that  Counsel  was  expected
and we know that Counsel did not appear because there was a letter  to  that
effect sent by facsimile to the hearing and brought to the attention of  the
judge.  The  letter  from  solicitors  says  that  the  solicitors  notified
Counsel's clerk of the new hearing date and continues "unfortunately due  to
an admin error on their side it was not put in the diary and  therefore  due
to no fault of the appellant or ourselves we were not able  to  get  Counsel
to the Tribunal today".

It would be remarkable if a solicitor made a claim  of  that  kind  if  that
claim turned out to be less than entirely truthful and the  judge  would  be
very wrong not to give a lot of weight to that unless there was a very  good
reason to doubt it.  There was no such reason in this case but the  position
is reinforced because I have a statement, sent  after  the  hearing  in  the
First-tier Tribunal, from Counsel's Chambers and  from  the  clerk  involved
admitting to a mistake.  Anyone with any experience of the operation of  the
clerks' rooms knows that mistakes of this kind are extremely rare  but  they
do happen and when they do a  lay  client  could  be  left  in  a  very  bad
position.  I have to say that I  find  the  judge  was  wrong  not  to  have
adjourned the appeal on the information before him.

With the benefit of hindsight in the additional information before me I  had
no hesitation in saying that the hearing  was  unfair.   The  unfairness  is
that a person who had a proper reason to expect to be  represented  was  not
represented.  In those circumstances there is little point  considering  the
Decision and Reasons.  Both Mr Armstrong before me  and  the  Reply  to  the
grounds of appeal settled by  Mr  Tarlow  comment  on  the  quality  of  the
decision.  That is really missing the point.  The grounds of appeal here  do
not complain that the decision is wrong but they complain that  the  hearing
should not have gone ahead and I  find  that  unanswerable.   I  acknowledge
that it was the second time there had been an  adjournment  application.   I
acknowledge that there had been an application for an adjournment  that  was
refused before the hearing.  None of those things have any relevance at  all
on the basic core fact which is that this appellant turned up  expecting  to
be represented and was not because of somebody's else's mistake.

I have no hesitation in saying the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  given
that this case is going to turn, I suspect, on credibility and as there  has
not been a proper  hearing  it  clearly  must  go  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be decided again.

Notice of Decision

I therefore find the First-tier Tribunal erred.  I set  aside  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal and I direct that the case be heard again in  the
First-tier Tribunal.



Signed



|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 16 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |

