
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03264/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd August 2017                   |On 12th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                   mr a k
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Lovejoy, Counsel instructed by Leonard Cannings
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan whose appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal and dismissed  by  her  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28th February 2017.  Essentially the  judge  found  that
    the Appellant would not be safe in his home area but could relocate  to
    Kabul with the assistance of his family.  The appeal was  dismissed  on
    asylum and human rights grounds.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  The first ground  was  that  as  a
    matter  of  law  the  question  of  relocation  cannot  depend  on  the
    relocation of a third party.  It was noted that  Judge  Iqbal  accepted
    the Appellant would be at risk if returned to his home area because his
    father who had worked for the Taliban was killed.  The judge  had  gone
    on to dismiss the claim finding that the Appellant  could  relocate  to
    Kabul as he was still in contact with his mother or maternal uncle, the
    judge finding that there  was  no  reason  why  the  mother  could  not
    resettle elsewhere such as  in  Kabul.   This  therefore  required  the
    mother to at least relocate which was  contrary  to  the  Qualification
    Directive (2004) 83/EC) which referred to the applicant relocating.

 3. It  was  submitted  therefore  that  the  question  of  relocation  was
    concerned with the ability of the Appellant to relocate and  could  not
    require third parties to relocate.  As a matter of law the question  of
    relocation concerned an applicant's ability to relocate in the  context
    of the situation at the time of decision which must  be  premised  upon
    where the actually families live, not where they may  move  to.   There
    might be very good reasons why a family may not be able or  willing  to
    relocate, such as  this  would  trigger  the  Taliban  search  for  the
    Appellant, commitments to other members of their  livelihood  or  their
    own vulnerability.  This is reinforced by the fact that the family  did
    not relocate with the Appellant when he left Afghanistan.  Judge  Iqbal
    did not find that the Appellant could relocate without his  family  and
    thus if the point was found in favour of the Appellant it would lead to
    a grant of asylum.

 4. In terms of Ground 2 it is pointed out that there  was  no  presumption
    that a family can or will relocate - this must be  supported  by  clear
    evidence, of which there was none.  It was also  said  that  the  judge
    erred in her assessment of  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  respect  of
    attempts to contact his family through the Red Cross.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted and the Secretary of  State  lodged  a
    Rule  24  notice  saying  that   the   judge   had   directed   herself
    appropriately.  The judge had heard the witness  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the account of contact by the Appellant was not credible.
     The judge was best placed to assess the evidence.

 6. Thus the appeal came before me on the above date.

 7. Before me Ms Lovejoy relied on her grounds.  There had been no evidence
    from the mother as to whether she might relocate.  As at  the  date  of
    the hearing before me the Appellant remained a minor,  being  under  18
    years.  Because of what was said in the grounds  I  was  asked  to  set
    aside the decision and allow the appeal.  In terms  of  AA  (unattended
    children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016  (IAC)  the  Appellant  fell
    into  the  category  of  an  unattached  child  who  was  entitled   to
    protection.

 8. For the Respondent Ms Ahmad relied on the Rule 24  notice.   The  judge
    was entitled to note that the Appellant was not a credible witness when
    it came to contact with his mother.  It was  noted  that  the  maternal
    uncle had been resourceful in helping the Appellant leave  the  country
    and there was no reason why he could not continue to help the Appellant
    and his mother resettle elsewhere and away from the Taliban.   As  such
    there was no material error in the judge's approach  and  the  decision
    should stand.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

10. It seems to me there is considerable merit in the  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    It is one thing for a judge to say that an Appellant is not credible in
    terms of his inability to contact his mother, but quite  another  thing
    to conclude that the mother could "resettle" away from the Taliban  and
    their threats by moving  to  Kabul.   In  short  there  simply  was  no
    evidence from the mother that she would intend  to  relocate  or  would
    follow the Appellant to Kabul  once  he  was  returned  there.   Absent
    evidence from the mother or a reasonable inference that could be  drawn
    from all the evidence that she would follow the Appellant to Kabul,  it
    was not open to the judge to find that this was  a  significant  reason
    why it would not be unduly harsh for the  Appellant  to  return  namely
    because of the presence of  his  mother.   Essentially,  the  Appellant
    would be returned as an  unaccompanied  minor  who,  from  the  country
    guidance case, may well be at risk of serious harm  if  returned  there
    and therefore it would be unduly harsh if he was  returned.   In  these
    circumstances it is a straightforward finding that the judge fell  into
    a material error in concluding that the mother would resettle elsewhere
    away from the Taliban. As stated in the grounds there may be  a  number
    of good reasons why the mother would not relocate to Kabul.

11. It remains the case that the Appellant is a minor (just) as at the date
    of the hearing before me.  As such he does require  protection  and  it
    would clearly be unduly harsh for him to relocate to Kabul according to
    the country guidance case referred to above which I follow.

12. It follows that the decision of Judge Iqbal must be set aside  and  the
    Appellant's appeal allowed under the 1951 Convention (imputed political
    opinion) and Article 3 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

14. I set aside the decision.

15. I allow the appeal.

Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed    J Macdonald                            Date   11th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
