
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03272/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 February 2018                 |On 1 March 2018                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  NASIR [K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timson instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Ennals who, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
        August 2017, dismissed the appeal on all grounds and confirmed  the
        deportation order made against the appellant.
     2. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  asserting  the  Judge
        failed to consider and determine whether  Exception  3  of  section
        33(4) UK Borders Act 2007 assisted him. Permission  to  appeal  was
        initially refused by another  judge  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
        granted on a renewed application by the Upper Tribunal on 9 October
        2017.



Error of law


     3. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, was born on  [  ]  1977.  The
        Judge noted the appellants claim to be in a relationship  with  his
        partner, a Slovakian national, and his submission that his  removal
        from the United Kingdom by way of deportation breaches  his  rights
        under EU law. At [30] the Judge finds "..... It seems  to  me  that
        the question of whether the appellant is in a durable  relationship
        with  Ms  [G]  is  adequately  dealt  with  in   the   respondent's
        consideration of a possible claim under Art 8 ECHR.  The respondent
        specifically rejected the claim based on there being a genuine  and
        subsisting relationship with Ms [G]."
     4. At [32] the Judge finds "I also accept from the evidence before  me
        that the appellant is in a relationship with his son [A], born in [
        ] 2014. I accept that he lives with his  partner  and  child  as  a
        family, and they would intend to continue to do so once the  second
        child is born. None of the evidence before suggests anything  other
        than a family relationship with two parents and a small child".
     5. It is not disputed before me that the  Judge  has  found  that  the
        appellant is in  a  durable  relationship  with  his  EEA  national
        partner.
     6. The Judge arguably erred in finding that the  EEA  aspects  of  the
        case could be determined within the article 8  ECHR  considerations
        as it is necessary to consider EEA aspects first for,  if  engaged,
        the deportation powers under EEA law are  different  from  domestic
        provisions.
     7. Of more significance is the fact it was found the appellant is in a
        relationship with the EEA national yet did no further  in  relation
        to this aspect than to consider the matter under article 8 ECHR.
     8. The Judge refusing permission referred to the decision of the Upper
        Tribunal in Rose (Automatic  deportation  -  Exception  3)  Jamaica
        [2011] UKUT 276 (IAC) in which the Tribunal held that the  personal
        scope of the safeguards  against  expulsion  which  Article  27  of
        2004/38/EC (the "Citizens Directive") affords to  "family  members"
        does not include  "other  family  members"  hence  Exception  3  to
        section 32(4) and (5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 cannot be  invoked
        by 'other family members'. Had this been all the  Tribunal  decided
        in Rose that may be the end of the  matter  but  it  was  not.  The
        Tribunal also found that a person who  had  been  found  to  be  an
        extended family member under the Regulations needs to be considered
        by the Secretary of State as  a  person  in  respect  of  whom  the
        discretion to issue a residence card under  regulation  17  may  be
        exercised. The result of the exercise of  that  discretion  may  be
        that regulations 20-21 applied to the appellant's removal, and  the
        decision would not be lawful without regard to them.
     9. In this appeal, it is not disputed that consideration has not  been
        given to the  exercise  of  discretion  on  whether  to  grant  the
        appellant a residence card as an extended family member of the  EEA
        national; as the Judge proceeded to  determine  the  matter  rather
        than refer the case. Until this exercise  has  been  completed  the
        assessment of the criteria going to deportation or  removal  cannot
        be completed and it cannot be ascertained whether  the  appellant's
        removal is lawful.
    10.  As  discussed  with,  and  agreed  by,  the  advocates  the   most
        appropriate way forward is to find the Judge erred in law.   Having
        found the appellant  is  an  extended  family  member  of  the  EEA
        national, on the basis of his relationship with  the  EEA  national
        and the child,  the  Judge  failed  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
        Secretary of State to enable the decision maker to consider how  to
        exercise discretion in relation to the issue of the Residence Card.
        I set the decision aside. I  substitute  a  decision  allowing  the
        appeal to  the  limited  extent  the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
        Secretary of State to  enable  consideration  of  the  exercise  of
        discretion  and  for  an  assessment  of  the  criteria  going   to
        deportation dependent upon the outcome of whether a residence  card
        is to be granted or not. The claimant's entitlement to a  residence
        card should be decided before a proper decision can be  made  about
        if or how he is to be deported. It  is  trite  law  that  a  person
        entitled to reside in the United Kingdom as the dependant of an EEA
        national cannot  be  the  subject  of  automatic  deportation  (see
        section 33(3) of the 2007 Act).


Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remit the  appeal
        to the Secretary of State for the reason set out above.


   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 27 February 2018
