
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03215/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st October 2016                     |On 31st October 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                  EBRU [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss U Dirie, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey whose date of birth is recorded as
    28th September 1992.   She is of mixed Kurdish ethnicity.  She  arrived
    in the United Kingdom  on  2nd  July  2015  and  claimed  international
    protection as a refugee. On 10th November 2015 a decision was  made  to
    refuse that application and the Appellant appealed. On  10th  May  2016
    the appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Moran  sitting
    at Hatton Cross.  Judge Moran found the Appellant an entirely  credible
    witness in every material particular.  That is not in dispute.

Basis of claim

 2. The basis of the claim was that the Appellant began to  shown  interest
    in the HBP Party a separatist party, in 2012  to  2013,  and  became  a
    member in December 2014. Her family were also supporters of  the  party
    if not formal  members.  On  5th  January  2015,  after  she  had  been
    canvassing she returned home, the police raided it.  She was taken to a
    nearby  police  station.  She  was  beaten   and   interrogated   about
    involvement with the PKK a Kurdish separatist party.  She was  made  to
    sign a statement.  She did not know what that  statement  was.  She  is
    concerned that the document itself may have  put  her  in  danger.   To
    repeat the Appellant was accepted as a credible witness.  She was  then
    taken to a secluded area by police officers and raped.   She  made  her
    way home in distress.  She was reluctant to mention what  had  happened
    to her and given the cultural context one readily understands why  that
    was so.  She was afraid of the police but she was also  afraid  of  the
    reaction of her family.   She did however seek medical attention  after
    speaking with a friend. No physical treatment was required but she  had
    bruising. She remained in the Istanbul area until May  2015.   She  did
    not know whether the police were continuing  to  look  for  her  but  a
    complaint was eventually made to the authorities through her  political
    party concerning what had happened to her.  The result was  a  raid  on
    her previous address  and  her  landlord  being  taken  to  the  police
    station.  The  Appellant's  concern  was  that  the  police  wished  to
    "encourage" the Appellant to withdraw her complaint.   It  remains  the
    case that the Appellant has not disclosed, to her  family,  the  events
    which have occurred.   So  it  is  that  this  relatively  young  woman
    travelled alone to the United Kingdom without family support.  She does
    however have some family in the United Kingdom to whom she can return.

 3. Having considered the evidence Judge Moran made a key  finding,  namely
    that those police officers who committed the  appalling  act  upon  the
    Appellant were rogue police officers, and went  on  to  find  that  the
    officers who subsequently came  looking  for  her  were  not  the  same
    officers  who  had  raped  her  but  were  offices  investigating   the
    complaint.  In the circumstances  the  judge  did  not  find  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk now  were  she  to  return  to  Turkey.   He
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. Not content with that Decision by  Notice  dated  29th  June  2016  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal refused permission.  However,  in  a
    renewed application permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge King
    TD.  It is worth setting out in full, because it is short,  what  Judge
    King had to say in granting permission.

         "The judge accepts the fact of a brutal rape  by  police  following
         her release from custody.  It is arguable that  the  reasons  given
         for finding that that action simply the action of rogue officer and
         that  there  is  a  sufficiency  of  protection  are   inadequately
         reasoned.  Internal relocation is stated but also with very  little
         reasoning or analysis. The Appellant is entitled to make  complaint
         against those officers but fears,  with  some  justification,  that
         such a complaint will or has provoked an adverse interest in her."

 5. One can read into the grant of Judge King, his preliminary  acceptance,
    at least, that the Appellant was entitled to succeed.  I remind  myself
    that the matter is clearly for me.

Was there an error of law?

 6. For the Respondent it was submitted that the background material showed
    that there was "evidence of more intolerance towards this  kind  of  by
    behaviour", which  implies  acceptance  that  there  is  this  kind  of
    behaviour.  I was also  invited  to  distinguish  the  acts  of  police
    officers in Turkey towards Appellants taken into detention  because  of
    their political activities and otherwise but with respect to Mr Singh I
    am not entirely clear the point that  is  being  made  because  it  was
    accepted in her case that the  interest  in  her  was  because  of  her
    political activities. Mr Singh invited me to find that the reasons  why
    the police officers were looking for the Appellant  subsequent  to  the
    rape had to be divorced from the initial events.

 7. For the Appellant Miss Dirie suggested that I should look to the matter
    holistically and that there were a sequence of connected events.

 8. Of course all of this has to be seen in the context  not  only  of  the
    background material but with an eye on the country guidance case of  IK
    (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00312.   I  shall
    return to the country guidance in due course.

 9. Mr Singh took me to country information and guidance.  But  I  have  to
    consider in  the  first  instance  before  looking  to  that,  which  I
    appreciate goes to materiality, whether the judge adequately looked  at
    the evidence that was before him.

10. The judge says at paragraph 29:-

         "The background country information is important. I have considered
         all the material relied on by each party.  It  is  consistent  with
         some of the other reports that there have been that rogue  officers
         could [my emphasis] carry out the sort of attack that they did."

11. In fact the bundle provided  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  for  the
    hearing ran to 201 pages, the majority of which was background material
    which the judge seemed able to summarise in those few words followed by
    a little more, it is fair to say, in that paragraph.  He  did  set  out
    from the background material paragraph 2.16, 3.11 and 3.12 of the  Home
    Office Turkey: Background  information.   The  judge  appears  to  have
    focused in large  measure  on  references  to  rogue  officers  and  at
    paragraph 30 of the decision it reads:

         "The related guidance 'Turkey: HDP (People's Democratic Party)'  is
         also relevant but is of greater assistance to a case where there is
         a finding of fact of ongoing adverse interest.  I do not find  this
         to be such a case.  Even if there were ongoing adverse interest the
         guidance also says that internal relocation from rogue state actors
         is likely to be available."

    I mention this because the issues of  internal  relocation  has  fallen
    away in this case if I find that there is  a  material  error  of  law,
    because Mr Singh does not contend for it.

12. Mr Singh quite properly  took  me  not  only  to  those  parts  of  the
    background material which are supportive of the Secretary of State  but
    also to those parts  which  are  not.  That  is  quite  proper  and  at
    paragraph 8.4 of the country information and guidance under the heading
    "Human Rights Violations and  Impunity"  there  is  reference  to  thie
    United States Department of State 2014 Country Report on  Human  Rights
    Practices which noted that:

         "The law prohibits  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention.  There  were
         numerous  reports   of   the   government   not   observing   these
         prohibitions.  Whilst  civilian  authorities  maintained  effective
         control of the TMP, government mechanisms to investigate and punish
         alleged  abuse  and  corruption  before  state  officials  remained
         inadequate, and impunity  remained  a  problem.  Although  the  law
         prohibits holding a suspect arbitrarily  or  secretly,  there  were
         numerous  reports  that  the  government  did  not  observe   these
         prohibitions. By law police and jandarma  may  compel  citizens  to
         identify themselves without cause.  During  2014  police  routinely
         detained individuals for hours without charge."

13. The report goes on at 8.4.2  to  deal  with  an  Amnesty  International
    Report  published 25 February 2015 in which it was said:-

         "Investigations  into   abuses   by   police   officials   remained
         ineffective, and the chance of securing  justice  for  the  victims
         were remote.  In  the  absence  of  the  long  promised  but  never
         established independent police complaints mechanism,  police  units
         were effectively responsible for investigating  their  own  alleged
         abuses under the instruction of under resourced prosecutors. Police
         departments routinely failed to provide the  most  basic  items  of
         evidence to investigate."

14. I appreciate that there is background material upon which the Secretary
    of State can rely and  I  was  taken  to  it  by  Mr  Singh.   But  the
    difficulty which the Secretary of State has, and where I find the judge
    fell into error, is that where there is conflicting evidence  which  is
    at best equivocal then the standard of proof must favour the Appellant.
     Although, as  it  happens,  I  find  in  fact  having  looked  at  the
    background material to which I have been taken by both parties,  it  is
    more supportive of the Appellant's case than not.  But where  there  is
    background material which is equivocal  given  the  lower  standard  of
    proof then the issue must be resolved in the Appellant's favour.   This
    is not a case where balance of probabilities determines the issue.

15. The grounds themselves submit that there was no  sufficient  basis  for
    the judge to find that these police offices were "rogue  officers"  nor
    that there was a sufficient basis to find the  ultimate  issue  in  the
    case, namely that the Appellant would be  safe  upon  her  return.  The
    point was well made by Miss Dirie that the judge had  noted  that  "the
    investigation" which followed the rape when the  police  officers  were
    looking for the Appellant was not simply a knock on  the  door  with  a
    request to speak with her but a raid on the former house with an arrest
    of the neighbour, in circumstances in which it was never suggested that
    this neighbour had anything to do with the attack upon her.

16. In my judgement the decision simply  cannot  stand.   The  decision  is
    entirely against the weight of evidence and here  I  am  referring  not
    only to the evidence of the  Appellant  who  was  found  to  be  wholly
    credible but the background material to which I was taken.  I have  not
    referred to all of the background material to which I was taken  but  I
    am delivering this decision extemporaneously  before  the  parties  and
    they will appreciate that I have not in the few moments from when  they
    made their submissions to delivering this decision forgotten what  they
    had said to me nor the material to which I was referred;  I  have  made
    clear notes of the various passages to which I was taken.

The remaking of the Decision

17. I was helped  in  the  remaking  of  this  Decision  not  only  by  the
    background material to which I have already referred but  also  to  the
    country guidance of IK which at paragraph  46  sets  out  a  number  of
    factors which are not, it is to be emphasised, a checklist.   But  they
    are material to my consideration and it is of note that the  judge  did
    not make reference to  them  which  is  yet  another  point  which  can
    properly be taken against him in determining whether or not there was a
    material error of law.

18. Paragraph 46 reads as follows:

         "The following are factors which inexhaustibly we considered to  be
         material in giving rise to potential suspicion in the minds of  the
         authorities concerning a particular claimant.

         (a)  The level  if  any  of  the  Appellant's  known  or  suspected
             involvement with a separatist organisation. Together with this
             must be assessed the basis upon which it is contended that the
             authorities knew of or might suspect such involvement.

         (b)  Whether the Appellant had ever been arrested or  detained  and
             if so  in  what  circumstances.   In  this  context  it  maybe
             relevant to note how long ago such arrest  or  detention  took
             place, if it is the case that there appears to  be  no  causal
             connection between them  and  the  claimant's  departure  from
             Turkey, that otherwise it may be a  factor  of  no  particular
             significance.

         (c)  Whether the circumstances of the  Appellant's  past  arrest(s)
             and detention(s) (if any) indicate that the authorities did in
             fact view him or her as a suspected terrorist.

         (d)  Whether the Appellant  was  charged  or  placed  on  reporting
             conditions or now faces charges.

         (e)  The  degree  of  ill-treatment  to  which  the  Appellant  was
             subjected in the past.

         (f)  Whether the Appellant has family connections with a separatist
             organisation such as KADA or HADEP or DEHAP.

         (g)  How long a period elapsed between the Appellant's last  arrest
             and detention and his or her departure from  Turkey.  In  this
             regard it may of course be relevant to consider  the  evidence
             if any concerning what the Appellant was in fact doing between
             the time of the last arrest and detention and  departure  from
             Turkey.  It is a factor that is  only  likely  to  be  of  any
             particular relevance if there is a reasonably  lengthy  period
             between the two events  without  any  ongoing  problems  being
             experienced on the part of the Appellant from the authorities.

         (h)  Whether in these period  after  the  Appellant's  last  arrest
             there  is  any  evidence  that  he  or  she  was  kept   under
             surveillance or monitored by the authorities.

         (i)  Kurdish ethnicity.

         (j)  Alevi faith.

         (k)  Lack of current up-to-date Turkish passport.

         (l)  Whether there is any evidence that the authorities  have  been
             pursuing or otherwise expressing an interest in the  Appellant
             since he or she left Turkey.

         (m)  Whether the Appellant became  an  informer  or  was  asked  to
             become one.

         (n)  Actual perceived political  activities  abroad  in  connection
             with a separatist organisation.

         (o)  If the returnee is a military draft evader there would be some
             logical impact on his profile to those assessing  him  on  his
             immediate return following SAPET.  Of course this alone is not
             a basis for a refugee or human rights claim."

19. Of those factors (a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (g), (i) were relevant to the
    Appellant.

20. I put to Mr Singh an alternative scenario, namely that  the  complaint,
    albeit made through a third party by the political party with which the
    Appellant was associated, might have been  made because it was  in  the
    interests of the political party and that the acts of  the  police  for
    pursuing the Appellant subsequently was to "remove  the  evidence".   I
    asked Mr Singh if he wanted to comment and his  response  was,  "I  see
    your point".

21. I come to the firm view in this case, applying the lower standard, that
    after this woman was raped, consequent upon her arrest and  association
    with a political party against whom  the  Turkish  authorities  had  an
    interest, she was pursued in a  manner  in  which  she  reasonably  was
    entitled to be fearful. I come to that view because of the raid, when I
    say raid I mean the subsequent raid of the former house, and all of the
    background material to which I have referred and to which I was taken.

22. In my judgement it was completely against the weight  of  evidence  for
    the judge to come to the  view  that  he  did.  The  evidence  strongly
    pointed in the Appellant's favour and I so find.

23. There is no need for me  to  consider  in  this  case  whether  or  not
    internal relocation is a viable option for  the  Appellant  because  Mr
    Singh very properly and fairly conceded that on the particular facts of
    this case that it was not a matter with which I need be concerned.

24. In all the circumstances the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

25. The appeal of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is remade.   The Appellant is a  refugee.   She
    is  entitled  to  international  protection  as  such  and  the  appeal
    necessarily succeeds on human rights grounds also.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker           31st October 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker           31st October 2016
