
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03565/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On January 7, 2019                           |On January 30, 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  MR D J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi, Counsel instructed by Braitch R B
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Iraqi national and  he  clandestinely  entered  the
    United Kingdom on January 19, 2016 and  claimed  asylum  the  following
    day.  The respondent rejected his application on February 26, 2018  and
    the appellant lodged grounds of appeal on March 14, 2018 under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thomas on April
    17, 2018 and in a decision  promulgated  on  May  24,  2018  the  Judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Permission to appeal was initially  sought  on  May  29,  2018  by  the
    appellant but this was refused by Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Shaerf on June 18, 2018.  Permission to appeal was renewed  to
    the Upper Tribunal on June 29, 2018 and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley
    granted permission to appeal on September 21, 2018 finding it  arguable
    the First-tier Judge may have erred in his assessment of  the  evidence
    and that all grounds were arguable.

 4. The respondent filed a  Rule  24  response  on  November  7,  2018  and
    submitted that any error in the arrest warrant was not material because
    the First-tier Tribunal had clearly  found  that  any  prosecution  for
    absconding would not lead  to  ill-treatment  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's  alleged  colleagues  had  been  granted  asylum  by  other
    European countries attracted limited weight  as  no  details  of  those
    claims had been placed before the Judge.

 5. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 I make an order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  of  publication  of
    specified documents or information relating to the proceedings  or  any
    other matter likely to lead members  of  the  public  to  identify  any
    person who the Upper Tribunal considers should not be identified.   The
    effect of such an anonymity order may therefore be to  prohibit  anyone
    not  merely  the  parties  in  the  case   from   disclosing   relevant
    information.  Breach of the order may be punishable and a  contempt  of
    court.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Azmi invited the Tribunal to find there had been an  error  in  law.
    The Tribunal had accepted the appellant had a subjective fear, but  the
    Tribunal did not accept the authorities would be unwilling  to  protect
    him.  This finding failed to consider the fact that the  appellant  did
    have a genuine fear of persecution as there was evidence  that  he  had
    previously  suffered  threats  and  two  colleagues  had  been  granted
    protection in other European countries and more weight should have been
    given to these issues.

 7. Finally, Mr Azmi argued the Judge's approach to the arrest warrant  was
    flawed because there was objective evidence, at pages 110 to 113 of the
    bundle, which demonstrated that the authorities  did  carry  out  human
    rights abuses on people in detention and as there was an arrest warrant
    out for this appellant for absconding he too would face a similar risk.



 8. Mrs Aboni relied on the Rule 14 response dated  November  7,  2018  and
    submitted that the findings  made  by  the  Judge  were  open  to  him.
    Dealing with the individual grounds she submitted that  the  Judge  was
    fully aware of the appellant's previous problems  and  noted  that  the
    authorities had offered to look into those issues and complaints.   The
    fact nothing came of those threats does not mean  there  was  no  State
    protection available.  Secondly, with regard to his  colleagues  having
    been granted asylum by other  European  countries  she  submitted  that
    there was insufficient evidence  why  they  had  been  granted  status.
    Merely providing copies of documents with their names did  not  explain
    why they have been  given  those  documents.   Finally,  there  was  no
    evidence that the  appellant  would  be  ill-treated  even  if  he  was
    arrested for absconding.

    FINDINGS

 9. This is an appeal brought by the appellant against the decision by  the
    Judge to refuse the protection claim and  the  claim  under  Article  3
    ECHR.

10. The Judge when considering this appeal  set  out  in  some  detail  the
    appellant's case and then went on to summarise  the  respondent's  case
    and in  particular  the  case  in  respect  of  the  protection/Article
    3/Article 15(c) case.

11. The Judge noted that the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    worked for the Kurdistan Regional Security in  the  government  service
    known as Asaish Security in Sulaymaniyah.   The  Judge  considered  the
    documents that had been adduced and accepted that he was  so  employed.
    The appellant's fear was from  persons  connected  to  ISIL  and  other
    persons who  threatened  him  if  he  did  not  cease  his  employment.
    Evidence produced of complaints being made to the  police  station  and
    arrest warrants have been issued by the Supreme Court in  October  2015
    were adduced in the appellant's bundle.  The Judge accepted  this  side
    of the appellant's case.  The Judge also noted that the  appellant  did
    flee Iraq, taking his family to Turkey where they  claimed  asylum  but
    after his wife suffered a heart condition  the  appellant  returned  to
    Iraq and having returned to Iraq the appellant claimed he continued  to
    experience similar threats.

12. The first ground of appeal centred around that that the Judge failed to
    consider the future risk to the appellant. The Judge clearly recognised
    that the appellant had  suffered  problems  but  such  threats  whether
    verbal or in writing and concluded  that  there  was  State  protection
    available as  he  had  reported  matters  to  the  authorities.   I  am
    satisfied that the findings contained in paragraph 24 of  the  decision
    address the first ground of appeal and there is no error of law on this
    issue.

13. The appellant identified  that  colleagues  had  been  granted  refugee
    status in Italy and  Germany  and  contained  within  his  bundle  were
    documents relating to these two people.  Absent from the bundle was any
    information as to why they had been granted refugee status.  Each  case
    must be considered on its merits and it may well be  that  their  cases
    were more serious than the appellant's or alternatively the  State  did
    not provide protection to them or investigate their claims.  There  was
    no information provided about those claims and the Judge  was  entitled
    to make the findings he did and I am satisfied there  is  no  error  on
    this issue.

14. The final issue concerned Mr  Azmi's  argument  that  if  returned  the
    appellant would face torture because there  is  an  outstanding  arrest
    warrant.  The Judge, at paragraph 25 of his decision, took the case  at
    its  highest  and  found  that  the  appellant  could   face   possible
    prosecution for being absent from his job.  Mr Azmi referred me to  the
    appellant's bundle of evidence and in particular pages 110  to  113  of
    the bundle.  This is the bundle that was submitted on April 11, 2018.

15. I raised with Mr Azmi how these paragraphs related to  the  appellant's
    situation because these concerned detentions of  persons  suspected  of
    being affiliated with IS/ISIL.  His argument was that if  such  persons
    would be tortured or killed  then  a  similar  fate  could  await  this
    appellant.

16. No other evidence was adduced to show that this  appellant  would  face
    similar action if he was returned to Iraq.  The abuses referred  to  in
    pages 111 to 113 related specifically to persons involved with IS/ISIL.
     At worst the appellant is someone who absconded  and  save  as  stated
    above I was not directed to any other  evidence  that  was  before  the
    Judge  which  supported  the  submission  made  by  Mr  Azmi.  In   the
    circumstances I do not find there had been an  error  of  law  on  this
    ground.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law.  I uphold the decision.


Signed                              Date         16/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award made as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed                              Date         16/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
