

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03746/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 27 February 2018                   |         On 05 March 2018            |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    R N M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Byrne in his submissions focused on the "paper apart" grounds 1  and
    2 below.  He had nothing to add to the other grounds. However,  as  the
    other grounds were not  departed  from,  and  as  the  grounds  overlap
    substantially, they are all summarised here:

      Ground 1.  The judge's assessment of credibility was flawed because he
      failed  to  consider  relevant  evidence,   namely   the   appellant's
      substantial amendments to the asylum interview.

      Ground 2.   The judge criticises the appellant for failing to  mention
      his claimed sexuality at the screening interview.   It is  well  known
      that appellants may omit certain details at  the  screening  for  good
      reason: YL (China)  [2004]  UKIAT  00145,  paragraph  19.   [Mr  Byrne
      acknowledged that the rest of this ground was incorrect in  fact,  and
      did not rely on that part].

      Ground 3.  At paragraph 52 the judge rejects the  appellant's  account
      re allegations of witchcraft ... [but] no reasons ... are given.

      Ground 4.  At paragraph 71  the  judge  states  that  the  appellant's
      British partner overstated the difficulties if she is forced to go  to
      Kenya to continue the relationship ... her  concerns  were  consistent
      with the background evidence ... there is no evidential basis for  the
      finding ... this  has  distorted  the  assessment  of  "insurmountable
      obstacles".

      Further grounds in "paper apart":

      Ground 1.  At paragraph 27 the FtT said:

      "If the appellant was genuinely in fear of his life or of serious  ill
      treatment upon his return to Kenya, I consider he would have disclosed
      this at a much earlier stage".

      The FTT therefore held this to be dispositive of the entire claim.  It
      follows that because the appellant had not claimed earlier, he was not
      in genuine fear of his life. That is the ordinary meaning of the words
      used. The remaining analysis is therefore obiter. The claim is periled
      on this finding.

      The FTT placed decisive weight upon a late claim  and  therefore  gave
      considerations [under  section  8  of  the  2002  Act]  a  status  and
      compartment of its own ...  [J v SSHD 2012 SLT 162, [2011] CSIH 49  is
      quoted].

      The lateness of the claim did not comprise a global  assessment.  Read
      correctly it is a decisive factor. It ought not to have  been  because
      late claims must be considered  in  context  that  the  appellant  was
      safely within the UK and  spent  substantial  periods  lawfully  as  a
      student. Asylum is a last resort. The dicta in JT (Cameroon) [cited in
      JA] ought to be followed. It is an error of law  to  give  this  point
      decisive import.

      Ground 2.

      The FTT placed  substantial  weight  on  alleged  failure  to  mention
      matters...  at  screening   interview...   [the   grounds   quote   an
      interviewing officer's standard advice that only a  brief  outline  of
      why asylum is sought is asked for, and if appropriate a full interview
      will follow].

      At paragraph 29 the FTT considers it of  some  significance  that  the
      appellant did not refer to "his  sexuality"  at  screening  interview.
      Paragraph 29 discloses an error in comprehending the appellant's claim
      - he was not claiming to be homosexual, only that he  was  imputed  to
      be. Secondly, the FTT failed to have regard to the nature and  purpose
      of the interview... It was irrational to have  regard  to  an  alleged
      omission going to the detail of the claim in an interview designed  to
      omit the detail.... It is to screen the individual for their  personal
      circumstances not to interview them in relation to  the  substance  of
      their claims [YL is quoted].

      ... Omission of details precisely what is to be expected at  screening
      interview.

      Ground 3.

      The FTT concluded the applicant had not completed his  degree...  That
      is an error of fact... The FTT identifies this as  a  negative  factor
      detracting from the desirability of the appellant  remaining,  or  put
      another way the utility of the appellant's presence could have reduced
      the public interest in his removal - as attested  by  a  large  public
      support for his application to remain.  The  strength  of  the  public
      interest is capable of being affected by such a factor...  The  matter
      is material as it is capable  of  making  a  difference  to  the  fact
      sensitive and evaluative article 8 assessment.

 2. The principal further points which I noted from the submissions  of  Mr
    Byrne were as follows:

      i) The error of taking the late claim  as  conclusive  percolated  the
         rest of the decision;  see paragraphs 33 and 37.

     ii) It was not clear whether the judge was strictly applying section  8
         or a "common law" approach,  but  the  statutory  provision  should
         comprise the issue at common law, and the judge had fallen into the
         "status and compartment" error explained in J at [9], derived  from
         JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878.

    iii) YL emphasised the latitude to be given to discrepancies  identified
         from screening interviews.  The  principle  must  apply  even  more
         strongly to an omission such  as  encountered  here,  with  several
         strands in the eventual claim.

 3. In replying to the submissions for the SSHD Mr Byrne added:

      i) There could be  in  principle  be  no  difference  in  the  correct
         approach to delay through statute or through  common  law,  so  the
         fact that the judge did not refer to s.8 made no difference.

     ii) At the end of paragraph  29  the  judge  said  that  the  appellant
         claimed that at screening interview he was  asked  only  for  brief
         reasons, and went on, "I do not accept that" -  a  clear  error  of
         fact, as that was exactly what the appellant was asked.

 4. Having considered also the submissions for the SSHD, I  find  that  the
    appellant has not shown any error on a point of law such as to  require
    the decision of the FtT to be set aside.

 5.  Ground 1 does not show that the appellant offered any amendment to the
    substantive interview which merited separate treatment, or which  might
    have made any difference.

 6. Ground 2 and "paper apart ground 2" both go to the screening interview,
    and may be taken together.

 7. The judge uses the term "sexuality" without a qualifier at paragraph 29
    but there are references to perceived sexuality at paragraphs 6, 8, 21,
    30 (twice), 32, 33, and 39.  The allegation of misunderstanding is  not
    supported on a full and fair reading.

 8. Mr Matthews made two sound points on this aspect.   Firstly, the matter
    is  not  only  omitted  from  the  screening  interview.   It  was  not
    forthcoming at an enforcement interview when the  appellant  was  asked
    for reasons not to return, and did not mention any of the  difficulties
    later relied upon (paragraph 28).  Secondly, the omission of  reference
    to sexuality must be put in the context set  out  by  the  judge.   His
    observation comes immediately after noting the quite detailed  response
    at screening interview, specifying other heads of claim (paragraph 29).

 9. Mr Byrne's observation about the last  sentence  of  paragraph  29  was
    astute, but again fails to reflect the full context.  The judge is  not
    declining to believe that the appellant was asked for brief details,  a
    well-known feature of this jurisdiction.  He  is  declining  to  accept
    that as an explanation for the omission.

10. The error of approach identified in YL is  not  to  be  found  in  this
    decision.

11. Ground 3 overlooks reasons stated elsewhere - see paragraph 36.

12.  Ground  4  is  only  disagreement  with  the  judge's  assessment   of
    insurmountable obstacles, which is well supported by the evidence.

13. "Paper apart ground 1" takes the judge's sentence out of  context.   It
    is followed by a sentence stating that delay damages credibility, which
    does not suggest that there was no more to the case.  It is followed by
    numerous sensible reasons for rejecting the multiple  heads  of  claim.
    The judge plainly did not  treat  the  late  making  of  the  claim  as
    conclusive.

14. It may further be noted that this was a delay related not to perception
    of the safest destination, but to a last-ditch effort to avoid removal.

15. "Paper apart ground 3" may identify a slip on a matter of fact, but the
    appellant's completion of his degree  did  not  have  any  prospect  of
    carrying the day on human rights grounds.

16. VV (grounds of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00053 at paragraph 25 refers to  the
    approval in the House of Lords of a statement by Sir Thomas Bingham  MR
    that an issue  of  adequacy  of  reasons  was  to  be  resolved  "on  a
    straightforward  reading  without  excessive  legalism  or   exegetical
    sophistication".

17. The two principal  criticisms  in  the  grounds  are  taking  delay  as
    decisive on its own, and failing to allow  for  the  restriction  of  a
    screening interview to brief details. Neither criticism is valid,  once
    the decision is read fairly and as a whole.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  There is no apparent  reason  for
    one, but as the matter was not addressed in the UT, anonymity has  been
    maintained herein.

            [pic]

            27 February 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




