
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03189/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunal Liverpool  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 September 2018                          |On 26 September 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     JIA
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, instructed by CAB Bolton.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Tully dated 13 April 2018 dismissing his appeal  against  the
      decision of  the  respondent  dated  20  February  2018  refusing  the
      appellant's protection and human rights claims.

2     The appellant is  a  national  of  Iraq,  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  and
      originating from the town of Jalawla in the  Diyala  governorate.  The
      appellant arrived in United  Kingdom  in  or  around  March  2017  and
      underwent a screening interview on 16 March 2017, and a SEF  interview
      on 14 February 2018. The appellant claimed to fear serious harm in his
      home town for two reasons: in 2015 ISIS had taken over the  town,  and
      also in 2015/2016 the appellant's father  had  become  involved  in  a
      tribal dispute, the father had been killed,  and  the  appellant  said
      that he remained at  harm  as  a  result  of  such  dispute.  He  also
      asserting that the other parties to  the  dispute  had  influence  and
      power in the Iraqi Kurdistan Region, (IKR)  and  the  appellant  could
      therefore not internally relocate there.

3     The  respondent  disputed  the  appellant's  age.  The  appellant  had
      asserted at the screening interview that his  date  of  birth  was  10
      October 2000, and that he was then 17 (even though he  would  in  fact
      have been 16 at the time if his claimed date of birth had been  true).
      At the screening interview, the respondent had served on the appellant
      a  document  stating  that  his  'physical  appearance/demeanour  very
      strongly suggest that you are significantly over the age of 18 '.  The
      respondent refused the application.

4     On appeal before the judge, the judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the
      appellant and made findings which included the following:

      (i)   in relation to  the  appellant's  age,  the  appellant  had  not
           discharged the burden on him  to  establish  his  age,  and  the
           appellant was not  a  child  when  he  was  encountered  by  the
           respondent  in  March  2017  [23];   there   was   no   innocent
           explanation for the appellant's discrepancies about his age, and
           (impliedly)  the  appellant  had   been  dishonest   about   his
           assertions [24];

      (ii)  in relation to possession of ID  documents,  the  appellant  had
           been inconsistent about whether he had been in possession of  an
           ID  card  and  passport  [25];  he  had  not  been  truthful  or
           consistent about the documents he had previously  held  or  what
           happened to them [26];

      (iii) in relation to the protection claim, the appellant's account  of
           the tribal feud was not credible [27-33];

      (iv)  in relation  to  humanitarian  protection  and  consequences  of
           return, the appellant was from Jalawla and  his  presence  there
           would  result  in  being  subject  to  indiscriminate   violence
           amounting to serious harm within the scope of Article  15(c)  of
           the qualification directive [36]; considering the potential  for
           the appellant to receive support on  arrival  in  Iraq  and  the
           availability of  internal  flight,  the  judge  noted  that  the
           appellant had previously held both a CSID card and passport, and
           he had not been honest about were those documents are  and  when
           he last saw them [38]; in particular:

                 "He claims variously that he never saw  his  CSID  card  or
                 lost it en route to the UK. It may well be  that  he  still
                 has access to that document. He says that  the  agent  took
                 his passport from him after travel out of Iraq;  I  do  not
                 accept  this  claim  in  light  of  my  findings  above  on
                 credibility. The appellant says that he has  not  attempted
                 to obtain replacements of his CS ID and passport.  Again  I
                 consider it likely that he has  access  to  that  document"
                 [38];

      (v)   alternatively the appellant' s father had previously  brought  a
           box of family documents from Jalawla to the town  of  Khaneqeen,
           and even if the appellant's mother  had  subsequently  died,  as
           asserted, the appellant had previously been able  to  contact  a
           with a neighbour and could do so again [38];

      (vi)  the appellant could pass through Baghdad  for  the  purposes  of
           onward travel and to obtain such documentation as he would  need
           to go onto the IKR [39];

      (vii) the appellant could obtain a replacement CSID card  either  from
           the embassy in the UK  or  reasonably  soon  after  returned  to
           Baghdad [39];

      (viii)      the appellant could internally relocate to  the  IKR  [40-
           41].

5     The appellant's appeal was dismissed.

6     The appellant's subsequent grounds  of  appeal  dated  17  April  2018
      argue, in summary, that the judge misdirected herself in  relation  to
      whether the appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection:

      (i)   in appearing to find that the appellant  would,  on  arrival  to
           Baghdad, be able to obtain a replacement CSID  card,  the  judge
           failing to direct herself appropriately in  accordance  with  AA
           (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944,  which,  it  was  argued,
           provided that an applicant's ability to obtain a CSID  card  was
           likely to be severely hampered if he is  unable  to  go  to  the
           civil status affairs office of his own governorate,  as  in  the
           present  case  (Grounds,  para  2-3);  and  applying  the   same
           authority, he would not be able to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID
           card in Baghdad (grounds, para 4);

      (ii)  if stranded in Baghdad, the appellant's profile was  such  that,
           again applying AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944, he would be
           destitute and street homeless, contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

7     Permission to appeal was granted by judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Bird  in  a  decision  dated  15  June  2018  on  those  grounds,  but
      additionally suggesting that  the  judge  arguably  erred  in  law  in
      finding that the appellant had previously held a CSID or passport, the
      judge having arguably erred  in  failing  to  give  reasons  for  that
      finding at [26]; further, the judge had arguably erred in law  in  her
      assessment of the appellant's age, in relying only  on  one  statement
      made by the respondent, referred to at [19] (ie the document served on
      the appellant regarding his physical  appearance/demeanour);  and  the
      judge had failed to comment on the respondent's failure to carry out a
      Merton compliant age assessment.

8     It  is  thus  clear  that  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  was
      significantly wider in scope than the issues raised by  the  appellant
      himself in the grounds of appeal.

9     I heard from the parties. Ms Patel adopted the grounds of  appeal  and
      confirmed that she intended to pursue the additional points raised  in
      the grant of  permission.  Ms  Patel  drew  to  my  attention  certain
      passages within the country guidance set out at the annex to AA (Iraq)
      v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944. She submitted that on the  basis  of  that
      authority,  it  was  not  possible  for  a  person  from  the   Diyala
      governorate, such as the appellant, to obtain a replacement CSID  card
      in Baghdad, and that the judge's approach to the appeal was flawed.

10    However, I pointed out to Ms  Patel  that  the  judge  determined  the
      appeal on the assumed basis that the appellant either  had,  or  still
      had access to, his CSID  card  and  passport,  and  that  the  judge's
      assessment of how he might obtain a replacement CSID card in Iraq  was
      therefore immaterial.

11    Indeed, when I heard from Mr Mills, his  position  was  that  although
      there may have been some error of approach by the  judge  as  to  what
      documents could be obtained by the appellant from the authorities upon
      return to Iraq, given the judge's primary findings, any such error was
      not material.  Alternatively, if such an error may have been  material
      to the outcome of the appeal, then Mr Mills would request a  rehearing
      of the appeal, and permission to rely upon a new  Country  Policy  and
      Information Note on Iraq: "Internally relocation, civil  documentation
      and returns" Version 7 dated September 2018.  Any  re-hearing  of  the
      appeal would also need  to  take  into  account  the  updated  country
      guidance given in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT
      00212 (2.6.18),  although  that  country  guidance  would  not  become
      relevant if there were no material error in the judge's decision.

12    Ms Patel therefore addressed me on the issue raised in  the  grant  of
      permission to appeal, as to whether the  finding  that  the  appellant
      either still has, or has access to, his CSID and passport, was open to
      the judge on the  evidence  available,  and  whether  the  judge  gave
      adequate reasons for such a finding.

      Discussion

13    I find, contrary to the suggestion within of the grant  of  permission
      to appeal, that the judge's reasoning on this issue is  not  contained
      only at [26]. At [25], the judge noted that  the  appellant  had  been
      inconsistent in his evidence, asserting  in  the  screening  interview
      that he had an ID card, but had lost it on the way to the UK,  whereas
      in his SEF interview he had said that his father had told him  that  a
      CSID card existed for him, but the appellant had never  seen  it.  The
      judge set out, and then rejected the appellant's explanation  for  the
      discrepancy.

14    Further, at [26], the judge noted that the appellant had  specifically
      stated that he had left Iraq from Erbil, 'on his own  passport'.   The
      judge considered in some detail the appellant's evidence as to whether
      he, or an agent, had been in possession of  that  passport,  and  gave
      reasons  which  I  find  are  adequate  in  law,  for  rejecting   the
      appellant's credibility about who was in possession of  the  document.
      The judge held at the end of [26] that  the  appellant  had  not  been
      truthful or consistent about the documents he had previously  held  or
      what happened to them. This finding was open to the judge.

15    One argument advanced orally by Ms Patel, which is  not  contained  in
      the grounds of appeal, and is not raised by Judge Bird in the grant of
      permission to appeal, is that the judge had either proceeded  under  a
      mistake of fact in relation to part of the appellant's evidence  about
      what documents he had previously possessed, or had failed to take such
      evidence properly into account, and that this mistake  had  materially
      affected the judge's assessment on  credibility  on  that  issue.  The
      evidence which Miss Patel drew to my attention was that at page A9  of
      the screening interview, being a continuation of question 1.2  at  A2,
      where the appellant had given his date of birth as 10 October 2000. At
      A9, the record of interview sets out the following:

           "Q: The date of birth you've given makes you 16
           A: How is this so?
           Q: You are 16 until October this year, then you would be 17.
           A: I don't know, I have seen 10/10/200 (sic) on my  civilian  ID
           card.
           Q: Where is your ID card now?
           A: I lost it on my way to this country" (Emphasis added)

16    Ms Patel points out that there are three different types  of  identity
      documentation  in  Iraq,  the  Civil  Status  ID  (CSID),  the   Iraqi
      Nationality Certificate (INC) and Public Distribution System (PDS).  I
      see, for example, the three forms of documentation being discussed  at
      para 53 of AA (Article 15(c))  (Rev  2)  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC).  Ms
      Patel's argument is that the reference to 'civilian ID card' at q  1.2
      at A9 was in fact not a reference to a Civil Status ID  card,  but  to
      the  appellant's  Iraqi  Nationality  Certificate  (INC).  Thus,  when
      purporting to find that the appellant had given inconsistent  evidence
      about whereabouts of any CSID card, the judge had  proceeded  under  a
      mistake of fact, as the appellant had not been referring to  his  CSID
      card at question 1.2 at A9 at all.

17     I  am  perplexed  by  this  argument.  Not  only  was  this   alleged
      explanation for a discrepancy in  the  appellant's  evidence  not  put
      forward by him in his witness statement dated 26 March  2018,  nor  on
      his behalf by Ms Patel before the judge at  the  hearing  on  6  April
      2018, it also defies all common sense.  The  judge  was  clearly,  and
      perfectly entitled to treat the appellant's reference at 1.2 at A9  to
      his 'civilian ID card' to be a reference to his Civil Status ID  card,
      or CSID. The term used by the appellant is  almost  identical  to  the
      formal title of the document. Further, the term used by the  appellant
      has no resemblance at all to the formal title of the Iraqi Nationality
      Certificate (INC). I informed Ms Patel but I thought this argument had
      no merit at all, and ultimately had to use my case  management  powers
      to curtail her submissions on the point which she sought to pursue  at
      length.

18    I find that there is no material error of law in the judge  proceeding
      to determine the appeal on the basis that the appellant  either  still
      has, or has access to, his CSID card and passport, as held at [38].

19    Further and in any  event,  there  is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
      alternate finding  at  [38]  that  the  appellant,  having  previously
      successfully contacted a neighbour in Khaneqeen, could do so again, to
      access family documents held in  a  box.  The  judge's  finding  might
      potentially seem somewhat speculative in this regard, but there is  no
      challenge to it, and no Robinson obvious error arises.

20    Ms Patel also argued  that  the  judge  had  proceeded  under  another
      mistake in fact, although this point was not mentioned in  either  the
      grounds of appeal, or the grant of permission to appeal. This supposed
      mistake of fact was that in stating at [40] that  '...given that he is
      of Kurdish ethnicity and speaks Kurdish's Sorani and  it  is  accepted
      that he (sic) from a Kurdish area... ", the judge appears  to  proceed
      on the basis that the appellant is actually from the  Iraqi  Kurdistan
      Region, IKR, and thus she misdirected herself as to  the  approach  to
      internal relocation.  Ms  Patel  argued  that  the  reference  to  the
      appellant being 'from a Kurdish area' was  the  crucial  passage,  and
      must mean that the judge had proceeded on the basis that the appellant
      was from the IKR, which of course he is not.

21    I find this submission totally without  merit.  The  judge  summarised
      the appellant's case at [1], that he had asserted that  he  could  not
      return to his home area of Jalawla, which was in a disputed area,  and
      further, that he could not relocate to  IKR;  the  judge  specifically
      referred to the appellant 'not coming from IKR' at   [11];  the  judge
      correctly directed herself, having found  an  Article  15  C  risk  in
      Jalawla,  that  it  was  necessary  to  see  if  the  appellant  could
      reasonably relocate elsewhere in Iraq, for instance to IKR; the  judge
      again specifically refers to the appellant not coming from IKR at [37]
      and [40].

22    I take the judge's reference at [40] that the  appellant  is  'from  a
      Kurdish area'  merely  to  be  a  reference  to  Jalawla  itself;  the
      appellant's own witness statement dated 26 March 2018  states  at  [2]
      that he went to a Kurdish school and he lived in a Kurdish  community.
      There is nothing in Ms Patel's point, and again, I  had  to  use  case
      management powers to curtail her submissions on the point.

23    The last point, raised in that the grant of permission to  appeal,  is
      that the judge may  have  erred  in  law  in  her  assessment  of  the
      appellant's age.   Insofar  as  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal
      suggests that the judge, in finding that the appellant had lied  about
      his age, took into  account  only  the  respondent's  assertion  in  a
      written document that his physical appellant/demeanour  very  strongly
      suggested that he was significantly over the age of 18, this is simply
      not correct. The  judge  referred  to  various  discrepancies  in  the
      appellant's evidence on the issue of his age;  he  had  at  one  stage
      stated that he had no doubt that he was over 18, and  was  not  child,
      and that if the authorities said he was born in 1992 he was happy with
      that assessment [20]; the appellant  had  been  on  notice  since  the
      screening interview that his age was in dispute, and had not  provided
      any positive evidence of his own in relation to that issue  [22];  the
      fact that if his date of birth were 10 October  2000,  he  would  have
      been 16, not 17, as he asserted at the date of the screening interview
      [24]; and he had changed his account about whether or not he had  ever
      seen his date of birth written down [24].

24    There were ample reasons supporting  the  judge's  decision  that  the
      appellant had not been truthful about his age,  and  that  he  was  an
      adult at the time of screening interview in March 2017.

25    Further, insofar as the grant of permission to  appeal  suggests  that
      where is disputed, there must be an age assessment  compliant  with  R
      (B) v Merton LBC [2003] 4 All ER  280,  this  is  not  the  case.  The
      respondent's  policies  and  procedures  on  age  disputes  have  been
      considered on a number of occasions, for example  in  AA,  R  (on  the
      application of) v SSHD [2013] UKSC 49, where the Supreme Court took no
      issue with the general approach of the Respondent as to the assessment
      of age, setting out at [19] of the judgement, a relevant extract  from
      the  respondent's  Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance   ("EIG"),
      paragraph 55.9.3.1:

           "...UK Border Agency will  accept  an  individual  as  under  18
           (including those who have previously claimed  to  be  an  adult)
           unless one or more of the following criteria apply:

           *     there is credible and clear documentary evidence that they
                 are 18 years of age or over;

           *      a  full  'Merton-compliant'  age  assessment  by   social
                 services is available stating that they are 18 years of age
                 or  over.  (Note  that  assessments  completed  by   social
                 services emergency duty teams are not  acceptable  evidence
                 of age);

           *      their   physical   appearance/demeanour   very   strongly
                 indicates that they are significantly over 18 years of  age
                 and no other credible evidence exists to the contrary."

26    Therefore, there clearly are circumstances  when  the  respondent  may
      lawfully  treat   a   person   as   an   adult   if   their   physical
      appearance/demeanour   very   strongly   indicates   that   they   are
      significantly over 18 years of age  and  no  other  credible  evidence
      exists to the contrary.

27    The appellant has failed to establish  that  there  are  any  material
      errors of law in the judge's decision dismissing his appeal.

      Decision

      The decision did not involve the making of any material error of law.

      I do not set aside the judge's decision.


      The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                            Date: 21.9.18

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless  and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 21.9.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan






