

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Numbers: PA/03735/2015
                                                               PA/02876/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |  Decisions & Reason           |
|                                   |Promulgated                    |
|On 18 October 2016                 |  On 19 October 2016           |
|                                   |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                                 (1) Mr s a
                                (2) MISS S A
                       (ANONYMITY Direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel (instructed by Good Advice UK)
For the Respondent:   Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.     The  Appellants  appealed  with  permission  granted  by  Upper
           Tribunal Judge Frances on 10 September 2016 against the decision
           of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Khawar  made  in  a  decision  and
           reasons promulgated on 5 April 2016, dismissing the  Appellants'
           linked asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.




      2.     The  Appellants  are  nationals   of   Iraq,   siblings,   born
           respectively on 5 November 1985  and  25  November  1987.   They
           applied for asylum long after entering  the  United  Kingdom  as
           Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrants.   They  claim  to  be  Sunni
           Muslims from Baghdad in fear of Shia militias.


      3.    Neither Appellant nor their representatives  attended  the  date
           fixed for their substantive appeal hearing.  Nor had  directions
           been complied with.  Judge Khawar found that notice  of  hearing
           had been  correctly  served  on  the  Appellants  and  on  their
           representatives.   He  decided  to  hear  the  appeals  in   the
           Appellants' absence and that it was fair to do so.


      4.    Judge Khawar found that the Appellants had failed to prove their
           case.  Thus the appeals were dismissed.


      5.    When granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
           considered that it was arguable that a problem had  occurred  in
           that an application to adjourn had been made to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal but that it had not reached the judge.


      6.    No notice under rule 24 was  filed.   Standard  directions  were
           made  by  the  tribunal  and  the  appeals   were   listed   for
           adjudication of whether or not there was  a  material  error  of
           law.




      Submissions


      7.    Mr Sharma for the Appellants submitted that it was a clear  case
           of   procedural   error.    The   Appellants'   solicitors   had
           foreshadowed an  adjournment  application  to  the  Home  Office
           Presenting Officer the previous day and that had  been  recorded
           by the judge.   The  medical  evidence  showed  that  the  First
           Appellant was not discharged until the day prior to his hearing.
            The time of the discharge was unclear.  The First Appellant was
           the main  witness  and  the  Second  Appellant  was  simply  his
           dependant.   Her  attendance  at  the  hearing  would  not  have
           advanced matters and in any event it  was  reasonable  that  she
           would have wished to remain with her brother to ensure  that  he
           was safe.  His headache could have been symptomatic of a serious
           illness  such  as  bacterial  meningitis.   The  Appellants  had
           intended to pursue their appeals.   The judge had  been  alerted
           to a problem and  should  have  done  more  before  electing  to
           proceed in the Appellants' absence.  The  decision  and  reasons
           should be set aside and the appeals reheard before another judge
           in the First-tier Tribunal.


      8.    Mr Jarvis for the Respondent submitted that the judge had  given
           adequate reasons for proceeding in the Appellants' absences  and
           had dealt with the evidence provided. The  Appellants  had  done
           nothing to prepare for the hearing.  The  decision  and  reasons
           should stand.




      Material error of law


      9.    With considerable regret the tribunal must find that  the  judge
           erred by proceeding in the Appellants' absence.   He  cannot  be
           blamed.   Any  experienced  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in  the
           Immigration and Asylum Chamber will be only too  well  aware  of
           the unfortunate number of last minute, ill  founded  adjournment
           applications  which  are  made,  which  cause  delay  to   other
           claimants and  substantial  wasted  public  resources.   In  the
           present appeals directions had not been complied with, a default
           for which there has been no explanation even now.  It would also
           have been obvious to the judge that both Appellants  had  raised
           their asylum  claims  long  after  their  entry  to  the  United
           Kingdom.  The foreshadowing of an adjournment  application  made
           to the Home Office Presenting Officer the previous day  had  not
           materialised.   As  matters  appeared  to  him,   and   on   the
           information he had, it was reasonable for the judge to  proceed.




      10.   Yet, unknown to the judge, the First Appellant had been examined
           at Glasgow Royal Infirmary on  20  March  2016,  diagnosed  with
           migraine, prescribed aspirin and discharged the  next  day.   No
           follow up was arranged. Views may differ as to whether that  was
           a sufficient reason  to  have  prevented  an  appellant  with  a
           genuine claim from attending his  hearing,  or  whether  it  was
           simply a device to avoid the hearing for which no  evidence  had
           been served and for which the Appellants were unprepared.


      11.   In procedural fairness terms, however, it is the  fact  that  an
           adjournment application supported by medical evidence  had  been
           made to the First-tier Tribunal but had not reached  the  judge.
           What the judge would have made of the application is beside  the
           point.  It might have caused  him  to  adjourn,  with  the  same
           reluctance which the present tribunal has in setting  aside  the
           judge's  decision.   It  cannot  be  said  that  any  First-tier
           Tribunal judge  would  have  been  bound  to  have  refused  the
           application.  In the circumstances, it  seems  to  the  tribunal
           that there is no option but to set aside  the  judge's  decision
           and to order a rehearing.


      12.   As has been noted above, the  approach  of  the  Appellants  and
           their representatives to the conduct  of  these  linked  appeals
           leaves much to be desired.  It is the Appellants who have chosen
           to make protection claims in the  United  Kingdom  and,  as  the
           UNHCR Handbook  makes  clear,  the  obligation  is  on  them  to
           cooperate fully at all stages of the process.  The process makes
           significant  demands  on  the  public  purse.  The   Appellants'
           representatives should be well  aware  of  the  separate  duties
           imposed on them under the  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure
           Rules, above all the overriding objective in rule 4.  It is  now
           up to the Appellants to demonstrate that they  have  a  credible
           protection claim and to ensure that they comply fully  with  the
           First-tier Tribunal directions to the best of their ability.




      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which is set aside in its entirety.


      The appeals shall be reheard in the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  any
judge       apart from First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar, on  a  date  to  be
fixed, at   the first available date, at  Glasgow  hearing  centre,  because
the   Appellants live in Glasgow.


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     19 October 2016

