
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03741/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 June 2016                           |On 5 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum
                   DepUty UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ChamberlAin

                                   Between

                               MAHFUZUR RAHMAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Tunde-Olowu, of Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Freer who, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  9  May  2016,
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
         of 30 March 2015 to refuse his asylum claim.


      2. The appeal was dismissed without consideration of the substance  of
         the Appellant's claim. Rule  19(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014
         requires a Notice of Appeal to set out the Grounds of  Appeal.  The
         Appellant lodged his Notice of Appeal on 14 April  2016  but  there
         were no grounds attached. On 20 April 2016 the First-tier  Tribunal
         requested that the Grounds of Appeal be provided by 27 April  2016.
         When, on 06 May 2016, the judge, who  was  acting  as  Duty  Judge,
         considered the application, no Grounds of Appeal were contained  in
         the file.


      3. The judge had regard to Rule 25 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
         tier Tribunal) (Immigration &  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014.  This
         enables the First-tier Tribunal to dispose of  proceedings  without
         holding a hearing if a party fails to comply with  a  provision  of
         the rules or with a direction. The judge stated that there  was  no
         provision for a judicial decision  without  grounds,  and  that  an
         appeal had to be resolved by a judicial  hearing  of  the  material
         evidence supporting the grounds. The interests of justice could not
         be served if the matter proceeded to a hearing in  the  absence  of
         the Grounds and, as there was no explanation for their absence, the
         judge deemed  it  appropriate  to  dismiss  the  appeal  without  a
         hearing.


      4. The Appellant sought permission from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The Appellant contended that  he  had
         sent the Grounds by recorded delivery to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         and that the First-tier Tribunal received those Grounds on 27 April
         2015 and 08:16. In support of this assertion the Appellant provided
         a copy of the Grounds, a solicitor's covering letter dated 26 April
         2016 addressed to the First-tier Tribunal and making  reference  to
         the Grounds, the solicitor's records of posting for 26  April  2016
         and Royal Mail proof of delivery dated 27 April  2016.   Permission
         was granted by the First-tier Tribunal in light of this evidence.


      5. We indicated to the parties that the Tribunal file contained, inter
         alia, a covering letter from the Appellant's  solicitors  dated  26
         April 2016 which referred to the Grounds of Appeal being  enclosed,
         the Grounds of Appeal themselves, a Royal Mail  'track  your  item'
         printout indicating that an item with reference  BZ481306032GB  was
         delivered on 27 April 2016 at  08:16am,  and  a  photocopy  of  the
         solicitor's outward dispatch book with a tab  containing  the  same
         reference number  positioned  next  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         address and the Appellant's name. Mr Tufan, who acted in a fair and
         pragmatic  manner,  accepted  the  cogency  of  the  aforementioned
         evidence. He accepted that,  if  the  Appellant  had  provided  the
         Grounds to the First-tier Tribunal, the decision had been  made  in
         error and the  Appellant  had  effectively  been  deprived  of  the
         opportunity of having his appeal substantively considered. In light
         of this evidence and the position adopted by the Presenting Officer
         we satisfied ourselves that, through no fault of his own, the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge's decision was vitiated by a material error  of
         law.
      6. A mistake of fact can amount to an error of law (consider E v  SSHD
         [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49;  MA  (Fresh   Evidence)   Sri   Lanka*[2004]
         UKIAT00161;  ML  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2013] EWCA Civ 844). In E & R, giving the  judgment  of
         the Court of Appeal Carnwath LJ stated (at paragraph 66):


          In our view, the time has now come to accept  that  a  mistake  of
          fact giving rise to unfairness is a separate head of challenge  in
          an appeal on a point of law, at least in those statutory  contexts
          where the parties share an interest in cooperating to achieve  the
          correct result. .... First, there must have been a mistake  as  to
          an existing fact, including a mistake as to  the  availability  of
          evidence on a particular matter. Secondly,  the  factual  evidence
          must  have  been  'established',  in  the  sense   that   it   was
          uncontentious and objectively verifiable. Thirdly,  the  appellant
          (or his advisers) must not have been responsible for the  mistake.
          Fourthly, the mistake must have played a material (not necessarily
          decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning.

      7. We find that the Grounds of Appeal were received by the First-tier
         Tribunal on the morning of 27 April 2016. For some reason unknown
         to us the First-tier Tribunal administrative staff appear to have
         failed to attach the Grounds to the file. The judge believed there
         were no Grounds when in fact the Grounds had been provided to the
         First-tier Tribunal. The judge, quite innocently, made a mistake as
         to the availability of the Grounds. It is not in contention that
         the Grounds were sent. The Appellant's solicitors were not
         responsible for the mistake and the mistake clearly played a
         material, and in fact decisive part in the Tribunal's reasoning.


      8. In these circumstances it is appropriate to remit the appeal back
         to the First-tier Tribunal for a full substantive hearing.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision contains a material error of law.
The matter is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full  oral
hearing.




[pic]                               28 June 2016
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


