

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03509/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2017                               |On 11 July 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     AK
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Adebayo, A2 Solicitors
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

       2. The appellant is a citizen of Kuwait.  He claims that if  returned
          to Kuwait he faces a real risk of persecution  because  he  is  an
          undocumented Bidoon.  NM  (documented/undocumented  Bidoon:  risk)
          Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356 makes it clear that if accepted to  be
          an undocumented Bidoon the appellant is at risk of persecution  in
          Kuwait.

Procedural history

       3. In a decision dated 6 September 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge  VA
          Cox comprehensively rejected the credibility  of  the  appellant's
          claims and dismissed his appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  heard
          evidence from two witnesses I shall refer to as W1 and W2.


       4. Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  granted  permission  to  appeal
          observing it to be arguable that having found W1 to  be  credible,
          the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  give  attach  weight  to  W1's
          evidence that the appellant is an undocumented Bidoon.

       5. The respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated 21  February  2017
          in which she submitted that the findings of fact were open to  the
          First-tier Tribunal and the  grounds  of  appeal  merely  disagree
          with these.

Hearing

       6. Mr Adebayo  invited  me  to  find  that  having  found  W1  to  be
          credible, the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  obliged  to  give  clear
          reasons for rejecting  his  evidence  that  the  appellant  is  an
          undocumented Bidoon. Mr McVeety  acknowledged  that  the  decision
          gives rise to concerns but when read as  a  whole  the  First-tier
          Tribunal adequately reasoned findings, open to it.


       7. After  hearing  submissions  from  both  parties,  I  reserved  my
          decision which I now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

       8. The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  evidence  of  W1  to  be
          credible  at  [43].   The  First-tier  Tribunal  then   explicitly
          accepted W1's evidence that the appellant:


              i) was selling vegetables, including tomatoes for a number  of
                 years, they met up regularly for  tea  and  coffee  over  a
                 number of years and were well known to one another [44];


             ii) attended a demonstration with him which  was  dispersed  by
                 the authorities with water cannon [50].


       9. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept  the  appellant  is  an
          undocumented Bidoon [50 and  51].   The  First-tier  Tribunal  has
          failed to give any reasons whatsoever for rejecting W1's  evidence
          that  the  appellant  is  an  undocumented  Bidoon,  when  it  was
          accepted that they were well known to each other over a number  of
          years.  W1's evidence that he was an undocumented Bidoon and  knew
          the appellant to also be an undocumented  Bidoon  was  significant
          independent and apparently credible evidence  in  support  of  the
          determinative issue in the appeal.


      10. As Mr McVeety acknowledged it  was  possible  for  the  First-tier
          Tribunal  to  make  adverse  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
          credibility, yet accept  that  like  W1,  he  is  an  undocumented
          Bidoon.   When  making  its  findings  of   fact   regarding   the
          credibility and consistency of the  appellant's  claim  to  be  an
          undocumented  Bidoon,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give
          adequate reasons for apparently rejecting W1's  evidence  in  this
          regard and also failed to consider the evidence in the context  of
          the country background evidence as set out in NM  and  updated  in
          the appellant's bundle.  Indeed, NM is  not  referred  to  at  all
          albeit it has been said that the "current  country  guidance"  was
          considered at [20].    That it is necessary  in  a  case  such  as
          this to make specific findings on a claim to  be  unregistered  in
          Kuwait, even where there are other adverse  credibility  findings,
          is demonstrated by inter alia, the headnote and [116] of NM.

Conclusion

      11. The  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  are  vitiated  by  material
          errors  of  law  and   need   to   be   remade   entirely.    Both
          representatives agreed that in the event I found there  to  be  an
          error of law, the decision should be remade  completely.   I  have
          had  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.

Decision

      12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      13. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 July 2017
