
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03078/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9th May 2017                       |On 23rd May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [b r]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Legal Representation
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    D S Borsada, promulgated on 13th October 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 22nd September 2016.  In the determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq, a female, and was born on [ ] 1990.
     She  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  23rd
    September  2016,  rejecting  her  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection, on account of having undergone an illicit relationship with
    a man from the Yazidi Christian community, whereas she  herself  was  a
    Sunni Muslim, from a large  family  consisting  of  her  parents,  four
    brothers and one sister, all of whom are still  living  in  Iraq.   The
    Appellant became pregnant with the child of this man  from  the  Yazidi
    Christian community by the name of Elyas and is now with a  child,  and
    her claim is that Elyas himself has been killed by ISIS  insurgents  in
    Iraq, and that she would be returning back to that country  as  a  lone
    woman and a failed asylum seeker, which will subject  her  to  risk  of
    persecution and ill-treatment.

The Judge's Findings

 3. In an  extensive,  comprehensive,  and  detailed  determination,  Judge
    Borsada,  set  out  the  Appellant's  claim  (see  paragraph  5);   the
    submissions by the Respondent (paragraph 6); the submissions  from  the
    Appellant's representative (at the time was legally represented), which
    are set out at paragraph 7; before proceeding to make detailed findings
    of fact himself (see paragraphs 8 to 15).  The judge decided  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed because  essentially,  her  claim  was  not
    credible.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that the judge wrongly considered  the
    claim from an advantage point of a judge sitting in the  UK,  and  made
    wrongful  assumptions  in  relation  to  cultural  attributes  of   the
    community in Iraq, so as to lead him  to  erroneous  conclusions.   For
    example, it is asserted that the judge was wrong  in  taking  the  view
    that the Appellant could not have come from a conservative  family,  if
    she had been allowed by the family  to  go  to  university,  to  be  in
    possession of a mobile phone, and to move about freely.   It  was  also
    said that it was not necessarily implausible that the  Appellant  would
    have continued to drive to see Elyas, after it was made clear to her by
    her father that the relationship was unacceptable, and that threats had
    been issued.  This was despite the Appellant making clear that she  was
    careful not to be seen with him holding hands or kissing in public.  It
    was also said that the judge was  wrong  to  have  concluded  that  the
    family would have allowed her to go out in public on her own given  her
    illicit relationship.

 5. On 9th November 2016, permission to appeal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal,  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had  given  a  proper
    consideration to all the issues that had arisen before  him.   However,
    on 16th December 2016, the Upper Tribunal gave permission to appeal  on
    the basis that it was arguable that the  judge's  credibility  findings
    were flawed and that the issue of risk as a lone female without support
    needed proper consideration.

 6. On 10th January 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to  the  effect  that  the  judge  had  delivered  a
    comprehensive determination, considered all the evidence,  and  reached
    negative credibility findings at paragraphs 9 to 10,  which  were  well
    reasoned and could not in any way said to be rational.   Moreover,  the
    Appellant came from the Iraqi Kurdish Region and the  country  guidance
    case of AA (Iraq) suggested that she could safely return back there.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me, the Appellant  was  unrepresented  on  9  May
    2017.  She appeared with a McKenzie Friend, [AA], with  her  child  who
    was with her, and she had difficulty  understanding  English,  so  that
    [AA] assisted her during the  hearing.   She  explained  that  she  was
    without funds and could not any longer pay the fees of her  lawyer  who
    had drafted her grounds of appeal, and who had represented her  in  the
    Tribunal below, but she had additional documentation that she wished to
    hand  up,  and  this  consisted  of  two  articles,  which  purportedly
    demonstrated that there is a risk for alone woman  to  return  back  to
    Iraq.  These consisted of a Daily Mail article, which  was  as  old  as
    17th May 2007, in relation to an honour crime of a girl by the name  of
    Dua Khalil Aswad, who had fallen in love with  a  Sunni  boy,  but  had
    herself come from the Yazidi religion, and she  was  stoned  to  death.
    Another article was about "sexual  harassment  in  Iraqi  Kurdistan:  a
    problem for all girls" from the Huffington Post  of  22nd  March  2017.
    She handed these up for Mr Mills,  the  Senior  Presenting  Officer  to
    consider,  and  then  they  were  passed  on  to   the   Tribunal   for
    consideration.

 8. Since it was Mr Mills' appeal, on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of
    State, he began by saying that he would rely upon the Rule 24 response.
     The judge had found the Appellant to be lacking  in  credibility.   He
    did not find that the Appellant's family would threaten her or that she
    was at risk from them.  She could return back  to  the  cradle  of  her
    family, and if this was the case then she would not be  returning  back
    as lone woman, and everything else falls by the wayside.  If,  however,
    this was not so, then in the alternative the Appellant  can  return  to
    Iraqi Kurdistan where she could find safe relocation.

 9. For her part, [BR], the Appellant, stated that she could  not  go  back
    because her life was in danger and she will be killed.  She  said  that
    what will befall her if she returns to Iraq will  be  worse  than  what
    happened in the documents that she had handed up.  She said that  there
    is no support for herself or her child.  She could not return.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a part of law (See Section  12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

11. First, the grounds of application do not disclose all the reasons given
    by the judge in coming to his decision, which  are  more  detailed  and
    more extensive than appeared to be the  case  from  the  grounds.   The
    question that the judge directed himself to was that the fact that  the
    Appellant was pregnant, and now had a baby, does not  in  itself  prove
    that she was in an illicit relationship with  a  man  by  the  name  of
    Elyas.   Nor  does  it  prove  that  her  family  disapproved  of   her
    relationship with the child's father.  The fact that the child's father
    was  not  named  on  the  birth  certificate  "is  significant  and  in
    particular her failure to have the certificate amended  and  that  this
    does tend to suggest to me a lack of truthfulness on her part as to the
    real identity of the father" (paragraph 11).  The decision by the judge
    is nuanced.  He does not require corroboration, which is unnecessary in
    a protection claim, but he does  say  that  "the  lack  of  documentary
    evidence has not assisted in circumstances in  which  there  were  many
    other reasons to doubt the veracity of her evidence as detailed  above"
    (paragraph 11).

12. Second, one of these reasons is that Elyas is  said  to  have  returned
    back to Iraq to make arrangements for the future, and  given  the  risk
    that had already been alluded to, this was most unlikely, and not least
    because "there was a sympathetic uncle who already  helped  and  surely
    could have done so again", and "there was also Elyas's family  who  are
    clearly not opposed to the match and  would  have  been  able  to  help
    without Elyas running the risk of returning" (paragraph 10).

13. Third, it was not plausible, as the judge  found,  that  the  Appellant
    remained fifteen days in Iraq without her whereabouts  becoming  known,
    in circumstances in which the uncle was clearly in  communication  with
    her family when the father and brother of  the  Appellant  had  already
    found out  about  her  pregnancy,  together  with  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's brother was a policeman who had influence  and  connections
    with the authorities (paragraph 10).

14. Finally, the judge does address the issue of the Appellant returning as
    a lone woman but concludes that there is no risk of ill-treatment being
    visited upon her (see the reasons given at paragraphs 12 to 13).

15. For all these reasons, the decision reached by the judge  was  entirely
    sustainable on the facts as found by him.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd May 2017
