
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03125/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 October 2016                         |On 4 October 2016                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    N S K
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  claimant.
This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to   contempt   of   court
proceedings.

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal on Article 8  ECHR
   grounds against her decision to refuse his protection claim.

2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett
   who considered it arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to
   Article 8 ECHR was  erroneous  as  there  was  no  consideration  of  the
   claimant's position under the Immigration Rules  HC395  (as  amended)  or
   whether there were compelling compassionate circumstances for  which  the
   Secretary of State should have granted leave outside the Rules.

3. At a hearing on 23 May 2016 before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Archer
   there was common ground between Ms Aruna for the Secretary of State,  and
   Mr S Mardner who represented the claimant, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
   had indeed erred as alleged, in that the two stage approach  set  out  at
   [31]-[33] and [51]-[55] of The Secretary of State for the Home Department
   v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 had not been applied.

4. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer was unable to complete  the  decision.
   By a transfer order dated 3 October 2016, the appeal has been transferred
   to me.

5. Given the agreement between the parties at the hearing that there  is  an
   error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision, I consider  that  the
   proper course is for the decision to be set aside and this appeal  to  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh with  no  findings
   of fact or credibility preserved.

DECISION

6. My decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.

   I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be
   remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.




Date:  4 October 2016                   Signed:    Judith A J C Gleeson
                                                         Upper Tribunal
Judge Gleeson





