
                                    [pic]

S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03772/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 January 2020                             |On 26 February 2020            |
|                                               |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                     B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


    1. The appellant appeals with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal
       against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  G  Wilson,
       promulgated on 24 September 2019, dismissing her  appeal  against  a
       decision of the respondent, made  on  3  April  2019,  refusing  her
       protection and human rights applications. The appellant had  claimed
       on behalf of herself and her three dependent children.


    2. The appellant's application was based on a  claim  that  she  was  a
       victim of human trafficking but, on 25 October  2018,  the  National
       Referral Mechanism concluded that the appellant was not a victim  of
       human trafficking. The respondent did not consider the appellant had
       provided a consistent account of her claim  to  be  trafficked.  The
       respondent also rejected the appellant's claim to fear her family in
       Albania. Reliance was placed on the  appellant's  failure  to  claim
       asylum in Italy where she had the  opportunity  to  do  so.  In  any
       event, background information  showed  the  authorities  in  Albania
       would be able to provide the appellant  with  effective  protection.
       The appellant would be able to relocate to Tirana and access support
       there as a single woman.

    3. Judge Wilson heard the appeal in Newport on 9  September  2019.  The
       evidence filed in advance of the hearing included  medical  evidence
       suggesting that the appellant might be a  vulnerable  witness.  With
       the agreement of the representatives, the judge  applied  the  Joint
       Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and  the  relevant  Practice
       Direction. The judge recorded that credibility was in issue  and  he
       reminded himself of the guidance contained in the cases of HKv  SSHD
       [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223. He  reminded
       himself that when assessing the cogency of the appellant's  evidence
       and her credibility he should bear in mind  her  mental  health  and
       vulnerability.

    4. The judge also  noted  the  relevant  background  evidence,  country
       guidance and expert report which had been provided to him. He  found
       there was support for the appellant's  claim  within  the  objective
       evidence, country guidance and country expert report that there is a
       prevalence of people trafficking in Albania  and  that  there  is  a
       patriarchal society  within  Albania  based  on  honour.  There  was
       evidence that a woman who had been trafficked would not be  accepted
       by her family or her  husband's  family  and  that  divorced  single
       mothers who live alone are not looked on favourably by  society.  In
       short, he accepted there was support for the appellant's account  in
       these sources.

    5. The judge then analysed the appellant's account under  six  headings
       before reaching his conclusion  at  [45]  that  the  evidence  which
       supported  the  appellant's  account  taken  cumulatively  did   not
       outweigh the adverse  credibility  matters  he  had  identified  and
       therefore the low standard of proof had not been  satisfied  by  the
       appellant. She had not demonstrated she had been abducted and forced
       into prostitution in Albania in the manner she described or at all.

    6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal were drafted by Mr Georget,
       who also appeared in the First Tier Tribunal.  Judge  of  the  First
       Tier Tribunal Scott Baker granted permission to appeal, stating,

             "4. Having rejected the medical evidence it is  arguable  that
             the findings on credibility are flawed,  especially  as  there
             were no findings as to whether the judge had accepted that the
             appellant was suffering from PTSD and that  the  findings  had
             been  focused  on  limited  events  rather  than  a   holistic
             evaluation."




    7. Mr Georget developed his grounds at the  hearing.  There  are  three
       grounds but  they  overlap  and  they  all  relate  to  the  judge's
       credibility assessment. He emphasised that the  judge  accepted  the
       account had been consistent with background sources. He pointed  out
       he had accepted that vulnerability was relevant to  the  credibility
       assessment. In that context, he  argued,  the  judge  had  erred  in
       failing to give any weight to the medical  evidence.  As  said,  the
       judge was provided with a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Ewa Okon-
       Rocha and  the  judge  accepted  her  credentials  as  a  consultant
       psychiatrist  made  her  appropriately  qualified  to   assess   the
       appellant's mental health. The judge was  critical  of  the  report,
       however, because the expert did not make any assessment  of  whether
       the appellant could be feigning  or  exaggerating  her  symptoms  of
       PTSD, depression, panic disorder and anxiety and it appeared she had
       simply taken the appellant's account at face value. The judge placed
       little weight upon  the  report  as  corroborating  the  appellant's
       account because the report did not contain a critical and  objective
       analysis.


    8. Mr Georget agreed that the  decision  of  the  judge  to  treat  the
       appellant as a vulnerable witness did not in any way tie  his  hands
       when it came to his critical assessment  of  the  medical  evidence.
       That was in  line  with  the  Presidential  decision  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in SB (vulnerable adult:  credibility)  Ghana  [2019]  UKUT
       00398 (IAC). Mr Georget pointed out that  there  was  no  reason  to
       suppose that the expert  did  not  consider  the  appellant's  story
       critically because she had the  benefit  of  more  than  two  years'
       medical records containing an earlier diagnosis of PTSD.

    9. Mr Georget argued the judge had erred by approaching the  report  on
       the basis that the appellant might  be  feigning  and  ignoring  the
       possibility that she might not  be  feigning.  Mr  Georget  accepted
       there  were  difficulties  with  his  argument  because  the   judge
       expressly directed himself that  he  needed  to  bear  in  mind  the
       appellant's mental  health  and  vulnerability  when  assessing  her
       evidence and he confirmed that, when making credibility findings, he
       had borne in mind her  health  and  vulnerability  (see  [13.c]  and
       [24]). However, the judge had not  made  any  clear  findings  about
       whether the appellant suffers from PTSD or not.


   10. Secondly, Mr Georget argued the judge had  failed  to  carry  out  a
       holistic evaluation. For example, he did not make a  finding  as  to
       whether the appellant had, as claimed, been forced into marriage  at
       the age of 14. This was important because it  provided  the  context
       for assessing her future choices. The judge found  the  decision  of
       the appellant, who was then  with  her  husband,  to  leave  Germany
       before their protection claim there had been determined showed  that
       the  appellant  and  her  husband  had  been  willing  to  make   an
       unmeritorious asylum claim where it suited their purposes. The point
       was that the appellant  had  been  in  no  position  to  oppose  her
       husband's decision. A further example was the  judge's  reliance  on
       the appellant's failure  to  claim  asylum  in  Italy  as  a  matter
       undermining her overall credibility because the appellant  had  been
       under the control of men at that time as well.

   11. Mr Georget's third ground was that the judge treated credibility  as
       an  abstract  matter  and  did  not  relate  it  to  the  facts.  He
       acknowledged the judge's self-directions were  impeccable  but  then
       suggested that the  judge  had  treated  his  task  as  a  balancing
       exercise.


   12. Mr Howells argued that the  judge's  consideration  of  the  medical
       report was entirely  in  line  with  the  guidance  provided  in  JL
       (medical reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC), which
       the judge had referred to. It was open to the judge to  give  little
       weight to the report and it was implicit that he did not accept  the
       appellant's claimed symptoms. Going on to the second ground, he said
       the judge had made findings on the major points of the  account  and
       he was not obliged to make findings on everything. It had  not  been
       disputed that the appellant was married and  the  judge's  reasoning
       was sound. As to the third ground, the judge was aware that  caution
       needed to be exercised and he was entitled to find  the  appellant's
       account incoherent and implausible. It could not be said  the  judge
       had ignored the positive parts of the account.

   13. In response, Mr Georget said that  his  overarching  submission  was
       that the ground rules for assessing credibility  in  asylum  appeals
       had not been followed and the judge should not have closed his  mind
       to the possibility that the account  was  true  when  assessing  the
       medical evidence.

   14. I reserved my decision as to  whether  the  decision  of  the  judge
       contains a material error  of  law  and,  having  done  so,  I  have
       concluded that it does not and therefore that the appellant's appeal
       must be dismissed. My reasons are as follows.

   15. As Mr Georget acknowledged, he faced an uphill struggle  in  showing
       that a judge who had directed  himself  impeccably  had  nonetheless
       fallen into error by failing to do what he explained he intended  to
       do. In relation to the point  about  treating  the  appellant  as  a
       vulnerable witness, when it came to making his  submissions  orally,
       Mr Georget accepted that there was no inherent  inconsistency  in  a
       judge treating an appellant as vulnerable and ultimately  not  being
       satisfied  that  the  reasons  behind  that  decision   were   fully
       established on the evidence. There is perhaps a helpful parallel  to
       be drawn with the situation in which there is  an  age  dispute.  It
       would be wise for the judge  to  treat  the  appellant  as  a  child
       witness even though the judge might ultimately conclude  for  cogent
       reasons that the appellant was not a child.

   16. I do not see any merit in  the  submissions  regarding  the  judge's
       treatment  of  the  report  of  Dr  Okon-Rocha.  He  recognised  her
       credentials as an expert. However, it was open to him to attach such
       weight to the expert's opinions as he  deemed  appropriate.  He  was
       clearly aware of the guidance provided in JL (China). In that  case,
       the Upper Tribunal explained that the more a diagnosis is  dependent
       on assuming that the account  given  by  the  appellant  was  to  be
       believed, the less likely it was that significant  weight  would  be
       attached to it (see [30]). It was therefore open  to  the  judge  to
       discount the weight he might otherwise have  given  to  the  medical
       report because, as he put it, the expert had not considered  whether
       the appellant might have been feigning or exaggerating her symptoms.

   17. Mr Georget's written grounds appear  to  suggest  that  the  judge's
       conclusions were not only contradictory but  arguably  perverse  and
       that he had, in effect, concluded the appellant had been feigning or
       exaggerating her symptoms. To be fair to the judge, he did  no  such
       thing. He simply explained why he was unable to give weight  to  the
       report of the expert as corroborating the appellant's account.

   18. I accept that the  expert  had  medical  records  showing  that  the
       appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD previously, apparently by her
       GP. The judge does not make any positive conclusions about this  and
       I can see why this may have  troubled  Judge  Scott  Baker  because,
       having explained why little weight could  be  given  to  the  expert
       report, the judge should  have  explained  why  the  other  evidence
       suggesting the appellant may have PTSD did not bear on  his  overall
       fact-finding.

   19. However,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge's  conclusions  on
       credibility are thereby significantly undermined. The decision as  a
       whole shows that the judge  was  familiar  with  the  evidence  and,
       significantly,  that  he  reminded  himself  to  bear  in  mind  the
       appellant's vulnerability when assessing her  credibility.  A  clear
       example is at [37] where the judge  did  not  take  the  appellant's
       vagueness against her.

   20. I agree with Mr Howells that the decision can be read as showing  it
       was implicit that the judge had in mind that the appellant may  have
       a degree of PTSD. In the  overall  circumstances,  without  evidence
       tying this into the particular narrative given by the appellant, the
       judge cannot be taken to have erred by  failing  to  treat  this  as
       having significant weight as corroboration.

   21. Mr Georget argued there was an error by the judge in failing to keep
       an open mind about whether the claim was  true  before  finding  the
       report carried no weight. I consider the judge's approach is  clear.
       He structured his credibility assessment under headings,  explaining
       his reasoning in relation to each of a number of  issues.  As  said,
       his treatment of the report was simply to explain  why  he  did  not
       give it positive weight. He then turned to matters which  undermined
       the appellant's credibility. I see no error at all in this approach.
       I note that,  in  the  next  section,  the  judge  treated  the  NRM
       decisions as neutral because he was  not  provided  with  either  of
       them.

   22. As for the judge's reliance on the appellant's decision  to  abandon
       her claim in Germany, I accept there was evidence which  might  have
       indicated that the appellant might have been under  the  control  of
       her husband at the time  such  that  the  judge  should  have  given
       reasons for explaining  why  he  nonetheless  gave  this  weight  as
       undermining credibility. However, in [35] he did  exactly  that.  He
       noted the appellant had given inconsistent evidence to the expert as
       to the reason for travelling  to  Germany  in  the  first  place.  I
       consider the judge was perfectly entitled to regard this as a matter
       undermining the appellant's credibility.

   23. Judge Scott Baker was also  concerned  the  judge  did  not  make  a
       holistic assessment of the evidence. I have already dealt  with  the
       point about the appellant's mental health.  Mr  Georget  highlighted
       the absence of any finding regarding the appellant's account of  her
       marriage. He suggested this matter provided the  "context"  for  the
       claim and explained some of the  decisions  made  by  the  appellant
       subsequently. However, I agree with Mr Howells that this matter  was
       not directly in dispute and, as noted, the judge pointed out the the
       background evidence of the patriarchal and  conservative  nature  of
       Albanian society.

   24. Nor is there any merit in the  point  that  the  judge  treated  his
       credibility assessment as a balancing exercise such that he  thereby
       imported a much higher standard of  proof.  At  [45]  the  judge  is
       simply drawing together the various threads  of  his  reasoning  and
       showing he has taken full account of the matters which weigh for and
       against  the   appellant's   credibility.   He   referred   to   the
       "appropriate" standard of proof.  There  is  no  basis  at  all  for
       arguing he applied the wrong standard of proof.

   25. Standing back and reading the decision as a whole,  I  consider  the
       judge made no material  errors  of  law.  His  self-directions  were
       correct and he assessed the evidence with diligence. He  gave  clear
       explanations as to why he did not accept the appellant's account and
       those reasons were based on the evidence. He  took  account  of  the
       appellant's vulnerability and  how  that  might  have  affected  her
       evidence.


   26. The appeal is therefore dismissed and the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal dismissing the appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds  shall
       stand.




NOTICE OF DECISION

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.





Direction Regarding Anonymity

Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 3 February 2020


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


