
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03634/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 January 2018                            |On 28 March 2018             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     SK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Miss Seehra
For the Respondent:     Ms Ahmad


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  in  1982.  She  appeals
    against the decision of the respondent made on 1 April 2016  to  refuse
    her claim for asylum.

 2. Her immigration history in brief is that she  was  granted  periods  of
    leave as a  student  between  February  2012  and  October  2015.   She
    returned to Sri Lanka between June and July 2014.   Her  student  leave
    was curtailed to expire in July 2015 because her college said  she  had
    not registered for classes during the  previous  semester  and  it  had
    withdrawn its sponsorship.  She claimed asylum on 6 October 2015.

 3. The basis of her claim is that she fears persecution by the authorities
    because of suspected involvement with the LTTE.  She worked as a  clerk
    at the High Court in Ampara from 2008 to 2011.  In  November  2008  her
    landlady in Ampara where she lodged with two Tamils asked her to obtain
    a court order which was required by her lawyer.  She did so.   She  was
    arrested at work and detained for two days.  The police told  her  they
    had information that she was connected with  the  LTTE,  in  particular
    that she was involved in her landlady's activities with the LTTE,  such
    as fundraising.  She admitted getting the court order.

 4. On release she continued working at the court until she left Sri Lanka.
     She had no problems from the authorities.

 5. However, on return to Sri Lanka in June 2014 she was  detained  at  the
    airport and taken to the CID office in Colombo, where she was held  for
    five days and was then taken to Welikada jail where she was held  until
    her parents paid bail.  She was told she was being detained because she
    left Sri Lanka while they were still investigating her.  She was beaten
    once and accused of  having  helped  the  LTTE.   On  release  she  was
    required to report weekly to a police station.  She did so  once.   Her
    parents paid an agent to get her through the airport.  The police  went
    to her parents' house a week later looking for her.  They had  returned
    twice, most recently in August 2015.

 6. The respondent did not believe the account.  In  summary,  it  had  not
    been explained why her landlady would have asked her to get a  document
    instead of getting it through a lawyer; why she would have been allowed
    to continue  working  at  the  court  if  she  was  suspected  of  LTTE
    involvement and why she would have been untroubled by  the  authorities
    for three years after release.  Also being able to leave Sri  Lanka  in
    2011 and 2014.

 7. She appealed.

    First tier hearing

 8. Following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 3  August  2017  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier NJ Bennet dismissed the appeal.

 9.  His  reasons,  in  summary,  were  that  there  was  no   satisfactory
    explanation why a lawyer would not have got the court order rather than
    a clerk; nor why she would have been able to continue working  for  the
    court if she was suspected of helping the LTTE.  Also, the  explanation
    of why she got  the  court  order  was  contradictory.   Her  claim  of
    interpreter error was not accepted.

10. Next, the judge found  difficulties  with  the  documents  relating  to
    proceedings in the Magistrates Court which appeared  to  indicate  that
    the CID were satisfied about the investigation and had no intention  of
    detaining the  appellant  but  nonetheless  went  on  to  ask  for  the
    appellant to be remanded until the conclusion of the case.  Such in the
    judge's view  made  no  sense.   Equally  it  made  no  sense  for  the
    Magistrate to cancel the detention order but to remand the appellant.

11. Further, the Magistrate's record about bail was inconsistent.  Contrary
    to the appellant's evidence the  record  does  not  indicate  that  the
    parents were involved in the grant.

12. In further criticisms the judge noted  a  Ralon  document  verification
    report which indicated that the CID had stated that the warrant  was  a
    forgery.  He rejected as speculation that the CID might have engaged in
    a ploy to secure the appellant's removal by wrongly  stating  that  the
    warrant is false.

13. Finally, the judge found against the appellant that  she  was  able  to
    leave Sri Lanka on her own identity scarcely a month after she  claimed
    to have been arrested at the airport and her delay in claiming asylum.

    Error of law hearing

14. She sought permission to appeal which was granted on 16 November 2017.

15. At the error of law hearing  before  me  Miss  Seehra  made  four  main
    points.  First, that  the judge's findings  criticising  the  procedure
    disclosed in the Magistrate's Court documents and  thus  the  documents
    themselves was contrary to the background material.

16.  Second,  the  criticism  that  various  answers  at   interview   were
    contradictory and that he did not accept that the  interpreter  was  to
    blame did not take account of a letter correcting the anomalies sent to
    the respondent soon after the interview. In similar  vein  contrary  to
    the assertion (at [41]) that the appellant had not  explained  why  she
    rather than a lawyer had been asked to obtain the  court  document  she
    did give an explanation in her witness statement.

17. Third, the judge failed  to  engage  adequately  with  the  appellant's
    challenge to the method of verification made by Ralon.   He  failed  to
    make any findings in relation to the potential risk the  appellant  has
    been exposed to by the  respondent  approaching  the  very  people  the
    appellant fears will mistreat her on return.

18. Further, the judge failed to  make  any  findings  on  the  appellant's
    husband's evidence which corroborated crucial aspects of her historical
    claim.

19. Ms Ahmad's response was that looked at in the round the judge had given
    adequate reasons justifying his findings.

    Consideration

20. In considering this matter it is  clear  that  the  judge  has  made  a
    careful effort to analyse the claim and some of his findings  are  ones
    in themselves which were clearly open to him on the evidence.  However,
    I consider that there are a number of difficulties.

21. First, a core criticism by the judge is of the procedure stated in  the
    Magistrate's Court documents (at [45]) where he concludes:-

         "... it makes no sense for the CID to be satisfied about the
         investigation and to have no intention of detaining the appellant
         further but to go on to ask for the appellant to be remanded until
         the conclusion of the case.  Equally, it makes no sense for the
         Magistrate to cancel the detention order but to remand the
         appellant ..."


22. However, background material that was before the judge  indicates  that
    such a conclusion may be incorrect.

23. The Amnesty International Report, Locked  Away:  Sri  Lanka's  Security
    Detainees (March 2012) provides extensive information about the  powers
    to detain pursuant to a detention order issued under the Prevention  of
    Terrorism Act, versus remand by  a  magistrate.  The  two  are  clearly
    distinct procedures (emphasis added):

         Page 10-11:


         At the end of August 2011 Sri Lanka finally lifted the State of
         Emergency, but on 29 August (just 24 hours before the emergency
         lapsed), the President introduced new regulations under the
         Prevention of Terrorism Act, which extended the detention of
         persons detained under the Emergency Regulations for 30 days
         pending issuance of detention orders under the PTA or remand by a
         magistrate.  The Sri Lankan government vowed that as of 1 September
         2011 any person arrested or detained would be handled under the
         Code of Criminal Procedure Act or the PTA:


         According to new regulations made under Section 27 of the PTA for
         the treatment of detainees and surrendees consequent to the Lapsing
         of the Emergency Regulations:


          1. Detainees under the lapsed regulations shall be produced
             forthwith before a Magistrate who will bring the suspect under
             the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.


          2. If this production does not take place within 30 days from
             30th August 2011 and the Magistrate does not take steps to
             remand him on material available the detainee shall be
             released.


          3. If a detention order either under Part II [the PTA Section on
             "Investigation"] or Part III [the PTA Section on "Detention
             and Restriction Orders"] has been issued in respect of the
             detainee before the expiry of 30 days, the detainee shall not
             be released subject to the availability of the right of bail
             in given circumstances.


          4. Those who were remanded by the magistrate under the provisions
             of the lapsed regulations will be deemed to have been remanded
             under the Prevention of Terrorism Act.


         Page 13-14:


         Under Section 9(1) of the PTA, people can be arrested without
         charge and detained for up to 18 months under a detention order
         issued by the Minister of Defence while police investigate the
         possibility of their involvement in illegal activity.  After
         release, the Defence Minister can issue additional orders
         restricting an individual's freedom of movement, association and
         expression (such as restricting travel or place of residence,
         prohibiting his or her involvement in organisations or preventing
         the individual from addressing public meetings).  These orders
         cannot be challenged in court.  Section 10 of the PTA states
         specifically that "an order made under section 9 shall be final and
         shall not be called in question in any court or tribunal by way of
         writ or otherwise."


         People arrested for investigation under the PTA by the police
         without a detention order from the Ministry of Defence must be
         brought before a magistrate within 72 hours, but the law does not
         give the Magistrate the power to question the lawfulness of the
         detention and it requires the magistrate to order the person to be
         detained under remand "until the conclusion of the trial": the law
         does not stipulate that the individual be charged with an offence
         first.  People have thus been held for years without charge or
         trial under this act, as they wait for detaining authorities to
         frame a case against them that often never materialises.  And given
         Sri Lanka's inefficient justice system, even individuals who are
         charged under the PTA have remained in detention for extremely
         prolonged periods - as long as 15 years - without being convicted.


         Page 49:


         Provided however, if no Detention Order in terms of Part III of the
         Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, No. 48 of 1979
         is issued prior to the expiration of the period of thirty days in
         respect of such person, such person shall forthwith be released
         from custody by the person in whose custody he is held, unless such
         person has been produced before a Magistrate and remanded under the
         provisions of Part II of the said Act, or any other law for the
         time being in force.


24. The evidence indicates that detention pursuant to a Detention Order and
    detention  on  remand  by  order  of  a  magistrate  are  two  distinct
    procedures and that the appellant's documents are consistent  with  the
    procedures described, namely detention pursuant to  a  Detention  Order
    issued under the PTA followed by an order from the magistrate when that
    Detention Order is cancelled, that she be detained on remand until  the
    conclusion of her case.

25. In failing to consider the documentary evidence in the context  of  the
    background material I consider that the judge erred.

26. Further, at para [42] the judge criticised the  appellant  for  various
    answers recorded in  the  interview  and  her  account  of  having  had
    difficulties with the interpreter during the course of  the  interview.
    He states:-

         "42.     She now  explains  that  her  replies  were  not  properly
             translated.  I accept that difficulties and  misunderstandings
             can occur when evidence is given through interpreters and that
             in this instance the interpreter acknowledged  having  made  a
             mistake  by  translating  'she'  for  'he',   Q88).    It   is
             nevertheless surprising that the interpreter made exactly  the
             same mistake twice in respect of both versions.  The appellant
             had a reason to want to change her evidence and  therefore  to
             blame the interpreter because the  respondent  had  identified
             the anomaly in her evidence in the refusal letter".


27. In suggesting that the appellant "had a reason to change  her  evidence
    and, therefore, to blame the interpreter  because  the  respondent  had
    identified the anomaly in her evidence in the refusal letter" fails  to
    note that the appellant had in fact corrected the  anomalies  prior  to
    the respondent's decision being received.  The solicitors sent a letter
    to the respondent on 1 April 2016 highlighting the various errors "made
    by the interpreter during the course of the interview". This was  three
    days after the interview which was held on 29 March 2016.

28. In failing to give consideration to material evidence the judge erred.

29. I would add that I find merit in the submission that the  judge  failed
    (at [41]) to consider the explanation at paras 18 and 19 of her witness
    statement why her landlord  had  requested  her  to  obtain  the  court
    document. If it was considered, no reasons were given for  why  it  was
    rejected.

30. I also find merit in the third point. At [38]  the  judge  stated  that
    counsel's  suggestion  that  the  CID  "might   have   engaged   in   a
    Machiavellian ploy to secure the appellant's removal by wrongly stating
    that the warrant is false is...speculative and does not justify  me  in
    rejecting the report out of hand." He continued (at [51]) "Despite  the
    limitations of the Ralon report, I am nonetheless  satisfied  that  the
    warrant is probably forged..."

31. In VT  (Article  22  Procedures  Directive-confidentiality)  Sri  Lanka
    [2017] UKUT  368  the  Upper  Tribunal  found:  (headnote)  (iii)  "The
    humanitarian principles  underpinning  Article  22  of  the  Procedures
    Directive prohibit direct contact with the alleged actor of persecution
    in the country of origin in a manner  that  might  alert  them  to  the
    likelihood that a protection claim has been made or in  a  manner  that
    might place applicants or their family members in the country of origin
    at risk."

32. It adds that redacting personal information and not making reference to
    the purpose of the enquiry might  protect  people  who  have  submitted
    false documents because if there is no  genuine  record  of  an  arrest
    warrant the authorities would not  be  able  to  identify  the  person.
    However, this method of enquiry "would not protect  those  who  have  a
    genuine arrest warrant issued against them" because the identity of the
    person will be known from the reference number [86].

33. Further, "...it is at least possible that the authorities might have  a
    motive to deny the existence of a warrant if they had a strong interest
    in arresting a person" The fact that the authorities have  confirmed  a
    document in one case "does not mean that weight can  be  given  to  the
    information provided in response to every verification request."[90]

34. The Tribunal concluded (at [91, 92]) by stating that the current method
    of enquiry with the authorities risked breaching  the  prohibitions  in
    Article 22 and is "unlikely to produce reliable  evidence  relating  to
    the authenticity of  the  document  in  question."  In  that  case  the
    Tribunal placed "little weight" on the evidence from the authorities.

35. It is not clear to me whether the judge was referred  to  VT.  However,
    very similar issues were raised in the skeleton argument. The judge did
    not engage with them. In failing to do so he erred in his  approach  to
    the verification evidence.

36. Further, I find merit in the claim that the judge failed to have regard
    to and make findings on the husband's evidence.

37. That he gave evidence is recorded at [28-32]. On  the  face  of  it  he
    corroborated important aspects of the  appellant's  evidence  including
    her arrest from the  airport  in  June  2014,  her  production  at  the
    Magistrates Court in Colombo, her remand in  Welikada  Prison  and  her
    release on bail.

38. Again, in failing to have regard to material evidence the judge erred.

39. I consider that these errors must taint the other findings made by  the
    judge such that the case must be reheard.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of  the
case is such that it is appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and of Practice Statement 7.2  to
remit the case to the First-Tier Tribunal  for  an  entirely  fresh  hearing
before a Judge other than Judge NJ Bennet.  No findings stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 26 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

