
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03457/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st January 2020                 |On 28th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MF
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Khan, of counsel, instructed by M & N
Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan  born  in  February  1990.  He
    arrived in the UK in 2003 as a dependent child with  his  family.  They
    claimed asylum at the port of entry. He was granted discretionary leave
    to remain and then, in June 2010, indefinite leave to remain.

 2.  On  13th  December  2016  the  claimant  was  convicted  of  supplying
    controlled drugs class A. He was sentenced to 2 years  and  six  months
    imprisonment. From the sentencing remarks it is clear that the claimant
    pleaded guilty to the charges and the sentencing judge  noted  that  he
    had expressed utter remorse. He was however found to have been involved
    with street dealing and to have had a significant  role  in  the  drugs
    dealing, and was sentenced accordingly.

 3. On 14th February 2017 the Secretary of State notified the claimant that
    he would be deported unless he could  show  that  he  fell  within  the
    exceptions at s.33 of the UK Borders Act 2007. The Secretary  of  State
    refused his human rights claim on 2nd March 2018.  His  appeal  against
    the decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge SJ  Clarke  in  a
    determination promulgated on the 28th June 2019

 4. Permission to appeal was granted and the Panel found  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law and set aside the decision allowing  the
    appeal.

 5. The matter now comes before me to remake the appeal.  I  preserve  from
    the First-tier Tribunal the following findings:

       . That the claimant had lived in the UK  lawfully  for  most  of  his
         life.

       . That the supply of class A drugs is a very serious offence and  the
         more serious  the  offence  the  greater  the  public  interest  in
         deportation.

       . That the claimant and his partner are currently in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship.

       . That the claimant has a genuine parental role with respect  to  his
         children.

 6. Mr Avery conceded:

       . That it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  claimant's  partner  and
         children to accompany him to Afghanistan if he were deported.

 7.  The factual issues which needed to be remade  were  agreed  to  be  as
    follows:

       . Whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  claimant's  partner  and
         children to remain in the UK without him whilst he is  deported  to
         Afghanistan.

       . Whether the claimant could relocate to Baghlan, his  home  area  of
         Afghanistan,  or  Kabul  without  very  significant  obstacles   to
         integration.

       . Whether the claimant has social and cultural integrative  links  in
         the UK.

    Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

 8. The key evidence of the claimant, as contained in his written statement
    and oral evidence, is as follows.

 9. He was born in 1990 and came to the UK in March 2003 with  his  parents
    and seven siblings, when he was 13 years old. He  did  not  obtain  any
    qualifications from his UK schooling as he  struggled  as  he  did  not
    speak English on arrival,  but  did  manage  to  obtain  some  level  1
    certificates in English, maths and  IT  from  college.   After  leaving
    college in 2005 until he started his prison sentence in January 2017 he
    did work in kitchens and in Tesco. The claimant said  that  during  the
    period 2014 to 2016 he was "lost" as he was addicted to class  A  drugs
    and drinking alcohol, during this time he lived  with  a  friend  in  a
    shared flat. In 2016 he was sentenced to  30  months  imprisonment  for
    supply of class A drugs namely  crack  cocaine  and  heroin,  with  the
    sentence starting in January 2017. In prison he did English  and  maths
    courses and learned skills to make himself more employable, and also  a
    parenting course.  After coming out of prison in May  2018  it  took  a
    number of months for him to get his work  permission  sorted  out,  but
    once he  had  this  he  started  work  immediately  getting  a  job  in
    McDonalds', then a job with an agency doing food packing and then  most
    recently with Wagamama as a kitchen porter. He has temporarily given up
    work as his wife needed help with his son  M  due  to  his  behavioural
    issues in the context of the birth of his son Z in December 2019.

10. He says that after leaving school he became a  fluent  English  speaker
    and has adopted the life-style and culture of the UK.  He  says  he  is
    without a network of support in Afghanistan as all of his family are in
    this country, and could be  easily  spotted  as  a  foreigner  in  that
    country due to his mannerisms. His grandparents have all  passed  away.
    He has two paternal uncles: one in the UK and one  in  France  and  his
    paternal aunts have all died. His extended maternal family all lived in
    other villages in Afghanistan, and he has never had  any  contact  with
    them, and his mother does not know where they are either. There was  no
    electricity in his home village,  and  so  no  phone  or  social  media
    contact. He had no education  in  Afghanistan:  there  was  no  village
    school and no education via the  mosque.  The  religious  and  cultural
    understanding he has came from  his  mother.  He  is  not  literate  in
    Pashto, but can speak it to a moderate level. The only work he  did  in
    Afghanistan was helping with the family goats and sheep, and  on  their
    subsistence small holding.

11. The claimant met his partner in 2005 at school, they re-met in 2012 and
    they became partners in 2014.Their first child, M, was born in December
    2014, and so is five years old, and their second child, Z, was born  in
    December 2019. His partner has a degree which she finished in 2014/2015
    and wants to do a teaching course but has not  been  able  to  complete
    this. His children are both British citizens. He has played a  role  in
    bringing up  his  oldest  child  as  his  partner  was  unwell  with  a
    miscarriage in 2016, spending time in hospital, and at  that  time  and
    generally he provided some help to care for his son prior to his  being
    sentenced to his term of imprisonment.

12. The claimant's partner is currently on maternity  leave  following  the
    birth  of  Z,  and  normally  works  in  a  school  doing  lunch   time
    supervision/teaching assistant work.

13. Since he came  out  of  prison  in  May  2018  he  has  played  a  more
    significant role with children M and Z. M started  reception  class  at
    school in September 2019. The claimant does not  officially  live  with
    his partner as firstly he was not allowed to because of  the  terms  of
    his probation which were that he live with his  parents,  and  secondly
    because the flat is a small one bedroom flat which is now  overcrowded.
    However he goes there every day: typically in the week he will go there
    at about 1pm and then stay until about 9pm, enabling him to collect his
    son from school where he is in reception at Brentford school; help with
    preparing food and at supper time; read to him and put him to bed,  and
    at the weekends he might stay over and help throughout the day and take
    M to clubs such as swimming and martial arts. Sometimes his  wife  will
    call him, and he will go over earlier on a week day to get M ready  for
    school, but it takes an hour and a half to travel to  his  wife's  flat
    from his parents home.

14. The claimant says that he currently plays a very  important  role  with
    his son, M, as he has behavioural problems and hyperactivity, and is  a
    very picky eater. He did feel that he had some problems  as  a  toddler
    but since he came out of prison these are now much  more  obvious,  and
    since they had their second child, Z, they are much more pronounced and
    problematic. Initially he  thought  that  these  problems  were  within
    normal bounds but now he does not believe they are.   If  M  feels  his
    needs are not being instantly met he cries, screams, throws things  and
    sometimes hits his own head. They cannot take  him  shopping  or  to  a
    restaurant due to his behaviour and they have instead  tried  to  leave
    him to the children's club at IKEA and then go out  themselves  to  eat
    (although on the last occasion this did not work). They have  a  family
    support worker, sent by Social Services, who visited a few times whilst
    he was in prison and is now going to do a formal assessment on  M  next
    week. The claimant feels that his partner cannot handle  M  as  M  just
    shouts and screams at her and threatens to hit Z. It takes  him  giving
    his whole attention to M to engage him and calm him; and in addition he
    uses star charts to encourage good behaviour with rewards. He and M now
    have a strong bond, and M expresses a preference that the claimant help
    him and take him to things rather than his mother. M's school are  also
    expressing concerns about his behaviour there.

15. The claimant argues that other family members could  not  take  on  his
    role with M, helping his partner to cope with the two children, as they
    have too much else they have to do. His parents still have a 6 year old
    child of their own; and his in-laws have a  daughter  with  autism  who
    they have to care for. They are all too busy to provide the support his
    wife needs  with  M,  and  struggle  with  coping  with  M's  behaviour
    themselves.  They do have regular contact with  his  mother-in-law  who
    sometimes cooks them food which he collects,  speaks  to  them  on  the
    phone or comes to visit. He is not really close to  his  father-in-law.
    He also helps out and supports his wider family of father,  mother  and
    seven siblings, all of whom are younger than him ranging from 25  years
    to 6 years. His parents and siblings who remain at home are reliant  on
    universal credit.

16. If he were to return to Afghanistan the claimant would not be  able  to
    meet his children in a third country as  neither  he  nor  his  partner
    would have funds to travel. He believes it would also be dangerous  for
    him to return to Afghanistan due to the war particularly  in  his  home
    area of Baghlan, and says that he would not be able to live there as he
    has never lived there as an adult and does not have the  skills  to  do
    so. He also does not believe he could work cooking Afghan cuisine as he
    is used to cooking English food and does not know Afghan dishes.

17. The key evidence of Ms RR, partner of the appellant, is that she  is  a
    British citizen born in 1991 in Isleworth. Her family are  of  Egyptian
    origin and her parents have lived in the UK since  1974.  She  met  the
    claimant at school in 2005, and they became friends again in  2012  and
    partners in 2014. The appellant did a bit of looking after their child,
    M, up to his being 2 years old and before the claimant went  to  prison
    but mostly she was helped by her mother when her sister was at  school.
    She confirms that she and the claimant are now a  strong  family  unit,
    the family language is English, and that the claimant cared for M  when
    she was in hospital having a miscarriage in July 2016 where she had  to
    have two blood transfusions, and the claimant has spent a lot  of  time
    with her, M and Z in the living arrangements as described above in  his
    evidence since coming out of prison in May 2018.

18. Their son M has severe behavioural issues which have been present  over
    the past year and a half but have become much worse since the birth  of
    Z. Z had a traumatic birth as he stopped breathing during the  delivery
    and had to spend time in intensive care M  is  hyperactive  and  cannot
    follow instructions. He has thrown things at Z, and is  behaving  in  a
    way which is beyond normal sibling jealousy. It is very difficult to do
    anything such as shopping with M, or get him ready for  school  or  bed
    without the assistance of the claimant. If the claimant were not in the
    country she would struggle with these basics and could not  take  M  to
    his extracurricular activities at the weekend. She confirmed  that  the
    family support worker is coming to do an observation  assessment  of  M
    next week having met her for an appointment at which she discussed  her
    concerns. There is, as yet, no diagnosis or plan. She could not  attend
    her first parents evening for M as she was in hospital with  Z  but  is
    aware that the teachers are also concerned about his behaviour.

19. The claimant's partner's view is that their children M and Z  would  be
    terribly impacted if the claimant were deported and they remained  here
    because their children would lose their father. She could not meet  the
    claimant in Pakistan as she does not speak Urdu or Punjabi either,  and
    she has no funds for such trips. She could not turn to her parents  for
    help with Z and M as she has a 19 year old sister with autism, ADHD and
    special needs and they have their own responsibilities. She cannot take
    Z there as her sister wants to pick him up and can be a danger to  him.
    She does sometimes provide some care to her sister to help  her  mother
    when the claimant can care for their kids, and her mother does cook for
    them sometimes and they go and  collect  the  food  but  generally  her
    mother has not been able to help her with her children,  M  and  Z,  as
    much as she would have liked. There have been  periods  where  she  has
    only spoken to her mother on the phone, for instance  over  the  summer
    holidays, due to the difficulties with her sister's behaviour and there
    was a period when her mother told her sister that she lived abroad, and
    her sister is still not aware of her address. She likes her  mother-in-
    law and the claimant's older sister but  she  cannot  communicate  with
    them without the claimant translating as they do not speak English  and
    she cannot speak Pashto. In addition, none of them can really cope with
    M's behavioural problems

20.  Mr  Avery  relies  upon  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.  The  key
    submissions relevant to the issues that I must decide that  arise  from
    this document and which Mr Avery set out in  oral  submissions  are  as
    follows.

21. It would not be unduly harsh for the claimant's wife  and  children,  M
    and Z, to remain in the UK as they could be assisted  by  his  extended
    family in the UK and there is no medical evidence that the impact on  M
    and Z would be  more  than  the  normal  effects  of  deportation.  The
    behaviour of M is simply normal  jealousy  following  the  birth  of  a
    sibling, and in any case the claimant is not  living  with  his  family
    full time. There was a degree of exaggeration of their family  life  as
    the claimant gave evidence regarding them going out as a  family  which
    his wife denied had happened.

22. It is not  accepted  that  the  claimant  is  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in  the  UK  due  to  his  criminal  convictions  for  drugs
    offences, and the lack of  evidence  of  employment  and  any  positive
    contribution to the community made by him. Further it is  not  accepted
    that the claimant would have very significant obstacles to  integration
    in Afghanistan because he speaks Pashto; he is aware of Afghan  culture
    from his mother; he spent the first  13  years  of  his  life  in  that
    country and has memories of living in the village in  Baghlan;  he  has
    transferrable skills as a chef/ kitchen assistant that he could use  in
    Kabul or alternatively he could work for  another  family  on  a  small
    holding in the village. There is no strong evidence that he would be at
    risk as someone who is westernised or evidence that this is the case.

23. It is not accepted that there are  any  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above  the  exceptions  to  deportation  as  he  has  criminal
    convictions for supplying class A drugs and for shop-lifting in another
    identity. Whilst he has extended family in the UK there is no  evidence
    that the relationships he has with this family show  dependency  beyond
    more than normal emotional ties.

24. Mr Avery submitted that the appeal should therefore be dismissed.

25. Mr Khan argued that the witnesses  were  both  credible  as  they  were
    essentially consistent and plausible in their evidence.

26. Mr Khan argued that the claimant was socially integrated in the UK.  He
    had given his evidence in fluent  English  which  is  his  language  of
    choice; his entire education had taken place  in  the  UK;  his  entire
    family and private life was in the UK; and his work bar a small  amount
    of family assistance as a child of 13 years on their small  holding  in
    Afghanistan had been in the UK. Since his release from prison  in  mid-
    2018 he had focused all his attention on his family,  and  particularly
    his children, and on legitimate work.

27. Mr Khan argued that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  the
    claimant integrating in Afghanistan. He referred me to the EASO Country
    Guidance Afghanistan report dated June 2019  and  particularly  to  the
    section regarding  Baghlan  regarding  the  security  situation,  which
    stated that there was indiscriminate violence in  that  area.  He  said
    that the claimant could not go to Kabul because he had no knowledge  of
    that place, never having been there, and no network or  family  support
    there either. Whilst the claimant speaks Pashto he is not  literate  in
    that language, and could not receive remittances from  his  parents  in
    the UK who are reliant on universal credit or his wife who  has  a  low
    income and two children to support. As a  result,  he  would  not  have
    anything  like  a  full  and  active  private  life  if   returned   to
    Afghanistan.

28. Mr Khan argued that it would be unduly harsh to return the claimant  to
    Afghanistan whilst his family remain in the UK because the issues  with
    his child, M, are beyond the normal ones. It is not only  the  claimant
    and his wife who are worried, Social Services and the school  are  also
    concerned so clearly this is beyond normal jealousy  and  misbehaviour.
    The issues go back to prior  to  the  claimant  going  to  prison.  The
    evidence of the claimant's current extensive  caring  role  with  M  is
    consistent. Without the claimant his partner would struggle  profoundly
    to care for the two children, and this would impact  on  all  three  of
    them. There is not an alternative source of support for his partner  as
    her mother  has  to  deal  with  an  autistic  daughter  with  learning
    difficulties  and  ADHD,  and  has  had  to  pretend   the   claimant's
    partner/wife lives  abroad  as  this  daughter  cannot  be  around  the
    children safely.  The claimant's partner cannot turn to her in-laws  if
    he were deported as she cannot communicate with  her  mother-in-law  as
    they do not have a common language and also because  her  mother-in-law
    has her own six year old child. Further whilst the grandparents love  M
    and Z they cannot deal with M's behavioural problems  in  the  way  the
    claimant can.

29. The appeal should therefore be allowed.

30. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

    Conclusions - Remaking

31. The claimant might succeed in this Article 8 ECHR deportation appeal in
    one of three ways.

32. Firstly, the claimant might succeed in this appeal by showing  that  it
    would be a breach of right to respect to private  life  to  deport  him
    because he can meet the requirements of the exception to deportation at
    s.117C(4) of  the  2002  Act,  by  showing  that  he  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated  in  the  UK  and  would  have  very  significant
    obstacles to integration if returned to Afghanistan, and thus  be  able
    to meet the first exception to deportation as it is  accepted  that  he
    has been lawfully present in the UK for most of his life.

33.  In CI (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 the Court of Appeal  held:
    "In assessing whether a "foreign criminal" is "socially and  culturally
    integrated in the UK", it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the
    rationale behind the test is to determine whether the person  concerned
    has established a private life in the UK which has a substantial  claim
    to protection under Article 8. The test should therefore be interpreted
    and applied having regard to the interests protected by the concept  of
    "private life.""  It  is  further  said  that:  "Relevant  social  ties
    obviously include relationships with friends and relatives, as well  as
    ties formed through employment or other paid or unpaid work or  through
    participation  in  communal  activities.  However,  a  person's  social
    identity is not defined solely by such particular relationships but  is
    constituted at a deep level by familiarity with  and  participation  in
    the shared customs, traditions, practices, beliefs, values,  linguistic
    idioms and other local knowledge which situate a person in a society or
    social group and generate a  sense  of  belonging.  The  importance  of
    upbringing and education in the formation of a person's social identity
    is well  recognised,  and  its  importance  in  the  context  of  cases
    involving the Article 8 rights of persons facing expulsion  because  of
    criminal offending has been recognised by the European Court." And with
    respect to the impact of criminality on social and cultural integration
    it is said: "Clearly, however, the impact of offending and imprisonment
    upon a person's integration in this country will depend not only on the
    nature and frequency of the offending, the length of time over which it
    takes place and the length of time spent in prison, but also on whether
    and how deeply the individual was socially and culturally integrated in
    the UK to begin with. In that regard, a person who  has  lived  all  or
    almost all his life in the  UK,  has  been  educated  here,  speaks  no
    language other than (British) English and has no familiarity  with  any
    other society or culture will start with  much  deeper  roots  in  this
    country than someone who has moved here at a later age. It is  hard  to
    see how  criminal  offending  and  imprisonment  could  ordinarily,  by
    themselves and unless associated with the breakdown  of  relationships,
    destroy the social and cultural integration  of  someone  whose  entire
    social identity has been formed in the UK."

34. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA  Civ
    813 the Court of  Appeal  considered  the  following  with  respect  to
    whether  a  claimant  would  have   very   significant   obstacles   to
    integration: "The idea of "integration" calls for  a  broad  evaluative
    judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of  an
    insider in terms of understanding how life in the society in that other
    country is carried on and a capacity to participate in  it,  so  as  to
    have a reasonable opportunity to be  accepted  there,  to  be  able  to
    operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build up within  a
    reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance  to
    the individual's private or family life."

35. Secondly, the claimant might succeed in this appeal by showing that  it
    would be a disproportionate interference with his right to  respect  to
    family life as it would be unduly harsh for his partner and children to
    remain in the UK without him whilst he returns to Afghanistan, and thus
    that he can meet the second exception to deportation  at  s.117C(5)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It  is  accepted  on
    behalf of the respondent by Mr Avery that it would be unduly harsh  for
    his partner and children to accompany him to  Afghanistan  and  I  have
    preserved the finding that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with his partner and a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with his children. Despite  the  submission  of  Mr  Avery  that  their
    relationship is "unusual" I do not find that there is  evidence  before
    me that upsets these  preserved  findings.  There  was  no  substantial
    difference in the evidence of the claimant and his partner with respect
    to the time they spend together as a family, which I find  to  be  very
    substantial, or indeed  what  they  do  together.  The  fact  that  the
    claimant's wife did not mention an abortive attempt to have dinner  out
    at Nandos I find to be of no significance at all.

36. Applying KO (Nigeria) & Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53 what is needed to be shown  is  that,  solely
    focusing on the impact on the partner and children, that the claimant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh and go beyond the normal sad  effects
    of deportation on them such as splitting the family and  causing  upset
    by virtue of this fact. The interpretation of unduly harsh set  out  in
    MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]
    UKUT 223 is that: "'unduly harsh' does not equate  with  uncomfortable,
    inconvenient, undesirable or  merely  difficult.  Rather,  it  poses  a
    considerably more elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this context,  denotes
    something severe, or  bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
    comfortable".

37. Thirdly the claimant might, if neither exception  applies,  succeed  in
    this appeal  because  he  can  show  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above these exceptions that make his deportation
    a disproportionate interference with his right to respect to family and
    private life, applying s.117C(6) of the 2002 Act  as  per  RA  (s.117C:
    "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC),  in
    this process the seriousness of  the  claimant's  offence  will  be  of
    relevance and the outcome will  be  assessed  most  profitably  with  a
    balance sheet approach.

38. I  am  satisfied  that  the  claimant  and  his  partner  are  credible
    witnesses. Their evidence was detailed  and  showed  a  high  level  of
    consistency over the most relevant issues such as the  normal  schedule
    of time that the claimant spends with his family given that  he  mostly
    sleeps at his parents house, and the type of assistance he provides  in
    the care of their oldest child M, and the history of  issues  with  the
    behaviour of M and current interventions by the family  support  worker
    and concerns of the school. Both witnesses had  detailed  knowledge  of
    the extended family of their partner. I find that they continue  to  be
    in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,  and  that  the  claimant
    continues to have a genuine and subsisting parental role with  both  of
    his children.

39. I will firstly consider whether the requirements of  the  exception  to
    deportation relating to private life with reference to  the  claimant's
    evidence are met. The claimant is accepted as having lived lawfully  in
    the UK for the majority of his life. I find that  he  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK for the following reasons. He has lived
    in the UK since he was a 13 year old child;  he  is  a  fluent  English
    speaker in a relationship where the family language is English with his
    partner being a British citizen who was born in the  UK;  he  has  been
    educated only in English and that is the only language in which  he  is
    literate; he has worked in a wide variety of English  settings;  he  is
    currently leading a normal socially integrated life centred around work
    and family. There was undoubtedly a period of two  years  between  2014
    and 2016, candidly referred to by the claimant as a time  when  he  was
    "lost", and a drug  addict  who  was  abusing  alcohol  and  committing
    serious crime, which was followed by a period from January 2017 to  May
    2018 when he was in prison. During this time he was  not  socially  and
    culturally integrated but I find that this time is now behind him,  and
    since leaving prison in May 2018, so for the past  20  months,  he  has
    become an integrated citizen once again, as he was from 2005  to  2014,
    as I find that he has resumed his normal social and cultural ties  with
    the UK.

40. I find that the claimant does have a number of attributes  which  might
    generally mean that it was  not  the  case  that  he  would  have  very
    significant obstacles to integration if  returned  to  his  country  of
    nationality and origin, Afghanistan. He does have memories of living in
    the village in Baghlan; his  parents  still  communicate  with  him  in
    Pashto and he has sufficient ability in that language to mean  that  he
    could start the process of integration and having a social life by  way
    of making friends and obtaining work; he has transferrable work  skills
    in kitchen/ restaurant work and would be able to learn the relevant new
    cooking techniques or do unskilled labouring or  farm  work  as  a  fit
    young man. I now turn however  to  look  at  these  attributes  in  the
    context of the country of origin situation in Afghanistan.

41. I am satisfied that the claimant would have very significant  obstacles
    to the integration in his  home  area  of  Baghlan  for  the  following
    reasons. There is a situation of indiscriminate violence in  that  area
    of Afghanistan. I find that I can rely upon the evidence  in  the  EASO
    report Country Guidance: Afghanistan June 2019 at page 91 to 92 of that
    report as a reliable source of evidence. Whilst  the  evidence  is  not
    found to be sufficient to cause a real risk of serious harm to  satisfy
    Article 15 (c),  I  am  satisfied  that  the  different  test  of  very
    significant obstacles to integration is met  as  the  majority  of  the
    districts in Baghlan are contested  with  one  under  Taliban  control;
    there is a high Taliban presence; there were 261 civilian casualties in
    this area in 2018; and more importantly 13,491  people  were  displaced
    during the period January 2018  to  February  2019.  I  find  that  the
    claimant would not have financial assistance from the UK as none of the
    UK family has funds for this, his wife being low paid and  his  parents
    on universal credit, and so this could not ameliorate his situation  in
    Baghlan in any way. I am satisfied that he could not have  a  semblance
    of normal private life  ties  in  this  area  despite  his  having  the
    attributes I outline at paragraph 40 as he would like many others would
    be at real risk of displacement due to the violence there.

42. The Upper Tribunal found in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2018]
    UKUT 00118 (IAC) that it will not be generally unduly harsh to expect a
    young healthy man without accompanying dependants to relocate to  Kabul
    even without remittance support or a connection there.  However,  there
    has been a partially successful appeal to the Court of  Appeal  against
    this decision, in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ   873,  which
    required this conclusion to be revisited by  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
    reference  to  the  latest  (2018)  UNHCR  report  which  unequivocally
    concluded that relocation to Kabul,  in  an  asylum  context,  was  not
    reasonably available and by reference to the correct statistic for  the
    number of persons killed or  injured  in  armed  conflict  or  security
    incidents in Kabul. This remitted  appeal  has  not  yet  been  finally
    determined by the Upper Tribunal.

43. According to the EASO report there were 1866  casualties  in  Kabul  in
    2018. I am of course applying a different legal test but given the data
    examined by UNHCR in their report on Afghanistan dated June 2018, which
    led to the conclusion that internal flight  should  not  be  considered
    reasonably available to those with a real risk of serious harm in their
    home area, I  find  that  the  claimant  would  have  very  significant
    obstacles to integration in Kabul for the following reasons.  It  is  a
    place he has never visited and has no family or  community  connections
    with. In the 2018 UNHCR report it says: "UNHCR notes that civilians who
    partake in day-to-day economic  and  social  activities  in  Kabul  are
    exposed to a risk of falling victim to the  generalized  violence  that
    affects the city. Such activities including include travelling  to  and
    from  a  place  of  work,  travelling  to  hospitals  and  clinics,  or
    travelling to school; livelihood activities  that  take  place  in  the
    city's streets, such as street vending; as well as  going  to  markets,
    mosques and other places where people gather." UNHCR  also  finds  that
    70% of people in Kabul live in informal settlements, with:  "Population
    growth in  the  city  is  outpacing  the  city's  capacity  to  provide
    necessary infrastructure, services and jobs to citizens";  and  55%  of
    those living in those settlements are severely food insecure. The  view
    of UNHCR in this 2018 report is upheld and indeed strengthened in their
    submissions dated 6th December 2019 to  the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights in the case  of  MJ  v  Netherlands  (application  49259/18)  as
    security incidents are noted to have further increased over the  period
    January to September 2019; they record a deterioration  in  the  socio-
    economic conditions in Kabul with an even worse  situation  as  regards
    the lack of accommodation and infrastructure; and  note  evidence  that
    they clearly regard as credible that deported Afghans are  particularly
    vulnerable to experiencing violence and difficulty accessing the labour
    market. I find that if returned to Kabul that  the  claimant  would  be
    likely to be returned to live in an informal settlement; that he  would
    be likely to struggle to find employment and be severely food insecure;
    and that he would be at risk of being a victim of violence. I find that
    this satisfies the test that he would have very  significant  obstacles
    to integration as in this context, even with the attributes set out  at
    paragraph 40, he would not be able to establish the basics of a private
    life in Afghanistan.

44. As such my conclusion  is  that  the  claimant  can  meet  all  of  the
    requirements  of  s.117C(4)  of  the  2002  Act,  and  as  such  whilst
    significant weight  must  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminal,  and  I  fully  acknowledge  that  the
    claimant committed a serious crime relating to the supply  of  class  A
    drugs,  I  find  that  his  deportation  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect to private life as protected  by
    Article 8 ECHR.

45. For completeness I go on to consider  whether  he  can  also  meet  the
    requirements of s.117C (5) of the 2002 Act and show that he  meets  the
    exception to deportation based on family life ties. The issue,  as  set
    out by reference to the guidance cases above, is whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh (as properly defined above) to his  children  and  partner
    for him to be deported whilst they remain in the UK. It  plainly  would
    not be in the best interests of his children for him  to  be  deported:
    the evidence before me is that since leaving prison  he  has  been  and
    continues to be a good father. He is not simply someone  who  genuinely
    has a parental relationship with those children but is  also  a  father
    who has plays a significant role in their upbringing, and is willing to
    prioritise their well-being over his employment and make them the  most
    important and major focus of his day to day life. The  test  of  unduly
    harsh is one which, however, requires  evidence  that  his  deportation
    would  go  beyond  the  normal  effects  of  deportation  which   would
    predictably leave those children bereft and  saddened  that  this  good
    father is no longer in their lives. The test can only  be  met  if  the
    outlook for them would be severe and bleak and not merely difficult and
    undesirable in his absence.

46. I accept that this is a case in which I have no expert evidence on  the
    behavioural problems that M is exhibiting, but this is not because  the
    claimant has not asked for this it is because it is not  yet  available
    as the family support worker has not yet  completed  her  investigation
    and M is only in his second term of school. I have  however  found  the
    evidence of claimant and his partner credible, and it  is  relevant,  I
    find, that his partner has played a caring role for her sister who  has
    learning difficulties, ADHD and autism as  well  as  having  experience
    working in a school and so her opinion with respect to  her  son  M  is
    informed by a context of being exposed to  normal  children  and  those
    with identifiable difficulties which go beyond the  regular  issues  of
    sibling rivalry, toddler tantrums and normal misbehaviour. I also  find
    it relevant that the claimant gave up his work at Wagamama despite  the
    family being on a low income as the difficulties his partner was facing
    dealing with the children alone and the  severity  of  M's  behavioural
    problems could only be  addressed  by  his  being  there.  It  is  also
    supportive of the claimant and his partner's evidence that  the  family
    support worker is investigating this matter through observation  of  M,
    indicating that the problems could not be addressed  simply  by  advice
    and parenting techniques such as star charts, which  the  claimant  has
    already tried as a response; and also that  the  school  has  expressed
    concerns about M's behaviour even though he is in  the  early  days  of
    settling into school in the reception class.

47. I am satisfied  on  the  evidence  before  me  that  M's  behaviour  is
    currently such that it  is  would  be  extremely  problematic  for  the
    claimant's partner to safely care for her baby Z and M at the same time
    and do basic household management such as shopping and cooking  without
    support. I find if she were to be placed in a position where she had to
    do this her life and that of her two children would indeed be bleak and
    not just merely difficult. This is because M's behaviour is  physically
    threatening to Z and preventative of normal  and  necessary  activities
    such as shopping. I do not find that the claimant's partner can turn to
    family for this extra help: her parents have  her  disabled  sister  to
    care for and her in-laws have their own young child of 6, live one  and
    a half hours away, are existing on universal credit and her  mother-in-
    law and her do not have a common  language.  It  is  also  questionable
    whether the grandparents would be able to  deal  with  M's  challenging
    behaviour. I also find that the claimant's partner is not in a position
    to pay for such support as she is  on  a  low  income  as  a  lunchtime
    supervisor and teaching assistant in a school on maternity  leave;  and
    that the wider family do not have financial resources to assist her  in
    this way either.

48. In light of the above,  and  in  the  context  of  my  finding  that  M
    currently has severe behavioural problems and that Z, is  clearly  very
    vulnerable due to his young age, I find that it would be  unduly  harsh
    for the claimant's partner and children M and Z to  remain  in  the  UK
    whilst he is deported to Afghanistan. As it is conceded that  it  would
    be unduly harsh for them to accompany him to Afghanistan, I  find  that
    the requirements  of  the  family  life  exception  to  deportation  at
    s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act are met, and thus whilst  acknowledging  that
    significant weight  must  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals, and that  the  claimant  committed  a
    serious crime related to the supply of illegal class A  drugs,  I  find
    that his deportation would also be a disproportionate interference with
    his right to respect to family life as protected by Article 8 ECHR.

49. In these circumstances I do not need to go on to consider whether there
    are compelling compassionate circumstances over and above the exception
    to deportation as they are found to be met  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above.




    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. The Panel set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. I remake the appeal by allowing it on human rights grounds.




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant/  now  the  claimant.  This  direction  applies  to,
    amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction
    could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so in  order  to
    avoid a likelihood of harm arising to the claimant's children.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 22nd January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan  born  in  February  1990.  He
    arrived in the UK in 2003 and claimed asylum at the port of  entry.  He
    was granted discretionary leave  to  remain,  and  then  in  June  2010
    indefinite leave to remain. On 13th December  2016  the  appellant  was
    convicted of supplying a controlled drug class A. He was sentenced to 2
    years and six months imprisonment. On 14th February 2017 the  Secretary
    of State notified him that he would be deported unless  he  could  show
    that he fell within the exceptions at s.33 of the UK Borders Act  2007.
    The Secretary of State refused his human  rights  claim  on  2nd  March
    2018. His  appeal  against  the  decision  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge SJ Clarke in a determination  promulgated  on  the  28th
    June 2019

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bristow
    on 19th July 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier
    Judge had erred in law in considering that it would be unduly harsh for
    the appellant's partner and child to remain in the UK without him. This
    was because it is arguable that the decision was based  solely  on  the
    fact that it would break up the family, and therefore that there was  a
    failure to apply the proper unduly harsh test set out in KO (Nigeria) v
    SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

 3. The matter came before us to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

    Submissions - Error of Law

 4. In the grounds of appeal, skeleton argument  and  oral  submission  the
    Secretary of State argues as follows.

 5. Firstly it is said that it was not  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to conclude that  the  claimant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner and child at paragraphs 11 and 12 of  the
    decision, when a social worker had said in a report  of  December  2017
    that the relationship was on and off and he had not done much  for  his
    son.  The claimant's name is not on his child's birth  certificate  and
    the positive findings about family outings were not sufficient to reach
    this conclusion. There was no evidence of  significant  and  meaningful
    positive engagement with the son  to  find  that  the  claimant  had  a
    parental relationship with him.

 6. Secondly, it is argued that when considering the unduly harsh test  the
    seriousness and nature of the offending is not to be taken into account
    but it is a high test going beyond what would necessarily  be  involved
    for any child faced with the deportation of a parent, see KO (Nigeria).
    Harsh is defined in MK (Sierra Leone)  [2015]  UKUT  223  as  something
    severe or bleak. The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  circumstances
    in Afghanistan were such that the family would be broken up,  and  that
    alone was the reason the deportation would be  unduly  harsh.  This  is
    insufficient; there was also a failure to consider why the  appellant's
    partner and son could not live with him in Afghanistan; and  a  failure
    to consider whether the family could meet from time to time in a  third
    country such as Pakistan if they remained  in  the  UK  whilst  he  was
    deported. The context for the decision-making was that the appellant no
    longer claims to have a fear of persecution in Afghanistan  so  it  was
    open to him to return to his home area of Baghlan as well as Kabul.

 7. Thirdly, it is  argued  that  the  finding  that  he  would  have  very
    significant obstacles to integration in Afghanistan, and  so  satisfied
    the private life immigration rules, was also not open to the First-tier
    Tribunal. It was found that he would have such  obstacles  due  to  his
    arrival in the UK at a young age, see paragraph  16  of  the  decision.
    This was an insufficient finding given the test as set out  in  SSHD  v
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 was that he needed to show that he would not
    be able to integrate on return, which meant that he would have to  show
    that he would not have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be  accepted  in
    Afghanistan, operate on a day to day basis and building up a variety of
    human relationships.  Further,  he  needed  to  show  very  significant
    obstacles to this integration, which means more than mere  hardship  or
    inconvenience. As the claimant has worked in the UK, has some relatives
    in Afghanistan, speaks Pashto and has some cultural links, and  has  no
    health problems it was not rational of the First-tier Tribunal to  have
    found that he met this test.

 8. Fourthly, it is argued that the claimant is not socially and culturally
    integrated in the UK applying the test set out in Binbuga  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 551, as this means that  he  must  hold  the  core  values,  ideas,
    customs and social behaviour of the UK. The findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal were insufficient to meet this test as they were that  through
    his work he had started to integrate, see paragraphs 13 and 15  of  the
    decision.

 9. Fifthly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  consider
    the public interest as set out at s.117C(1) and (2), which was relevant
    given the claimant's drugs conviction.

10. Mr Khan pointed to issues with the claimant's wife being  pregnant  and
    having miscarriages as being relevant to whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for her and her child to remain in the UK without  the  claimant,
    and said that there was no evidence as to whether they would be able to
    meet him in a third country or maintain contact via  social  media.  He
    accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had not looked at  the  issue  of
    relocation to the home area when considering whether the claimant would
    have very significant obstacles to integration if he was deported,  but
    argued that the decision that he was socially and culturally integrated
    was properly made as the First-tier Tribunal had built on the probation
    evidence set  out  at  paragraph  13  and  added  the  claimant's  long
    residence and current work to find that he was currently integrated.

11. At the end of the hearing we informed the parties that  we  found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and would set out our  reasons
    in writing. Both representatives were content that we remake the appeal
    in the Upper Tribunal, and were in agreement that the remaking  hearing
    should be adjourned to another day as the claimant was with his wife in
    hospital as she had given birth prematurely.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

12. The Secretary of State accepts that the claimant has lived  in  the  UK
    lawfully for most of his life, see paragraph 5 of the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

13. We find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  given  weight  to  the
    public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals, and  the  fact
    that the more serious the offence the greater the  public  interest  in
    deportation. At paragraph 8 of the decision, it is clearly stated  that
    the supply of class A drugs is a very serious offence which  undermines
    society and that the Judge has full considered the  serious  nature  of
    his criminal activity through the decision.

14. With respect to the family life exception to deportation we  find  that
    it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that  the  claimant  and
    his partner were currently in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,
    particularly as his partner has had three miscarriages since the  birth
    of their son and was currently pregnant, as recorded at paragraph 11 of
    the decision. There is careful consideration  of  the  email  from  the
    social worker dated 6th December 2017 which stated that  at  that  time
    the relationship was "on and off" and the claimant had  not  done  much
    for his son in the past, see paragraph 10 of the decision, but  it  was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal to  find  that  the  relationships  had
    moved on in a positive way and he was now fulfilling a parental role in
    his son's life based on the oral evidence at the  appeal,  particularly
    as the claimant  and  his  partner  were  both  found  to  be  credible
    witnesses, see paragraphs 9 to 12 of the decision.

15. However we find that it was undoubtedly an error of law for the  First-
    tier Tribunal to have found, at paragraph 14 of the decision,  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner and child  to  remain
    in the UK whilst he was deported as this  would  break  up  the  family
    unit, as this does not properly apply  the  judgement  of  the  Supreme
    Court in  KO (Nigeria), which found that something more than the normal
    consequences of deportation was needed to show that the deportation was
    unduly harsh. As such the conclusion that the appeal should be  allowed
    on the Article 8 ECHR family life grounds is materially flawed.

16. With respect to the findings relating to the  claimant's  private  life
    the First-tier Tribunal finds that return to Afghanistan would lead  to
    the  claimant  having  very  significant  obstacles   to   integration,
    notwithstanding the fact that the claimant speaks Pashto and  has  some
    cultural ties, because of the UNHCR guidelines from  30th  August  2018
    which  states  that  there  is  no   reasonable   internal   relocation
    alternative to Kabul. There is however no consideration as  to  whether
    the applicant could reasonably relocate to his  home  area  of  Baghlan
    without very significant  obstacles  to  integration.  The  grounds  of
    appeal correctly identify that there is therefore an incompleteness  in
    the reasoning in paragraphs 15 and 16 of the decision as this  material
    consideration has not been addressed.

17. There was also a failure, when considering the appeal on  private  life
    grounds, to consider the claimant's  social  and  cultural  integrative
    links in the light of his offending. At paragraph 13 of the decision it
    is said that he is now starting to integrate in the UK  and  can  speak
    English which would indicate that the test has not yet been fully met.

18. Thus, we find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in finding that  these
    two elements of the private life exception to deportation were  met  as
    there is insufficient reasoning to reach this conclusion,  as  well  as
    erring in the application of the unduly harsh family life exception.




    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      3. We adjourn the remaking hearing.




    Directions

      1. The remaking of the appeal will take place at 10am on 21st  January
         2020

      2. Any new evidence from either party  to  be  filed  with  the  Upper
         Tribunal and served on the  other  party  by  4pm  on  Friday  10th
         January 2020.




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of harm arising to the claimant's child.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 26th November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

