
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03472/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 January 2019                            |On 30 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                  M I E H A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against   the
    Secretary of State's decision of 26 February 2018 refusing asylum.  The
    judge dismissed his appeal.  The appellant sought permission to  appeal
    that decision, and in a letter of  13  September  2018  the  respondent
    invited the Upper Tribunal  to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a further hearing.

2.   In the notice of decision sent  out  on  30  October  2018  Judge  Blum
    indicated that he was minded to find an error of  law,  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the case  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. He directed that any party opposed  to  this  course  of
    action was to inform the Tribunal in writing with reasons no later than
    21 days from the date the decision was sent out.

3.   No objection has been lodged to the  proposed  course  of  action,  and
    accordingly the decision of the judge in this case is set aside and the
    matter is remitted for a full hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, to be
    heard at Manchester before a judge other than Judge Malik.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date15 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

