
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03085/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th August 2018                           |On 9th October 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Clark, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (AB) or her children.  A  failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal I will for convenience refer to the parties as  they  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on  28  December
    1986.  She is a Sikh.  She left Afghanistan, together with her  husband
    and daughter ("K") and her mother-in-law in July 2014.  En route to the
    UK, she and her daughter were separated from her husband and mother-in-
    law.  Eventually,  the  appellant  and  her  daughter  entered  the  UK
    clandestinely by lorry on 16 August 2014.  She  claimed  asylum  on  16
    August 2014.  The basis of her claim was that she and her  family  were
    subject to persecutory treatment as Sikhs in Afghanistan and  would  be
    at risk on return.

 4. On 28 June 2015, the appellant's second daughter ("M") was born in  the
    UK.

 5. On 9 March 2017, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the  ECHR.   The
    appellant's  husband  had  previously  made  an  asylum  claim,  as   I
    understand it essentially on the same basis, which had been refused and
    his appeal had been dismissed in 2014.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Real,  who
    heard the appeal, dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

 7. In addition,  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  impact  upon  her  two
    children, K and M, of returning to  Afghanistan.   In  particular,  she
    relied upon the impact upon K's education if returned  to  Afghanistan,
    and also the impact upon M's health, who  suffers  from  hypothyroidism
    and  who  has  developmental  issues  which  were  subject  to  ongoing
    investigation.

 8. Judge Real dismissed the appellant's claim under Art 3 of the  ECHR  on
    the basis that neither the appellant's circumstances nor those  of  her
    daughter, M (in particular the impact upon her health), in  Afghanistan
    reached the high threshold to establish a breach of  Art  3.   However,
    the judge went on to allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Secretary of State appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  against  Judge
    Real's decision to allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8.  No cross-
    appeal was brought against the judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    on asylum grounds and under Art 3.

10. The appeal first came before me on 23  January  2018.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 15  February  2018  I  concluded  that  Judge  Real  had
    materially erred in law in allowing the appeal under Art 8  and  I  set
    her decision aside.  At that time, given that no challenge was  brought
    to the judge's decision to dismiss the appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and
    under Art 3, I directed that her findings and decision in  that  regard
    should stand.

11. The appeal was adjourned in order that it  could  be  re-listed  for  a
    resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal in order to re-make the  decision
    in respect of Art 8 only.

12. That resumed hearing was initially listed before me on 27  March  2018.
    However, that hearing was adjourned at the invitation of the  appellant
    (without objection by  the  Secretary  of  State)  because  M's  health
    condition had deteriorated and she had been hospitalised  the  previous
    day.  Further information  was  to  be  sought  on  her  condition  and
    prognosis.

13. The resumed hearing was again listed before me on 20 August 2018.

The Resumed Hearing

14. At the resumed hearing on 28 August 2018, Mr Howells,  who  represented
    the Secretary of State, accepted on behalf of the respondent  that  the
    appellant's appeal should  be  allowed  under  Art  8.   This  was,  he
    indicated, on the basis of new evidence concerning the  health  of  the
    appellant's other child, K, since the previous hearings.  I will return
    to the evidence shortly but, in summary, in July K was diagnosed with T-
    Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia.   She  was  undergoing  combination
    chemotherapy and, if that was successful,  she  would  require  a  bone
    marrow transplant together with 18-24 months post-transplant  intensive
    follow-up.  Even with that "very intensive therapy",  she  is  said  to
    have "at the very best a 50/50 chance of long term survival".

15. In the result, therefore, it is accepted that  the  appellant's  appeal
    should, at least, be allowed under Art 8 of the ECHR.

16. However, Mr  Clark,  having  taken  instructions  from  the  appellant,
    indicated that the appellant wished to pursue the appeal under Art 3 of
    the ECHR based upon K's medical condition.

17. Mr Howells did not object to the appellant pursuing her claim under Art
    3, despite the fact that Judge Real's decision dismissing the appeal on
    that ground had not previously been  challenged,  based  upon  the  new
    matter and evidence relating to K.

18. No objection was made to the admission of  a  bundle  of  new  evidence
    dealing, in particular, with K's medical condition and the availability
    of treatment and care for her in Afghanistan.  Consequently, I admitted
    that evidence under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

The Appellant's Submissions

19. Mr Clark relied exclusively upon Art 3 of  the  ECHR  and  K's  medical
    condition.

20. First, Mr Clark accepted that the UK case law, binding upon  the  Upper
    Tribunal, only recognised a claim under Art 3  in  a  health  case  (at
    least concerned with an  adult)  in  so-called  "deathbed"  cases.   He
    submitted that, even if the House of Lords had  not  restricted  Art  3
    claims in health cases to such narrow circumstances in N v SSHD  [2005]
    2 AC 296, the Court of Appeal's interpretation of N in GS  (India)  and
    Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40, that Art 3 claims  (applying  N)  are
    confined to deathbed cases is binding upon the Upper Tribunal.

21. Mr Clark accepted, therefore, that the  more  recent  decision  of  the
    Grand Chamber in Paposhvili v Belgium (Application No 41738/10)  [2017]
    Imm AR 4 which recognised a  lower  threshold  for  a  health  case  to
    succeed under Art 3, could not be applied by the Upper Tribunal  unless
    and until the Supreme Court adopted that lower threshold  by  departing
    from the case of N.  Mr Clark accepted that that was the effect of  the
    Court of Appeal's recent decision in AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 64.

22. Mr Clark accepted that  K's  circumstances  did  not  fall  within  the
    "deathbed" category.

23. Secondly, however, Mr Clark submitted that the case law,  including  N,
    was concerned with a claim under Art 3 by an adult.  He submitted that,
    in assessing whether a breach  of  Art  3  had  been  established,  the
    circumstances, including the age of the claimant, had to be taken  into
    account.   He  submitted  that  the  category  of  "exceptional"  cases
    recognised as being required in order to  succeed  under  Art  3  in  a
    health case, was not limited to "deathbed" cases where  the  individual
    was a child and, having regard to her age, the level and  intensity  of
    suffering reached the Art 3 threshold.

24. Thirdly, Mr Clark invited me to make findings on the basis of the lower
    threshold recognised in Paposhvili to cover the  eventuality  that  the
    Supreme Court subsequently departs from N  and  adopts  the  Paposhvili
    test and  the  appellant  brings  a  further  appeal  which  would,  if
    Paposhvili were followed, require a consideration of K's  circumstances
    in the light of that test.

25. Mr Clark relied upon the evidence concerning K's health  and  prognosis
    set out in two letters from a Consultant Paediatric Haematologist, Dr J
    P Moppet, dated 26 July 2008 and 9 August 2008, at  pages  H12-H13  and
    H14-H15 respectively of the appellant's new  bundle.   He  also  relied
    upon an internet publication dated 2 July 2018  entitled  "Afghanistan:
    Few Options for Leukaemia Patients" (at pages H5-H8 of the  appellant's
    new bundle).  Mr Clark submitted that, although  K  was  not  currently
    terminally ill, if she  returned  to  Afghanistan  there  would  be  no
    treatment available for her leukaemia.  Intensive chemotherapy was "not
    feasible" and the additional "novel agent" with  which  she  was  being
    treated, namely "Nelarabine" was not available.  Further, if  she  were
    returned after her chemotherapy, the required  bone  marrow  transplant
    would not be available in Afghanistan.  The medical evidence  was  that
    without this treatment and indeed,  if  she  were  removed  within  the
    "first two years  following  bone  marrow  transplant",  K  would  die.
    Finally, Dr Moppet stated in his  letter  that:  "There  would  not  be
    adequate services available to provide her with a good  palliation  and
    she would likely  have  an  unduly  painful  and  difficult  palliative
    phase".  Mr Clark pointed out that the background document, to which  I
    have referred, indicated that within the health system in  Afghanistan,
    including  hospitals  in  Kabul,  the  only  treatment  available   for
    leukaemia patients, including children, was blood transfusions.

26. Taking all those circumstances into account, Mr Clark submitted that  K
    met the lower threshold recognised by the Grand Chamber  in  Paposhvili
    at [183].

The Respondent's Submissions

27. Mr Howells submitted that on the basis of the authorities binding  upon
    the Upper Tribunal, in particular GS (India) and  Others,  K's  medical
    condition did not reach the high  threshold  required  to  establish  a
    breach of Art 3 of the ECHR.  He submitted that that category  of  case
    was limited  to  "deathbed"  cases,  namely  where  the  individual  is
    terminally ill and his or her return to their home country would be  to
    circumstances where they would suffer "inhuman or degrading  treatment"
    as in D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423 because there would be  an  absence  of
    any family or other support during the dying process.

28. Mr Howells submitted that there was no authority that  children  should
    be treated differently in respect of the  Art  3  threshold  in  health
    cases.

29. Mr Howells did not make any submissions in relation to whether the  new
    medical evidence would establish that K  met  the  lower  threshold  in
    Paposhvili.

Discussion

30. The only claim now made by the appellant in this appeal is  that  based
    upon K's medical condition and that her  return  to  Afghanistan  would
    breach Art 3 of the ECHR.

31. As I have already indicated, it is accepted that the appellant's appeal
    should be allowed under Art 8 of the ECHR.

32. Further, it was common ground between the parties, that if a breach  of
    Art 3 in respect of K  is  established,  then  the  appellant's  appeal
    should be allowed on the basis that her  return  to  Afghanistan  would
    breach Art 3.

    Article 3 and 'health' cases

33. As is well-known, Art 3 of the ECHR provides that:

         "No-one shall be subject to torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment".

34. In order to establish a breach of Art 3 it is, again,  well-known  that
    any ill-treatment must attain a "minimum level of severity".

35. The  application  of  Art  3  in  so-called  'health'  cases  has  been
    considered in a number of leading decisions, in particular by the House
    of Lords in N v SSHD and the Strasbourg Court in D v  UK  and  N  v  UK
    [2008] Imm AR 657.  Those  cases,  and  their  effect,  were  helpfully
    summarised by the Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) in the  judgment  of
    Sales LJ (with whom Patten and Hickinbottom LJJ agreed) at [17]-[19] as
    follows:

         "17. The test to determine when art.3  may  prevent  removal  of  a
             foreign national from the UK, where he  is  suffering  from  a
             medical condition which may get worse if he  is  removed,  was
             authoritatively laid down in domestic  law  by  the  House  of
             Lords in N v Secretary of State for the Home Department.  That
             case concerned a Ugandan woman suffering from advanced HIV, or
             full-blown AIDS as it was called, who was receiving  effective
             treatment in the UK which would not be available to her if she
             was returned to Uganda.  If returned to Uganda,  the  claimant
             would die within a matter of months, whereas if she stayed  in
             the UK she could live for decades.  Despite  this,  her  claim
             under art.3 failed.

         18.  Lord Hope of Craighead gave the principal speech.  He referred
             to what was then the leading judgment of the  ECtHR,  in  D  v
             United Kingdom (1997) 24 E.H.R.R. 423,  which  also  concerned
             expulsion of a foreign national suffering  from  AIDS,  and  a
             range of other  authorities.   The  claimant  in  D  v  United
             Kingdom was in an advanced stage of AIDS and close  to  death;
             he would receive no comfort or moral support  while  dying  if
             returned to his country of origin.  The case was treated as an
             exceptional one, in which the  ECtHR  held  that  art.3  would
             prevent removal.  In Amegnigan v The Netherlands, [2004]  ECHR
             741, judgment of 25 November 2004, the ECtHR characterised the
             circumstances in D v United  Kingdom  as  'very  exceptional'.
             Lord Hope set out the test to be derived from  the  Strasbourg
             authorities in [50], as follows:

                  '.... For the circumstances to be ...  'very  exceptional'
                  it would need to be shown  that  the  applicant's  medical
                  condition had reached such a  critical  stage  that  there
                  were compelling humanitarian grounds for not removing  him
                  to a place which lacked the medical  and  social  services
                  which he would need to prevent acute suffering while he is
                  dying. ...'

             To similar effect, see also [69]-[70]  per  Baroness  Hale  of
             Richmond and [94] per Lord Brown of  Eaton-under-Heywood.   As
             Laws LJ pithily summarised the effect of these opinions in  GS
             (India) at [66], according to the  House  of  Lords  the  D  v
             United Kingdom  exceptional  situation  in  which  art.3  will
             prevent removal to another country with  lesser  standards  of
             care "is confined to deathbed cases'.

         19.  The claimant in N v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             applied to the ECtHR, relying on art.3. In its judgment in N v
             United Kingdom, the Grand Chamber dismissed  her  application,
             holding that her case  'does  not  disclose  very  exceptional
             circumstances, such as in D v United  Kingdom'  and  that  her
             removal to Uganda would not give rise to a violation of art.3.
             The ECtHR referred to the  speeches  in  the  House  of  Lords
             without adverse comment.  Its summary of the principles to  be
             drawn from its own case law included this:

                  "42.     In summary, the Court observes  that  since  D  v
                      United  Kingdom  it  has  consistently  applied   the
                      following principles.

                      Aliens  who  are  subject  to  expulsion  cannot   in
                      principle claim any  entitlement  to  remain  in  the
                      territory of a contracting state in order to continue
                      to benefit from medical, social  or  other  forms  of
                      assistance and services  provided  by  the  expelling
                      state.  The fact that the applicant's  circumstances,
                      including his life expectancy, would be significantly
                      reduced if he were to be removed from the contracting
                      state is not sufficient in itself  to  give  rise  to
                      breach of Article 3.  The decision to remove an alien
                      who is suffering from a serious  mental  or  physical
                      illness to a country where  the  facilities  for  the
                      treatment of  that  illness  are  inferior  to  those
                      available in the contracting state may raise an issue
                      under Article 3, but only in a very exceptional case,
                      where the humanitarian grounds  against  the  removal
                      are compelling.  In the D case the  very  exceptional
                      circumstances were that the applicant was  critically
                      ill and appeared to be close to death, could  not  be
                      guaranteed any nursing or medical care in his country
                      of origin and had no family there willing or able  to
                      care for him or provide him with even a  basic  level
                      of food, shelter or social support.

                  43.  The Court does not exclude that there  may  be  other
                      very  exceptional  cases   where   the   humanitarian
                      considerations are equally compelling.   However,  it
                      considers that it should maintain the high  threshold
                      set  in  D  v  United  Kingdom  and  applied  in  its
                      subsequent case law, which it regards as  correct  in
                      principle, given  that  in  such  cases  the  alleged
                      future harm would emanate not  from  the  intentional
                      acts or omissions of public authorities or  non-state
                      bodies,  but  instead  from  a  naturally   occurring
                      illness and the lack of sufficient resources to  deal
                      with it in the receiving country".

36. In AM (Zimbabwe) itself, the Court  of  Appeal  recognised  that  these
    authorities limited the application of Art 3 in 'health' cases  to  so-
    called "deathbed" cases, namely where death was already  imminent  when
    the individual was to be removed and the circumstances  on  his  return
    would amount to "inhuman or degrading treatment" (see e.g. at [38]).

37. That was the conclusion of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  GS  (India)  and
    Others.  In that case, Laws LJ at [65]-[66], set out the law  following
    N:

         "65....the ratio decidendi of N in the House of Lords  is  entirely
         plain. I give the following citations:

              '15. Is there, then, some other rationale [sc. other than the
              pressing nature of the  humanitarian  claim]  underlying  the
              decisions in the many immigration cases where the  Strasbourg
              court has distinguished D's case? I  believe  there  is.  The
              essential distinction is not  to  be  found  in  humanitarian
              differences. Rather it lies in  recognising  that  article  3
              does  not  require  contracting  states  to   undertake   the
              obligation of  providing  aliens  indefinitely  with  medical
              treatment lacking in their home countries. In the case  of  D
              and in  later  cases  the  Strasbourg  court  has  constantly
              reiterated that in  principle  aliens  subject  to  expulsion
              cannot claim any entitlement to remain in the territory of  a
              contracting state  in  order  to  continue  to  benefit  from
              medical, social and other forms of assistance provided by the
              expelling state. Article 3 imposes  no  such  'medical  care'
              obligation on contracting states. This is so even  where,  in
              the absence of medical treatment, the life  of  the  would-be
              immigrant will be significantly shortened. But in the case of
              D, unlike the later cases, there was no question of  imposing
              any such obligation on the United Kingdom. D was  dying,  and
              beyond the reach of medical treatment then  available.'  (per
              Lord Nicholls)

              '36. What was it then that made the case exceptional?  It  is
              to be found, I think,  in  the  references  to  D's  'present
              medical condition' (para 50) and to that  fact  that  he  was
              terminally ill (paras 51: 'the advanced stages of a  terminal
              and incurable illness'; para 52: 'a terminally ill man'; para
              53: 'the critical stage now reached in the applicant's  fatal
              illness'; Judge Pettiti: 'the final stages  of  an  incurable
              illness'). It was the fact that he was already terminally ill
              while still present in the territory of the  expelling  state
              that made his case exceptional.' (per Lord Hope)

              '69. In my view, therefore, the test, in this sort  of  case,
              is  whether  the  applicant's  illness  has  reached  such  a
              critical stage (ie he is dying)  that  it  would  be  inhuman
              treatment to deprive him of the care which  he  is  currently
              receiving and send him home to an early death unless there is
              care available there to enable him to  meet  that  fate  with
              dignity.' (per Lady Hale)

         See also per Lord Brown at paragraphs 89 - 94.

         66. These citations demonstrate that in the view of  the  House  of
         Lords the D exception is confined to deathbed cases...."

38. In his concurring judgment in  GS  (India)  and  Others,  Underhill  LJ
    agreed.  At [104] he said this:

         "... it is established by N v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2005] 2 AC 296 in the House of Lords that the essential
         reasoning in D must be  taken  to  be,  not  that  the  applicant's
         removal to St Kitts would cause or accelerate his death,  but  that
         it would lead to him dying in  inhuman  and  degrading  conditions,
         without access to any adequate care to alleviate his  suffering  in
         the final stages of his illness: see in particular the passage from
         the opinion of Baroness Hale of Richmond  quoted by Laws LJ at para
         65 above.  The reasoning of the majority in N v United  Kingdom  47
         EHRR 885 in the Strasbourg Court is to the  same  effect:  see  the
         final sentence of para 42 of its judgment quoted by Laws LJ at para
         50 above.  That is  in  accordance  with  principle.   The  subject
         matter of article 3 is not the right to life as such, which is  the
         subject of article 2, but the prevention of  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment".

39. Sullivan LJ (at [116]) also agreed with Laws  LJ  in  relation  to  his
    treatment of Art 3 of the ECHR.

40. In AM (Zimbabwe) the Court of Appeal recognised (following  GS  (India)
    and others) that the test  for  establishing  a  breach  of  Art  3  in
    'health' cases as set out by the House of Lords in N was  binding  upon
    the Court of Appeal and, by necessary implication, the  Upper  Tribunal
    and First-tier Tribunal (see also, EA and  Others  (Article  3  medical
    cases - Paposhvili not applicable) [2017] UKUT 445 (IAC)).

41. Consequently, as Mr Clark candidly accepted before me, any dilution  in
    the applicable test under Art 3 in 'health'  cases  recognised  by  the
    Grand Chamber in Paposhvili could not be relied upon by  the  appellant
    in this appeal.  That concession was, of course, subject to Mr  Clark's
    submission that the position was otherwise where the individual  was  a
    'child'.

42. Mr Clark identified no principled basis upon which the decision of  the
    House of Lords in N could be said not to be applicable in the case of a
    child.  Certainly, none of the decisions  recognised,  or  carved  out,
    such an exception  to  the  application  of  the  "deathbed"  category.
    Whilst  the  application  of  Art  3,   as   a   generality,   requires
    consideration of  an  individual's  specific  circumstances,  including
    their age, in determining whether the 'high threshold' of the  "minimum
    level of severity" has been reached to establish  a  breach  of  Art  3
    (see, e.g. Ireland v UK (1978) 2 EHRR 25 at [162]),  the  "exceptional"
    or "compelling humanitarian" criteria applied by the House of Lords  in
    N are principle based (see, GS (India) and Others).   In  my  judgment,
    Art 3 is confined to "deathbed" cases even where the  individual  is  a
    child.

43. The Court of Appeal in two cases endorsed that approach  (see,  R  (SQ)
    (Pakistan) and Anor) v UTIAC [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 and  AE  (Algeria)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 653).   In  AE  (Algeria),  the  Court  of  Appeal
    rejected  an  argument  that  the  "high  threshold"  in  health  cases
    recognised in N did not apply that because the individual was  a  child
    and so the test in N was inapplicable.  At [6], Maurice  Kay  LJ  (with
    whom Black and Lewison LJJ agreed) said this:

         "[Counsel for the appellant]  seeks to derive support  from  Mayeka
         and Mitunga v Belgium [2008] 46 EHRR 23.  Whilst that  decision  of
         the Grand Chamber does illustrate how the  age  of  the  child  can
         inform the content of the duty under Article 3, it is not a  health
         case and its facts bear no resemblance  to  those  of  the  present
         case.  ... It is true that in Mwanje v Belgium (2013) 56  EHRR  35,
         six of the seven judges expressed the hope that the  Grand  Chamber
         would one day revisit the high threshold in health cases set in  N.
         However, that  has  not  yet  happened  and,  whilst  the  fact  of
         childhood is relevant, on the existing authorities the  reality  is
         that  the  present  appeal  must  fail  in  relation  to  the   two
         alternative bases upon  which  it  is  put.   It  would  require  a
         significant extension of  the  Article  3  jurisprudence  for  this
         appeal to succeed and, in the light of the authorities,  I  do  not
         consider that it would be appropriate for us to be so innovative".

44. Of course, the Grand Chamber have now "revisited"  the  high  threshold
    set in N in Paposhvili.  But, as regards the application of that  "high
    threshold" (absent any review), the Court of  Appeal  clearly  did  not
    envisage that the test in N, which is now  succinctly  encapsulated  in
    the phrase "deathbed" cases, was inapplicable to a child.  In  both  SQ
    and AE, the Court  of  Appeal  considered,  rather,  that  the  child's
    circumstances were more appropriately dealt with under  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.

45. For these reasons, therefore, I conclude that the test in N applies  to
    this appeal in assessing whether  K's  circumstances  reach  the  "high
    threshold" required to establish a breach of Art  3  in  health  cases.
    That "high threshold" is restricted to deathbed cases.  It is  accepted
    by Mr Clark, on the evidence, that K's circumstances do not fall within
    that category as her condition is not terminal in the UK and her  death
    is not imminent regardless of any treatment she may receive.

46. I agree that the medical evidence which I have set out above  does  not
    demonstrate that K falls within the deathbed category  upon  which  her
    Art 3 claim must depend following the House of Lords decision in N.

47. For those reasons, whilst the appellant's appeal is allowed  under  Art
    8, she has not succeeded in establishing a breach  of  Art  3  and  her
    appeal is dismissed on that ground.

    Paposhvili v Belgium

48. The Grand Chamber's decision in Paposhvili  re-visited  the  applicable
    test when applying Art 3 in health cases.  Having recognised at  [181],
    that the Strasbourg Court's previous case law limited claims under  Art
    8 in health cases to "where the person facing  expulsion  is  close  to
    death", the Grand Chamber extended the scope of Art 3 in [183]  of  its
    judgment as follows:

         "The court considers that the 'other very exceptional cases' within
         the meaning of the judgment in N v the United Kingdom ((� 43) which
         may raise an issue under art.3 should be  understood  to  refer  to
         situations involving the removal of a seriously ill person in which
         substantial grounds have been shown for believing that he  or  she,
         although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk,  on
         account of the absence of appropriate treatment  in  the  receiving
         country or the lack of access to such treatment, of  being  exposed
         to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state of
         health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction
         in life expectancy. The Court  points  out  that  these  situations
         correspond to a high threshold for the application of art.3 of  the
         Convention in cases concerning the removal of aliens suffering from
         serious illness".

49. In AM (Zimbabwe), the Court of Appeal recognised that the Grand Chamber
    had relaxed the test for a violation of Art 3 in health cases but  only
    to a "very modest extent" (see [37]).  At [38], Sales  LJ,  having  set
    out the Grand Chamber's words at [183] of its judgment, said this:

         "This means cases where the applicant faces a real risk of  rapidly
         experiencing intense suffering (i.e. to the art.3 standard) in  the
         receiving state because of their illness and  the  non-availability
         there of treatment which is available to them in the removing state
         or faces a real risk of death within a short time in the  receiving
         state for the same reason. In other words, the  boundary  of  art.3
         protection has been shifted from  being  defined  by  imminence  of
         death in the removing state  (even  with  the  treatment  available
         there) to being defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely  'rapid'
         experience) of intense suffering or death in the  receiving  state,
         which may only occur because of the non-availability in that  state
         of the  treatment  which  had  previously  been  available  in  the
         removing state".

50. At [39], Sales LJ gave a number of reasons why he considered  that  the
    Grand Chamber only intended a "very modest extension of the  protection
    under art.3 in medical cases".

51. At [40], Sales LJ dealt with an argument that the Grand  Chamber  [183]
    intended to extend the breach of Art 3 to any case where  there  was  a
    "significant reduction  of  life  expectancy"  if  the  individual  was
    removed.  In rejecting that interpretation, Sales LJ said this:

         "It is true that if one read the phrase 'would face a real risk ...
         of being exposed ... to a significant reduction in life expectancy'
         in [183] out of context, it might be taken to indicate a very  wide
         extension of the protection of art.3 in  medical  cases,  since  in
         very  many  such  cases  where  a  foreign  national  is  receiving
         treatment at a higher level of effectiveness in the removing  state
         than would be available in the receiving state (e.g. in the case of
         those suffering from AIDS) they would be able  to  say  they  would
         face a real risk of a significant reduction of life  expectancy  if
         they were removed.  But this is not  a  tenable  interpretation  of
         [183] of Paposhvili, read in its proper context. N v United Kingdom
         was itself a case where removal  resulted  in  a  very  significant
         reduction in life expectancy (as was also noted  in  Paposhvili  at
         [178]), in which no violation of art.3 was  found,  and  the  Grand
         Chamber  in  Paposhvili  plainly  regarded  that  case  as  rightly
         decided.  N v United Kingdom was itself a Grand  Chamber  judgment,
         decided by 14 votes to 3.  It is impossible to infer  that  by  the
         formula used in [183] of Paposhvili the ECtHR intended  to  reverse
         the effect of N v United Kingdom.  Moreover,  the  Grand  Chamber's
         formulation in [183] requires there to be a 'serious'  and  'rapid'
         decline in health resulting  in  intense  suffering  to  the  art.3
         standard where death is not expected, and it makes no sense to  say
         in the context of analysis under art.3 that  a  serious  and  rapid
         decline in health is not a  requirement  where  death  rather  than
         intense suffering is the harm  expected.   In  my  view,  the  only
         tenable interpretation of [183], read in context, is the one  given
         above".

    Paposhvili and the facts

52. Mr Clark invited me to make factual findings applying the new  approach
    in Paposhvili so that, if a further appeal in this case is  made  at  a
    time when the Supreme Court has had an opportunity to reconsider  N  in
    light of Paposhvili, on the assumption that they would adopt the modest
    change to the test effected by the Grand  Chamber  in  Paposhvili,  the
    outcome of the appellant's appeal would be known.

53. There are a number of reasons why I should be cautious in accepting  Mr
    Clark's invitation.  First, there is  no  certainty  that  the  Supreme
    Court will modify the House of Lords' decision  in  N  to  reflect  the
    Strasbourg Court's decision in  Paposhvili.   Although,  it  does  seem
    likely, since the decision in N was itself based  upon  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence, that the Supreme Court will adopt the  current  approach
    of the Strasbourg Court in Paposhvili.  Secondly, as the law  currently
    stands, anything I say about the application of the Paposhvili test  is
    unnecessary for the disposal of this appeal.  Indeed,  Mr  Howells  did
    not address me on the facts and the application  of  Paposhvili  to  K.
    Thirdly, if the Supreme Court  does  change  the  law  to  reflect  the
    approach in Paposhvili, whether K's removal would breach  Art  3  would
    have to be determined on the evidence and facts at  some  future  point
    when that issue directly arises.  Necessarily, Mr Clark  is  seeking  a
    conclusion on Art 3 somewhat prematurely.  It is speculative as to what
    K's treatment and prognosis would be at that future point in time.

54. On the other hand, findings of fact made in these proceedings  at  this
    point in time may assist the future disposal of the appeal (without the
    need for a further hearing) if the Supreme Court changes the law in the
    UK and the appellant's appeal, if made, is  pending  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  It may also  assist  the  respondent  in  how  he  treats  the
    appellant's claim in the future.  On balance, but with some hesitation,
    I propose to make relevant findings applying the test in Paposhvili.

55. My findings are based on the  additional  material  submitted  for  the
    hearing before me, in particular the appellant's witness statement, the
    two letters from Dr Moppet and the background evidence at H5-H8 of  the
    bundle.

56. K suffers from T-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia which was diagnosed
    in July of this year.

57. She is receiving treatment in the UK for  that  but  she  has  a  "poor
    prognosis, and additionally she has not  responded  very  well  to  the
    treatment  so  far".   That  treatment  consists   of   a   combination
    chemotherapy with the addition of a novel agent called Nelarabine.   If
    she  responds  adequately  to  that,  K  will  require  a  bone  marrow
    transplant.  A donor will need to be found.  That course  of  treatment
    will probably last around six months but, thereafter, she will  require
    an intensive follow-up after the bone marrow transplant  for  at  least
    eighteen to 24 months.

58. Even with that treatment, her prognosis is "at the very  best  a  50/50
    chance of long term survival".

59. However, none of that treatment is available in Afghanistan.  The  only
    treatment available consist  in  blood  transfusions.   The  background
    evidence indicates that initial treatment might last for around fifteen
    days together with six months' worth of  medication  thereafter.   Bone
    marrow transplants are not available in Afghanistan.

60. I am satisfied that here will be a serious and rapid  and  irreversible
    decline in her health, leading to death.  The medical evidence is  that
    without these treatments K will die.  Even if she is removed  from  the
    UK within the first two years following the bone marrow transplant, the
    medical  evidence  is  that  she  would  die  also.    She   would   be
    "significantly  immune-suppressed"  and  she  would  require   "regular
    specialist review and multiple medications" which are not available  in
    Afghanistan.   In  addition,  there  would  not  be   available   "good
    palliation and she would likely have an unduly  painful  and  difficult
    palliative phase".  In other words, the process of dying,  which  would
    be inevitable  in  Afghanistan  if  she  were  removed  either  without
    completion of the treatment or within two  years  of  the  bone  marrow
    transplant that she is yet to have in the UK, she is likely to  die  in
    circumstances of pain and distress  involving  the  need  for  constant
    infusions of morphine, with the possibility  of  significant  bleeding,
    the consequences of which would be "unpleasant  to  catastrophic".   In
    the  absence  of  antibiotics,  she  would  most  likely  suffer   from
    "uncontrollable infection in the end".  The intensity of her  suffering
    in these circumstances is, self-evidently, severe, accentuated  by  her
    young age.

61. Adopting the test in Paposhvili as understood by the Court of Appeal in
    AM (Zimbabwe), I am satisfied that there are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that, although she is not at imminent risk of dying, there is
    a real risk that, due  to  the  absence  of  appropriate  treatment  in
    Afghanistan, she would be exposed to a "serious, rapid and irreversible
    decline" in  her  health  resulting  in  "intense  suffering  or  to  a
    significant reduction in [her] life expectancy".  Consequently, on  the
    evidence today, the facts establish that her removal would breach Art 3
    if the Paposhvili test were applicable.

62. It is, of course, not yet the law in the UK, and  I  emphasise,  again,
    that if the Supreme Court does change the law to embrace the Paposhvili
    test, whether the appellant can establish that K's removal would breach
    Art 3 will have to be decided upon  the  evidence  as  to  her  medical
    condition  and  prognosis,  together  with  the  availability  of   any
    appropriate treatment in Afghanistan, at the appropriate future date.

63. For the present, the evidence does not establish that K's removal would
    breach Art 3 on the basis of the law as it currently stands in  England
    and Wales.

Decision

64. For the reasons set out  in  my  earlier  decision  promulgated  on  15
    February 2018,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.  I set aside
    that decision.

65. I remake the decision as follows:

          i) The appeal is allowed under Art 8 of the ECHR.

         ii) The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and
             Art 3 grounds.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              2 October 2018
