
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/03390/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 11 January 2019                         |on 24 January 2019            |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [L T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against the decision of FtT Judge Handley, promulgated
    on 29 May 2018.

 3. The nub of the grounds is that the appellant is married; the judge  did
    not find  her  generally  credible;  did  not  accept  that  she  is  a
    Pentecostal Christian or that she escaped from military service;  noted
    at [29] that married  women  are  exempt  from  military  service;  and
    contradicted himself by allowing the appeal because  her  liability  to
    military service carries a risk of persecution.

 4. The grounds proceed on the assumption that the  appellant  is  married.
    However, her evidence, recorded at [19], was that the marriage ceremony
    in which she engaged was not one recognised by  the  authorities.   The
    judge expressed no conclusion on the matter.  Thus, there is no finding
    to justify the assumption in the grounds, and  the  evidence  is  that,
    legally, the appellant is not married.

 5. The grounds are based on an unwarranted  assumption,  and  disclose  no
    error.

 6. That conclusion disposes of the appeal to the UT, but I also  note  the
    following.

 7. Although there has been an  update,  representatives  agreed  that  the
    position continues to be as set out at section 7  of  the  respondent's
    Country Policy and Information Note, version 4.0, October  2016.   This
    strongly suggests that  the  authorities  would  not  extend  exemption
    through marriage to any relationship which does not legally  constitute
    a marriage.

 8. There also appeared to be force in the submission by Ms  Loughran  that
    the proposition that married women are exempt from  risk  is  supported
    only by some of  the  background  evidence,  and  not  by  the  country
    guidance given by the UT, which had that background evidence before it.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            11 January 2019
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




