



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03663/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11th December 2017                 |On 12th December 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between


                                      SP
                         (AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy instructed by Jeya & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.   Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances, including the fact that an anonymity direction was  made
    previously, I make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cas O'Garro promulgated on 10th July  2017  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant asylum  humanitarian  protection  or
    relief on the grounds of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 3. By a decision of 2nd October  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal challenge the decision in part on the basis  that
    the judge has made findings of fact in isolation from consideration  of
    the expert medical report.  It  is  clear  from  paragraph  44  of  the
    decision that  the  judge  having  made  findings  in  respect  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's account goes on to  reject  the  medical
    evidence given by Dr Halari that the appellant is suffering from  PTSD.
    The clear reason given for rejecting that medical evidence is that  the
    diagnosis is dependent upon the appellant's account.

 5. The  representative  for  the  respondent  conceded  that  the  judge's
    approach to the  medical  evidence  disclosed  an  error  of  law.  The
    appellant's representative sought to rely upon the decision of Ex Parte
    Virjon [2002] EWHC 1469 in which Forbes J commented that the judge  had
    erred by using adverse findings of fact to reject the medical evidence.
    In that regard consideration has also to be  given  to  such  cases  as
    Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and S v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ  1153,  although
    in the latter case it was indicated that,  where  the  report  contains
    only a history recounted by the appellant  and  nothing  which  depends
    upon the credibility of the appellant, the effect of the medical report
    mainly negligible.

 6. It having been conceded that there is an error of  law  it  is  evident
    that error impacts upon all of the findings of fact made in respect  of
    this appellant. It was accepted that the  appropriate  course  was  for
    this matter to be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing afresh with none of the findings of fact preserved.

 7. For the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal and it being  accepted
    by the respondent, there is an error of law in the original decision by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I direct that  the  decision  be  set
    aside. The decision is to be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a hearing afresh.




Notice of Decision


 8. I allow the appeal by the Appellant and direct that the matter be heard
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed







Date 11th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure








Direction regarding anonymity

Under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant  or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
and to the Appellant. Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.
Signed





Date 11th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

