
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03274/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd January 2019                 |On 31st January 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     ED
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonanvero, instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant  in
this determination identified as ED.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings





      1. In a decision promulgated on 26th April 2018,  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Davidge dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision
         by the respondent refusing her claim for international protection.

      2. Permission to appeal was sought on three grounds:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law in her approach
             to the NRM trafficking decision;

         ii) There was procedural unfairness in the judge's approach to the
             evidence of movement records; and

        iii) Although the judge had said she would treat the appellant as a
             vulnerable witness  there  was  nothing  in  the  decision  to
             indicate  that  she  had  or   had   considered   the   impact
             vulnerability may have had on her evidence.

      3. Since the First-tier Tribunal judge decision  was  promulgated,  ES
         (s82 NIA 2002; negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC) and MN
         [2018] EWHC 3268 (QB) have considered the impact of  MS  (Pakistan)
         [2018] EWCA Civ 594 on international protection claims. A  decision
         of the Competent Authority is not appealable and there cannot be  a
         'backdoor'  appeal   against   that   decision   in   a   statutory
         international protection claim appeal, but the NRM decision is  not
         a starting point for consideration of the international  protection
         claim. The NRM decision is a piece of evidence that is required  to
         be taken into  account,  taking  into  consideration  the  evidence
         relied upon as a whole.

      4. In this decision, the First-tier Tribunal judge stated in [19] that
         she had considered the evidence "in the round  and  as  a  complete
         picture" , stated that her starting  point  was  the  NRM  decision
         ([22]), set out the elements and findings of the  NRM  decision  in
         brief form ([23] to [26]) and stated that she found  that  the  NRM
         decision provided cogent reasons for the finding that the appellant
         was not a victim of trafficking. In [27] the judge then goes on  to
         record her conclusion that the appellant's  account  in  connection
         with being able to secret  money  and  the  arrangements  with  the
         doctor was not credible; she refers to that decision being for  the
         same reason as given in the NRM decision.

      5. The significant difficulty with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge is that although the judge has said she  is  looking
         at the evidence in  the  round,  she  makes  no  reference  to  the
         appellant's witness statement where elements of the NRM credibility
         findings are disputed. The judge has considered the evidence before
         her in the context of whether it can displace the NRM decision; she
         has not considered the evidence in the round as a complete  picture
         applying  the  relevant  standard  of  proof  in  an  international
         protection claim.

      6. Ground 1 is made out and is of such significance that the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be remade.

      7. The respondent failed to produce  the  movement  record.  There  is
         reference to the movement record in  the  NRM  decision.  Mr  Tufan
         submitted that although the  record  had  not  been  produced,  the
         appellant had been aware of it and had not requested its production
         and the respondent would not have said that such a document existed
         and said what it said if it  did  not.  Whilst  that  may  well  be
         correct, and there was nothing to challenge  that,  given  that  it
         formed a part of the appellant's disputed international  protection
         claim it should have been produced.

      8. Nevertheless, even if it had been made out, I cannot  see  that  it
         would have made  any  significant  difference  to  the  appellant's
         appeal on its own. Although ground 2 is made out  as  an  error  of
         law, on its own the error is  not  such  as  would  result  in  the
         setting aside of the decision.

      9. The judge did not refer to the appellant being a vulnerable witness
         in her decision, but it is not disputed that the  judge  agreed  to
         treat her as such. The grounds do  not  identify  issues  that  her
         vulnerability  could  have  impacted  upon   in   determining   the
         credibility of her account, particularly in the light of the  error
         of law by the First-tier Tribunal judge in the context of  the  NRM
         decision. Ground 3 is not made out, although of course  the  remake
         of the decision will require the  judge  to  take  account  of  the
         vulnerability of the appellant.

     10. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

     11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, s12(2)  of
         the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First tier  with
         directions or remake  it  myself.  In  this  case  the  fundamental
         findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge are set aside -  she  has
         not approached the evidence correctly and none of the findings  can
         stand. The factual matrix of this appeal is  disputed;  I  conclude
         that the decision should be remitted to  the  First-tier  judge  to
         determine the appeal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, no findings preserved.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 23rd January 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
