
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03281/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)        |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 August 2017                        |   On 12 October 2017             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fitzsimons instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia, born in 1981. He  appeals  with
    permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge   Solly,
    dismissing his appeal brought on international protection grounds.

 2. In response to the grant of permission to appeal the respondent filed a
    rule 24 notice indicating her intention to defend the decision,  whilst
    at the same time recognising that as at time of filing the  notice  the
    respondent had yet to receive a copy of the decision with the appellant
    grounds of appeal. In the event by the time of hearing  the  respondent
    had the opportunity to consider the grounds, application and  grant  of
    permission. Mr Harrison indicated that he  was  unable  to  defend  the
    judgement, conceding that the judge reached  her  credibility  findings
    based on the defects  identified  by  the  appellant  as  occurring  at
    paragraph 49 of her judgement, and that such reached conclusions  which
    were not open to her in the context of a mistaken consideration of  the
    appellant's brothers evidence, a mistake of  fact  in  respect  of  the
    documents submitted to  the  respondent  and  the  tribunal,  but  most
    significantly  reaching   an   adverse   credibility   finding   before
    considering if the medical evidence  concerning  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and scarring brought anything to the credibility assessment in
    the context of the account of torture and ill treatment.

 3. Mr Harrison and Mr Fitzsimons were agreed that the errors identified in
    the grant of permission required the matter to be remitted back to  the
    first-tier tribunal so that  a  full  fact-finding  exercise  could  be
    conducted de novo.

 4. I am satisfied that the errors conceded by Mr Harrison do  indeed  show
    material errors for  the  reasons  confirmed  by  him,  such  that  the
    decision cannot.

Decision

 5. The decision of Judge Solly dismissing the Appellant's  appeal  reveals
    material errors of law. I  set  it  aside  with  no  findings  of  fact
    retained. In the circumstances, the appeal is remitted  to  the  first-
    tier tribunal to be reheard, in full, de novo.


Signed                              Date 28 September 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


