
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03016/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th September 2018                        |On 5th October 2018           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr k k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alam, Counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  19th
    February 2018 refusing his  application  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection made on 27th August 2017.  His appeal was allowed by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Traynor in a decision dated  29th  May  2018.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals against that  decision  with  permission
    granted on 1st August 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  appellant  claims  to  have
    entered the UK on 9th October 1997.  On 4th September 2012  he  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his  long  residence  in
    the UK, but this application was refused and  his  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted on 21st October 2013.  His request to have  this  application
    reconsidered  was  refused  in  March  2015.   He  was  encountered  by
    Immigration Officers in 2013 and he was arrested on 1st March 2016  and
    served with removal documents as  a  person  liable  to  removal.   His
    application  for  judicial  review   was   refused.    His   subsequent
    application for leave to remain under the ten year family/private  life
    route was refused on 14th February 2017.   His  subsequent  application
    for leave to remain outside the Rules was refused on 10th January 2018.
     On 22nd August 2017 he claimed asylum.  This application was  made  on
    the basis of his claimed sexuality.  The basis of his claim is that  he
    has known he was gay since childhood.  He claims that he was caught  by
    his father at their home with his boyfriend and that  his  father  beat
    him. He claims that as a  result  of  this  he  left  Pakistan  on  9th
    December 1997.  He  claims  that  he  has  been  in  a  number  of  gay
    relationships in the UK.  He says that he fears persecution in Pakistan
    as a result of his sexuality.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant
    and his claimed partner as well as from another  witness.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant had "provided a  credible,
    consistent and entirely truthful account regarding the  core  issue  of
    his claim for asylum, namely that he is a gay Pakistani man"  who  left
    Pakistan on account of his sexuality and that he fears returning  there
    because of the adverse consequences he is likely  to  face  [47].   The
    judge allowed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

The grounds of appeal

 4. In the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    asserts that the judge made a material misdirection of law in  relation
    to his findings as to the appellant's credibility.  The Grounds  assert
    that the appellant is not a homosexual as  claimed.   It  is  contended
    that the appellant  failed  to  mention  his  sexuality  in  any  claim
    previously and has only made this claim as  a  last  ditch  attempt  to
    remain in the UK.  It is asserted that the appellant's previous  asylum
    claim was based on his family and private life and that  was  dismissed
    in 2013 and he did not mention his sexual orientation until  2017.   It
    is contended that the judge  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the
    appellant's previous appeal which found that he was not  credible.   It
    is contended that it is not credible that the appellant was  not  aware
    that he could claim asylum on the basis of his  sexuality  until  2017.
    It  is  further  contended  that  the  appellant  claims  to  be  in  a
    relationship with Mr A, who attended the hearing to give evidence,  but
    it is contended that the evidence given suggests  that  they  are  more
    likely to be flatmates rather  than  in  a  gay  relationship.   It  is
    contended that the appellant and Mr A have  conveniently  claimed  that
    they are in a relationship and that little or no weight should be given
    to their evidence.  It is contended that, although they claim  to  have
    been in a relationship for a number of years, they  have  not  provided
    any  evidence  of  corroboration  aside  from  photographs  and  it  is
    suggested that the appellant should have been able to provide a  letter
    from his landlord but had failed to do so.  It is contended that little
    weight should be given to Mr A's evidence as he  himself  attempted  to
    make a late claim of homosexuality in his own asylum  claim  which  was
    subsequently dismissed and he failed to  attend  his  hearing  to  give
    evidence.  The grounds contend that the appellant's evidence  and  that
    of Mr A is not credible and their evidence was given purely to  bolster
    each other's late asylum claim.  In conclusion it is submitted that the
    appellant is not a homosexual as claimed and therefore there  would  be
    no risk upon his return to Pakistan.

 5. In granting permission, Judge Hollingworth considered it arguable  that
    the judge  should  have  attached  greater  weight  to  the  chronology
    reflecting the claims made by the appellant and that the assessment  of
    the credibility of Mr A required further examination in  light  of  his
    history.   It  was  considered  arguable  that   the   examination   of
    inconsistency referred to by the judge requires re-evaluation in  light
    of these factors.

The submissions

 6. At the hearing Mr Tufan submitted that the challenge in this  case  was
    on the basis of lack of adequate reasons and the Section 8 issues.   He
    accepted that the appeal centred on credibility and that the Presenting
    Officer at the hearing had accepted that if the appellant was  credible
    he would be at risk in Pakistan.  He highlighted that the appellant and
    his claimed partner had never made a claim based on  sexuality  before.
    Although he accepted it was not before the judge, he submitted that the
    appellant's claimed partner is currently in the  process  of  making  a
    voluntary return to Pakistan.  He contended that, although  the  couple
    claimed to be in a relationship, apart from photographs  there  was  no
    further evidence, and in  particular no evidence from  their  landlord.
    In relation to the Section 8  issue  which  the  judge  dealt  with  at
    paragraph 46, he contended that this was a cursory consideration by the
    judge who gave the benefit  of  the  doubt  to  the  appellant  and  he
    contended that this was a perverse finding.

 7. In response Mr Alam contended submitted that the Secretary  of  State's
    grounds amount to a disagreement with the judge's credibility  findings
    and are an attempt to re-argue the case  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   He
    submitted that the Secretary of State had the opportunity to make these
    arguments in the First-tier Tribunal and in any event it is clear  that
    such arguments have been rejected by the judge.  In his submission  the
    grounds identify no error of law.  He submitted that in the  Section  8
    consideration at paragraph 46 the judge  reached  conclusions  open  to
    him.   He submitted  that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  make  the
    credibility findings made having  heard  from  the  appellant  and  the
    witnesses who were subject to cross-examination. He  pointed  out  that
    the judge referred to Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702  and  the  previous
    decision as he was  required  to  do.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    referred to  documentary  evidence  to  show  the  couple  were  living
    together.  In his submission the judge noted at paragraph 25  that  the
    witness became emotional and that this  was  something  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account.  He highlighted that the judge  referred
    at paragraphs 22 and 23 to the previous decision  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's  partner.   He  further  highlighted  that  the  judge  had
    considered the evidence from the witness at paragraph 47.  This witness
    had been subject to cross-examination also  and  the  judge  found  the
    appellant to be credible, consistent and truthful in  relation  to  the
    core issue in his appeal.  In his submission the judge  considered  all
    factors and came to a decision in favour of the appellant.

 8. Mr Tufan had nothing further to add.

Error of Law

 9. The Secretary of  State's  grounds  raise  issues  of  credibility  and
    weight.  I agree with Mr Alam's submission that they fail  to  identify
    any error of law.  In my view the judge reached conclusions open to him
    on the evidence.  The judge took into account the oral evidence of  the
    appellant,  his  partner  and  another  witness  who  were  subject  to
    examination-in-chief and cross-examination.  At  paragraph  40  of  the
    decision  the  judge  said  that  he  considered  that   any   internal
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account were minor  and  centred  on
    whether or not the appellant recalled a particular date or a  following
    date or even a year.  The judge found that the appellant had provided a
    consistent account of the fact that he left Pakistan  in  circumstances
    which he considered required him to depart from that country on account
    of  his  sexuality.   The  judge  considered  that  the  core  of   the
    appellant's claim had been reliably and consistently stated.

10. At paragraph 42 the judge took into account that there was no  evidence
    of the appellant being involved in any heterosexual relationships  with
    anyone in the UK.  The judge took no adverse inference  from  the  fact
    that when he made his application for  leave  to  remain  in  2013  the
    appellant did not raise his sexuality as a  reason  why  he  could  not
    return to Pakistan and considered that his account put forward in  2013
    was otherwise not inconsistent with the  claim  put  forward  now.  The
    judge found that the appellant was reticent  about  talking  about  his
    personal life and in 2013 was not as overtly sexually active within the
    gay community as he is now.

11. At paragraph 43 the judge found that the appellant had given  the  best
    account that he can in recalling circumstances and  relationships  from
    some years ago, finding  that  there  was  "a  thread  of  credibility"
    running through the appellant's account on the basis of which the judge
    was satisfied that the appellant has told the truth and  has  described
    his involvement in other relationships which  have  ultimately  failed.
    The judge went on at paragraph 44 to acknowledge that it  is  difficult
    for a person who is gay to prove their sexual identity  and  that  this
    appellant remains a private man and is discreet.  The judge gave weight
    to the fact that, in his claim  for  asylum,  the  appellant's  partner
    referred to a same-sex relationship with a person identified as KK  who
    the judge was satisfied was the appellant.  The judge accepted that the
    appellant and Mr A have lived together for  two  years  and  are  in  a
    settled relationship.  The judge took into  account  Mr  A's  emotional
    response when describing how he had been  estranged  from  his  family.
    The judge found that the appellant and Mr A have a strong affection for
    each other.  The judge said that he had "no doubt" as to the  sexuality
    of both Mr A and the appellant [45].

12. The judge went on at paragraph 46 to consider the provisions of Section
    8 of the 2004 Act and in particular took into account  the  appellant's
    very late claim for asylum given his claimed entry into the UK in 1997.
     The judge considered that the appellant should be given the benefit of
    the doubt in relation to what  knowledge  he  possessed  of  making  an
    asylum claim on the basis of his sexuality earlier.  The judge accepted
    that the appellant learned only a matter of months prior to making  the
    claim that he could advance  an  asylum  claim  on  the  basis  of  his
    sexuality.  Accordingly, the judge did not draw adverse inference  from
    the delay in claiming asylum and considered that it did not damage  the
    appellant's credibility.

13. The judge considered the  evidence  from  the  appellant's  witness  at
    paragraph 47 and concluded  that  he  had  "no  reason  to  doubt  that
    evidence" and noted that he was not  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative.

14. The judge concluded that when he had considered all of these factors in
    the round  the  appellant  had  provided  a  credible,  consistent  and
    entirely truthful account regarding the core issue  of  his  claim  for
    asylum, namely that he is a gay Pakistani man who has  fled  from  that
    country on account of his sexuality and that he fears  returning  there
    because of the adverse consequences that he is  likely  to  face.   The
    judge went on to find that the appellant was  at  risk  throughout  the
    whole of Pakistan and that there was no effective state protection.

15. I have set out the summary of the judge's findings above. In my view it
    is clear that the judge took into account all of  the  evidence  before
    him in making these findings.  The judge dealt with the points  against
    the appellant in considering his credibility, and, taking these factors
    into account, went on to find that the  appellant  was  credible.   The
    question of weight to be attached to various factors is  a  matter  for
    the judge.  The judge did take into account  Section  8  but  concluded
    that the delay did not adversely affect the appellant's credibility for
    the reasons given in paragraph 46.  These were conclusions open to  the
    judge on the basis of the evidence before him.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision does not contain a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 26th September 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 26th September 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




