
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03895/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                             |                                   |
|On 20 March 2019                   |On 22 March 2019                   |
|                                          |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                  BAHRA [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohzam of Twinwood Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hudson promulgated on 12 November 2018, which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of a protection claim  on  all
    grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 5 July 1986 and is a national of Iraq.

 4. On 29 October 2017 the Appellant applied for asylum on  the  bass  that
    that she was at risk from her  parents  who  did  not  approve  of  her
    marriage to [KI] who is a British citizen and by whom  she  had  a  son
    whose date of birth is 3.4.2016.

 5. On 8  March  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Hudson  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge failed to consider
    whether s 117B 6 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was
    met as her child was a British Citizen at birth by virtue of s2 (1) (a)
    of the British Nationality Act 1981 as the Judge had failed  to  assess
    whether it was reasonable for the child to  return  to  Iraq  with  his
    mother given the guidance in KO (Nigeria) [2018] 1 WLR 5273.

 8. On 29 November 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell gave  permission
    to appeal.

 9. In a Rule 24 Notice dated 19 December 2018 the  Respondent  in  essence
    conceded that there was an error of law and  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    proceed to a hearing to determine whether the Appellants  child  should
    be expected to return to Iraq with the Appellant.

10. Before me Mr Bates conceded that in the light of current case law of KO
    and JG (s.117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019]  UKUT  00072
    (IAC) Rev 1 the Appellant would succeed under s 117B6 as it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the British citizen child to leave the UK.

Legal Framework

11. The Appellant's appeal  was  pursuant  to  Section  82(1)  (b)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ('the  2002  Act')  which
    provides that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where  the  Secretary
    of State has decided to refuse a human rights claim.  S84  of  the  Act
    provides that an appeal under s82(1)(b) must be brought on  the  ground
    that a decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

12. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it
    must, in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in all
    cases to the considerations listed in section117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014). Section 117 (3) provides that  the  'public  interest  question'
    means the question of whether an interference with a person's right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

13. The S117B considerations in so far as they are relevant to this  appeal
    are as follows:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

Section 117B6

14. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
         who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;"

15. In relation to  the  Appellants  child  being  a  British  Citizen  the
    Appellant relies on the British Nationality Act 1981 which provides:

         "2. Acquisition by descent.

         (1)       A  person  born  outside   the   United   Kingdom   after
         commencement shall be a British citizen if at the time of the birth
         his father or mother-

             (a) is a British citizen otherwise than by descent;"

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made a material errors of law in that it failed  to  recognise
    that the Appellants child was a British Citizen at birth by  virtue  of
    the British Nationality Act. The Judge was therefore required  as  part
    of the proportionality exercise  to  determine  whether  the  Appellant
    could succeed under the provisions of  s  117B  6  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

17. I therefore set aside the Article 8 assessment and reheard the evidence
    on that discrete issue all other findings having been preserved.

18. Mr Bates readily conceded that the Home Office Policy is that it is not
    reasonable for a British Citizen child to be required to leave  the  UK
    and the appeal should succeed.

19. In this case I make clear that this was an  appropriate  concession  to
    make this is a finding I would have made whether  it  was  conceded  or
    not. I would inevitably have had to consider the best interests of  the
    child in question and the starting point is that  it  is  in  his  best
    interests to be brought up by both of his  parents.  I  noted  that  he
    attended court with his  mother  the  Appellant  and  his  father.  The
    Appellant and her husband are I accept in a subsisting relationship and
    she is clearly pregnant. It is also of course in his best interests  to
    have a relationship with his sibling when he or she is born. It  is  in
    the child's best  interests  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  his  British
    Nationality that it is undisputed he derives from his father. I am also
    satisfied that in general terms it is in his best interests  to  remain
    in the UK where it is safe and stable.

20. In determining whether therefore whether it is reasonable for the child
    to return to Iraq with his mother I must give significant weight to his
    best interests. I acknowledge that while the Appellant has no status in
    the UK the Appellants husband  is  a  British  citizen  so  unlike  the
    circumstances in KO which largely dealt with couples  neither  of  whom
    had the right to remain in the UK  in  this  case  there  is  only  one
    parents who has no status as in JG.

21. Having found that it is not reasonable for the child to  leave  the  UK
    the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph  117B6  and  in
    accordance with what is said in paragraph 34 of TZ and PG  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1109 it would be disproportionate to remove the Appellant  and  she
    succeeds under Article 8.

Decision

22. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal with regard to Article 8 such that the decision is set aside

23. I remake the appeal.

24. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.



Signed                                                              Date
20.3.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as the DNA evidence that the child was that of the Brtitish  Citizen  father
was not produced until the appeal.



Signed                                                                  Date
20.3.2019

Debra Birrell
