
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03322/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 25th November 2016                |On 28th November 2016                |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                MR AHMED [S]
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan (instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Pickup) promulgated on 2nd September 2016 by  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  refusal  of  his
    protection claim.

 2. The ground upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal inadvertently  erred  by  failing  to  address  the
    Appellant's submissions made shortly after the hearing and  before  the
    Decision and Reasons was promulgated.

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is in Iraqi national  from  Mosul  and
    that he cannot return to his home area because it  is  in  a  state  of
    internal armed conflict. The  Appellant  also  argued  that  he  cannot
    relocate to Baghdad as it would be unduly harsh for a Sunni  Arab  with
    no connections to Baghdad to relocate there.

 4. Counsel for the Appellant sought to persuade  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that there had been  a  deterioration  in  the  security  situation  in
    Baghdad since the country guidance case of AA (article 15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) was heard in May 2015.

 5. On the same day that the appeal before Judge Pickup  was  in  progress,
    15th August 2016, the Secretary of State published a new guidance  note
    entitled "Country Information and Guidance: Sunni (Arab) Muslims, Iraq,
    August 2016" which contained information pertinent to the issues  under
    appeal.

 6. The Appellant's representatives sent a copy of that  guidance  together
    with further submissions to the First-tier Tribunal on 17th August, two
    days after  the  hearing.  It  was  hand-delivered  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Manchester where the hearing had taken place.

 7. Notwithstanding those further submissions being made, no  reference  is
    made to them or to the new guidance in the Decision and Reasons.

 8. It is not possible for us to ascertain for certain, from the file, what
    happened to those documents but it is clear that that they were not put
    before Judge Pickup before he determined the appeal and promulgated his
    decision. The documents are now in the file and are stamped  as  having
    been received by the Tribunal on 17th August. They should have been put
    before the Judge and the failure to do so amounts to a procedural error
    amounting to an error of law.

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr McVeety accepted that it was  an
    error of law and that the error was material going as  it  did  to  the
    heart of the case, internal relocation to Baghdad. He also agreed  that
    the appropriate way forward was for the Upper Tribunal to set aside the
    Decision and Reasons in its entirety and to remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

10. We would add that is of considerable concern to us that  the  Secretary
    of State issued new guidance directly pertinent to this appeal  on  the
    very day of the hearing but the Secretary of State's representative did
    not bring it to the Tribunal's attention. We should have been  inclined
    to say that it was her duty to do so.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  Decision
and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.

There has been no application for an anonymity order and we do not make one


Signed                              Date 25th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

