
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03099/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 19 December 2018                           |On 18 February 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     T L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Ms K. Burnett of Kesar & Co. Solicitors
(Bromley)
For the respondent:          Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This appeal considers the laws relating to the admission  of  citizens
    of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea  ("North  Korea")  to  the
    Republic of Korea ("South Korea") when a person has committed a serious
    criminal offence.

2.    The background to the appeal was set out in the error of law  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal promulgated  on  13  August  2018  (annexed).  In
    summary, the appellant appealed  the  respondent's  decision  dated  17
    March 2017 to refuse a protection and human rights claim in the context
    of deportation proceedings. The respondent  made  a  deportation  order
    after the  appellant  was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  seven  years'
    imprisonment for rape.

3.    The respondent rejected the appellant's claim to  be  a  North  Korean
    citizen and certified the protection claim  under  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). Section  72
    of the NIAA 2002 is said to apply for the purpose of  the  construction
    and application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention. Where there
    is any ambiguity, section 72 must be construed in accordance  with  the
    Refugee Convention: EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2010] 1 QB 633. The  effect  of
    the  certificate  is  that  the   Tribunal   must   begin   substantive
    deliberation by considering the certificate.  If  the  Tribunal  agrees
    with the rebuttable presumption that the person who has been  convicted
    of a particularly serious crime constitutes a danger to  the  community
    of the United Kingdom, it must dismiss the appeal  in  so  far  as  the
    appellant relies on a Refugee Convention ground.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Broe  allowed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 December 2017. For the reasons given in the error  of
    law decision the Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.  A  number  of  factual   findings   were   preserved.   Most
    importantly, Judge Broe concluded that the appellant was likely to be a
    North Korean national and would not be entitled to Chinese citizenship.
    This hearing proceeds on the basis that it is  now  accepted  that  the
    appellant is more likely than not to be a citizen of  North  Korea  and
    that the only potential country of removal would be South Korea.

Legal Framework

Country guidance

5.    The Upper Tribunal considered the issue of admission of  North  Korean
    citizens to South Korea in GP & others (South Korean citizenship) North
    Korea CG [2014] UKUT 00391. The headnote summarised the main findings:

         "(1)     The Upper Tribunal's country guidance  in  KK  and  others
             (Nationality: North Korea)  Korea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  92  (IAC)
             stands,  with  the  exception  of  paragraphs  2(d)  and  2(e)
             thereof.   Paragraphs  (2),  (3)  and  (4)  of  this  guidance
             replace that given in paragraphs 2(d) and 2(e) respectively of
             KK.


         (2)       South  Korean  law  makes  limited  provision  for   dual
             nationality under the Overseas Koreans Act and the Nationality
             Act (as amended).


         (3)      All North Korean  citizens  are  also  citizens  of  South
             Korea.   While absence from the Korean Peninsula for more than
             10 years may entail fuller enquiries as to  whether  a  person
             has acquired another nationality or right of residence  before
             a travel document is issued, upon return to  South  Korea  all
             persons from the Korean Peninsula  are  treated  as  returning
             South Korean citizens.


         (4)      There is no evidence that North Koreans returned to  South
             Korea are sent back to North Korea or anywhere else,  even  if
             they fail the 'protection' procedure, and  however  long  they
             have been outside the Korean Peninsula.


         (5)      The process of returning North Koreans to South  Korea  is
             now set out in  the  United  Kingdom-South  Korea  Readmission
             Agreement (the Readmission Agreement) entered into between the
             two countries on 10 December 2011.  At present, the  issue  of
             emergency travel documents under the Readmission Agreement  is
             confined  to  those  for  whom  documents  and/or  fingerprint
             evidence establish that they are already known to South  Korea
             as citizens, or who have registered as  such  with  the  South
             Korean Embassy in the United Kingdom.


         (6)      Applying MA (Ethiopia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ  289,  North  Koreans  outside  the
             Korean Peninsula who object to  return  to  South  Korea  must
             cooperate with the United Kingdom authorities  in  seeking  to
             establish whether they can avail themselves of the  protection
             of another country, in particular South Korea. Unless they can
             demonstrate that in  all  of  the  countries  where  they  are
             entitled to citizenship  they  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason,  they  are  not
             refugees.


         (7)      If they are not refugees, it remains open to such  persons
             to seek to establish individual factors creating  a  risk  for
             them in South Korea which would engage  the  United  Kingdom's
             international obligations under the EU Qualification Directive
             or the ECHR.


         (8)      There is no risk of refoulement of  any  North  Korean  to
             North Korea from South Korea, whether directly or  via  China.
             South Korea does not return anyone to North Korea at  all  and
             it does not return North Koreans to China.  In a small  number
             of cases, Chinese nationals have been returned  to  China.   A
             small  number  of  persons  identified  by  the  South  Korean
             authorities as North  Korean  intelligence  agents  have  been
             prosecuted in South Korea.  There is  no  evidence  that  they
             were subsequently required to leave South Korea.


         (9)      Once the 'protection' procedure has been completed,  North
             Korean migrants have the same rights  as  other  South  Korean
             citizens save that they are not required to  perform  military
             service for South Korea.  They  have  access  to  resettlement
             assistance,  including   housing,   training   and   financial
             assistance.  Former  North  Koreans  may  have  difficulty  in
             adjusting to South Korea and there may be some  discrimination
             in social integration, employment and housing, but  not  at  a
             level which requires international protection."

The Readmission Agreement (2011)

6.    The Upper Tribunal considered the terms of the Agreement  between  the
    Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern  Ireland
    and the Government of the Republic of Korea concerning the  Readmission
    of Persons, which came into force on 01  June  2012  ("the  Readmission
    Agreement"). For the purpose of this appeal, the  following  provisions
    of the agreement may be relevant:





         The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and  Northern
         Ireland and the Government of the Republic  of  Korea  (hereinafter
         referred to as the "Contracting Parties"),


         Based on the friendly relations between the two countries and their
         peoples,


         Intending to effectively counteract illegal immigration into  their
         territories in the spirit of international efforts,


         Prompted by the desire to facilitate  the  readmission  into  their
         territories of own nationals  who  are  staying  illegally  in  the
         territory of the other Contracting Party, in  accordance  with  the
         general principles of international law,  the  respective  national
         laws of  the  two  countries,  and  in  the  spirit  of  trust  and
         cooperation, Have agreed as follows:


                                  SECTION I
                        Readmission of Own Nationals


                                  ARTICLE 1


             1.  Each Contracting Party shall readmit persons who  do  not,
         or no longer, meet the applicable entry or  residence  requirements
         in the territory of the requesting Contracting Party, if  proof  or
         prima facie evidence is furnished of the  fact  that  such  persons
         possess the nationality of  the  requested  Contracting  Party.  2.
         Paragraph 1 shall also apply to persons  who,  after  entering  the
         territory of  the  requesting  Contracting  Party,  have  lost  the
         nationality  of  the  requested  Contracting  Party  and  have  not
         acquired another nationality or have not  at  least  been  promised
         naturalisation by the requesting Contracting Party.


                                  ARTICLE 2


             1.  Proof of nationality shall be deemed furnished through:


         (a)      citizenship certificates;
         (b)      passports of  any  kind  (national  passports,  diplomatic
         passports, service passports), emergency travel documents; or
         (c)      children's passports;


         In these cases, the person concerned shall  be  readmitted  by  the
         requested Contracting Party without any formalities.


             2.  Prima  facie  evidence  of  nationality  shall  be  deemed
         furnished through:


         (a)      copies of any of the documents proving the nationality  of
         the person concerned as listed in paragraph 1 above;
         (b)      driving licences or copies thereof;
         (c)      birth certificates or copies thereof;
         (d)       results  of  an  interview  with  the  person   concerned
         conducted  by  the  competent  diplomatic  representatives  of  the
         requested Contracting Party; or
         (e)      any  other  document  which  may  help  to  establish  the
         nationality of the person concerned.


             3.  The documents listed in paragraphs 1  and  2  above  shall
         suffice as proof or prima facie evidence  of  nationality  even  if
         their period of validity has lapsed.


                                  ARTICLE 3


             1.  In the absence of proof  as  to  nationality,  readmission
         shall be governed by a readmission request. Any readmission request
         is  to  contain  the  following  information,  depending   on   the
         availability of documents or the statements of the person concerned
         to be readmitted:


         (a)      an  original  copy  of  the  fingerprints  of  the  person
             concerned, his or her gender and claimed date of birth;
         (b)      where a copy of fingerprints of the  person  concerned  is
             not  provided  as  part  of  the  readmission   request,   the
             particulars of the person  concerned  (surname,  given  names,
             date of birth, and where possible, place  of  birth,  and  the
             last place of residence in  the  territory  of  the  requested
             Contracting Party);
         (c)      indication of the means by which prima facie  evidence  of
             nationality will be furnished;
         (d)      a statement indicating that the person concerned may  need
             assistance, help  or  care  owing  to  sickness  or  old  age,
             provided he or she has consented to such statement being made;
             and
         (e)      any protection or security measure which may be  necessary
             in the individual return case.


             2.  Where a person is to  be  readmitted  in  accordance  with
         Article 1(2), the readmission request shall be filed within  twelve
         (12)  months  after  the  competent  authority  of  the  requesting
         Contracting Party has learned that person's loss of nationality. If
         the  person  concerned  lost  the  nationality  of  the   requested
         Contracting Party prior to the entry into force of this  Agreement,
         this time limit shall begin to run upon the  entry  into  force  of
         this Agreement.


             3.  If there are doubts about  the  prima  facie  evidence  of
         nationality, within three (3) days after the readmission request is
         received, representatives of the requested Contracting Party in the
         territory of the requesting Contracting Party shall  interview  the
         person.


             4.   The  requested  Contracting  Party  shall  reply   to   a
         readmission request without undue delay, and in any event within  a
         maximum period of twenty (20) working days. This time  limit  shall
         begin to run on the date of receipt of the readmission  request  by
         the competent authority of the requested  Contracting  Party.  Upon
         expiry of this time limit the readmission shall be deemed  to  have
         been agreed to. Upon  agreement  to  the  readmission,  the  person
         concerned may be immediately  returned  to  the  territory  of  the
         requested Contracting Party, who will provide the  relevant  travel
         document. The requested Contracting  Party  may  consult  with  the
         requesting Contracting Party about the number of the persons to  be
         returned within a certain period of time.


             5.   Upon  agreement  to  the   readmission,   the   requested
         Contracting Party will at the  same  time  provide  the  requesting
         Contracting Party with particulars of the person to  be  readmitted
         (surname, given names, and  resident  registration  number  or  its
         equivalent).


             6.   Upon  agreement  to  the   readmission,   the   requested
         Contracting Party will provide the person to be readmitted with the
         relevant travel document to be allowed  to  be  readmitted  to  the
         territory of the  requested  Contracting  Party  if  required.  The
         competent authority of the requested Contracting Party will provide
         the relevant travel document within a maximum of five  (5)  working
         days of receipt of a request from the competent  authority  of  the
         requesting Contracting Party. The validity period of  the  relevant
         travel document will be a minimum of twenty (20) working days.


             7.  The competent  authority  of  the  requesting  Contracting
         Party  shall  inform  the  competent  authority  of  the  requested
         Contracting Party without any undue delay of the date of return  of
         the person concerned, at the latest three (3) working days prior to
         the scheduled return.


                                  ARTICLE 4


         The requesting Contracting Party shall allow the re-entry into  its
         territory without particular formalities of any  person  readmitted
         by the requested Contracting Party if it is established,  within  a
         period of three (3) months after  the  readmission  of  the  person
         concerned into the territory of the  requested  Contracting  Party,
         that the requirements for readmission by the requested  Contracting
         Party under Article 1 were not met.




The Protection and Settlement Act (1997)

7.    In GP & Others the Upper Tribunal also considered  the  terms  of  the
    North Korean Refugees Protection and Settlement Support Act 1997  ("The
    Protection and Settlement Act"). The Upper  Tribunal  made  clear  that
    this provision was distinct from  the  Refugee  Act  11298/2012,  which
    incorporated the provisions of the Refugee Convention into South Korean
    law  from  July  2013.  The  evidence  showed  that  the  South  Korean
    authorities did not consider the Refugee Act  to  be  relevant  to  the
    status of North Korean migrants, who are considered to be South  Korean
    by  birth  and  are  therefore  not  "outside  the  country  of   their
    nationality" for the purpose of Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention
    [21]. It is clear from the findings  made  in  GP  &  Others  that  the
    "protection procedure" discussed in that case is a  separate  procedure
    arising from the  provisions  of  The  Protection  and  Settlement  Act
    specifically relating to North Koreans and is distinct from  protection
    procedures under the Refugee Convention. The following sections of  The
    Protection and Settlement Act may be relevant:
           Article 1 (Purpose)
           The purpose of this Act is to specify such matters  relating  to
           protection and support as are necessary  to  help  North  Korean
           residents  defecting  from  the  area  north  of  the   Military
           Demarcation Line (hereinafter referred to as "North Korea")  and
           desiring  protection  from  the  Republic  of  Korea,  to  adapt
           themselves to, and settle down as quickly as  possible  in,  all
           spheres of their life, namely, political, economic,  social  and
           cultural life.
           Article 2 (Definitions)
           For the purpose of this Act,
           1.    "Defecting North Korean residents" mean persons  who  have
                 their residence, lineal descendants, spouses and workplaces
                 in North Korea  and  who  have  not  acquired  any  foreign
                 nationality after defecting from North Korea.
           2.    "Protected persons" mean defecting North  Korea  residents
                 who are provided care and support pursuant to this Act.
           3.    "Settlement support facilities" mean facilities set up and
                 operated to provide protection of  and  settlement  support
                 for protected persons pursuant to the provision of  Article
                 10, Paragraph 1.
           4.    "Protection money or articles" mean money or  goods  paid,
                 delivered or lent to protected persons pursuant to this Act
           Article 3 (Scope of Application)
           This Act shall apply to defecting  North  Korean  residents  who
           have expressed their intention to be protected by  the  Republic
           of Korea.
           Article 4 (Basic Principles)
           1.    The Republic of Korea shall provide protected persons with
                 special care on the basis of humanitarianism.
           2.    Protected persons shall  strive  to  lead  a  healthy  and
                 cultural life  by  adapting  themselves  to  the  free  and
                 democratic legal order of the Republic of Korea.




           Article 5 (Criteria for Protection, etc.)
           (1)   The criteria for the provision of the care of and  support
                 for protected persons shall  reasonably  be  determined  in
                 consideration of their age, composition of  the  household,
                 school education, personal career, self-supporting ability,
                 health conditions and personal possessions.
           (2)   The protection and  settlement  support  stipulated  under
                 this Act shall, as a matter of principle,  be  provided  on
                 the  basis  of  the  individual,  but  may,  where   deemed
                 necessary, be given on the basis of the household.
           (3)   Protected persons shall be provided with care for one year
                 at settlement support facilities and for two years  at  the
                 place of residence.  However,  where  there  exist  special
                 grounds,  the  respective  period  of  protection  may   be
                 curtailed or extended following the  deliberations  by  the
                 Consultative Council on Defecting North Korean Residents as
                 stipulated under the provision of Article 6.
           ......
           Article 7 (Application for Protection)
           (1)   Any Person who has defected from North Korea  and  desires
                 to be protected under this Act shall apply  for  protection
                 to the head of an overseas diplomatic or  consular  mission
                 (including the commander of a military  unit  of  different
                 levels. This shall hereinafter be referred to as  "head  of
                 an overseas diplomatic or consular mission, etc.").
           (2)   The head of an overseas diplomatic  or  consular  mission,
                 etc. who receives such an  application  for  protection  as
                 stipulated under the provision of Paragraph 2 shall without
                 delay  inform  the  fact  to  the  Minister   of   National
                 Unification and the Director of  the  Agency  for  National
                 Security   Planning   via   the   head   of   the   central
                 administrative agency to which he belongs.
           (3)   The Director of the Agency for National Security  Planning
                 notified pursuant to the provision  of  Paragraph  2  shall
                 take provisional protective  measures  or  other  necessary
                 steps and  shall  without  delay  inform  the  Minister  of
                 National Unification of the result.
           Article 8 (Decision on Protection, etc.)
           (1)   The  Minister  of  National  Unification  shall,  when  he
                 receives such a notice as stipulated under the provision of
                 Article 7, Paragraph 3, decide on the admissibility of  the
                 application for protection following the  deliberations  of
                 the Consultative Council. However, in the case of a  person
                 who is likely to attest national security to a considerable
                 extent, the Director of the Agency  for  National  Security
                 Planning  shall  decide  on  the   admissibility   of   the
                 application, and inform or notify the Minister of  National
                 Unification and the protection applicant  of  the  decision
                 without delay.
           (2)   Where the Minister of National Unification has decided  on
                 the  admissibility  of  an  application  pursuant  to   the
                 provision of the text of  Paragraph  1,  he  shall  without
                 delay inform the head of an overseas diplomatic or consular
                 mission,  etc.  via  the  relevant  central  administrative
                 agency of  the  decision,  and  the  head  of  an  overseas
                 diplomatic and consular  mission,  etc.  informed  as  such
                 shall without delay notify the applicant of the decision.
           Article 9 (Criteria for a Protection Decision)
           In determining whether or not to provide protection pursuant  to
           the provision of the  text  of  Article  8,  Paragraph  1,  such
           persons as stipulated in the following Subparagraphs may not  be
           determined as protected persons.
           1.    International  criminal  offenders  involved  in  aircraft
                 hijacking, drug trafficking, terrorism or genocide, etc.
           2.          Offenders of nonpolitical, serious  crimes  such  as
      murder, etc.
           3.          Suspects of disguised defection
           4.          Persons who have for a  considerable  period  earned
                 their living in their respective country of domicile; and
           5.          Such other persons as recognized by the Presidential
                 Decree as unfit for the designation as protected persons.

Decision and reasons

8.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 17  March  2017
    to refuse a protection  and  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of
    deportation proceedings. Following  changes  made  to  Part  V  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002")  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 ("IA 2014"), the appellant can only appeal on  the
    ground that his removal would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention or that  his  removal  would  be  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Refugee Convention

9.    The respondent  certified  the  protection  claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention with reference to section 72 of the NIAA 2002. The effect of
    the certificate is that there is  a  rebuttable  statutory  presumption
    that the person is a danger to the community. The Tribunal  must  begin
    substantive  deliberation  by  considering  the  certificate.  If   the
    Tribunal, after having considered evidence in rebuttal, agrees with the
    presumption that the person is a danger to the community then  it  must
    dismiss the appeal in  so  far  as  the  appellant  relies  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds.

10.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Broe  heard  from  the   appellant   and
    considered the evidence put forward to rebut the statutory  presumption
    that he is a danger to the community. He considered the  assessment  in
    the OASys report. Based on this evidence he  concluded  "the  appellant
    has not rebutted the presumption" [26]. That finding is not challenged.
    The Upper Tribunal found that the judge erred by going on  to  consider
    the exceptions to deportation under section 33 of the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007 ("UKBA 2007"). A certificate  made  under  section  72  NIAA  2002
    applies to all appeals  brought  on  protection  grounds  whether  they
    involve a deportation  decision  or  not.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant failed to rebut the statutory presumption that he is a danger
    to the community. Section  72(10)(b)  states  that  the  Tribunal  must
    dismiss the appeal in so far as it is  brought  on  Refugee  Convention
    grounds. Accordingly, the Refugee Convention element of the  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Human Rights

11.   The parties agreed that the appeal is narrowed solely to human  rights
    grounds.

12.   No arguments were put forward to suggest that the appellant  would  be
    at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment in South Korea  either  as  a  North
    Korean citizen or during the protection procedure process. The Tribunal
    in GP & Others made clear that there  is  no  such  risk.  The  parties
    agreed that the country guidance in GP & Others remained relevant,  but
    did not deal with the specific issue raised  in  this  case,  which  is
    whether a person with a serious criminal conviction could be removed to
    South Korea under  the  Readmission  Agreement  and/or  the  protection
    procedure for North Koreans under the Protection and Settlement Act.

13.   On behalf of the appellant, Ms Bennett relied on  the  expert  opinion
    of Professor Christoph Bluth  and  argued  that  Article  9(2)  of  the
    Protection and Settlement Act indicated that the appellant would not be
    admitted under the protection procedure  because  he  had  committed  a
    serious criminal offence. If the appellant would  not  be  admitted  by
    South Korea then the only other  country  of  removal  would  be  North
    Korea. Removal to North Korea would amount to a breach of Article 3.

14.   On behalf of the respondent, Ms Cunha argued that the appellant  could
    rely on the readmission and protection procedure, which would determine
    his admissibility to South Korea.

15.   Ms Bennett pointed  to  a  Home  Office  Monthly  Progress  Report  to
    Detainees dated 24 January 2018,  which  stated  that  the  appellant's
    fingerprints were sent for checks "with Korea" and had come  back  with
    "negative  results".  The  evidence  is  somewhat  vague,  but  it   is
    reasonable to infer that the only checks that the respondent is  likely
    to have made would be with the  South  Korean  authorities  because  no
    attempt would be made to remove the appellant  to  North  Korea.  Given
    that the appellant was not born in South Korea and does  not  claim  to
    have ever lived  there,  it  is  unsurprising  that  the  South  Korean
    authorities have no record of him. However, GP  &  Others  makes  clear
    that the South Korean government considers North Koreans  as  nationals
    of South Korea.

16.   The Readmission Agreement makes bilateral arrangements between the  UK
    and  the  South  Korean  governments  for  the  readmission  of   their
    nationals. The Readmission Agreement applies to all nationals of  South
    Korea. The Readmission Agreement requires proof or prima facie evidence
    of nationality. In this case the appellant could not  provide  official
    documentation as evidence of South Korean nationality. Article  2(2)(d)
    is likely to apply whereby his nationality would have  been  determined
    by  way  of  an  interview  conducted  by  the   competent   diplomatic
    representative of South Korea ("the requested Contracting Party").

17.   Article 3 of the Readmission Agreement provides,  in  the  absence  of
    proof  of  nationality,  that  readmission  shall  be  governed  by   a
    readmission  request.  It  is  unclear  from  the  limited  information
    provided in the Monthly Progress Report whether the Secretary of  State
    made a formal readmission application to the South Korean  authorities.
    Although there  is  an  indication  that  a  copy  of  the  appellant's
    fingerprints may have been sent to the  South  Korean  authorities,  no
    action appears to have been taken, according  to  Article  2(2)(d)  and
    Article  3(3)  of  the  Readmission   Agreement,   for   a   diplomatic
    representative  of  the  South  Korean  authorities  to  interview  the
    appellant. It is unclear from the evidence  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State has taken any formal steps under  the  Readmission  Agreement  to
    establish  whether  the  South  Korean  authorities  might  accept  the
    appellant as a national.

18.   Pursuant to the Court of Appeal  decision  in  MA  (Ethiopia)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 289 the appellant's representative sent  correspondence
    to the South Korean embassy on 03 October 2018. The correspondence  did
    not ask about  his  admission  under  the  Readmission  Agreement,  but
    focused on whether he would be permitted to enter and reside  in  South
    Korea under the protection procedure outlined  in  the  Protection  and
    Settlement Act given that (i) he had been outside South Korea for  more
    than 10 years; and (ii) he had been convicted of a serious crime in the
    United Kingdom. At the date of the hearing, there had been no  response
    from the South Korean embassy.

19.   The Tribunal in GP &  Others  acknowledged  Professor  Bluth's  expert
    knowledge of South Korea. In that case  his  evidence  appeared  to  be
    focused on  the  likelihood  of  admission  under  the  Protection  and
    Settlement Act rather than the Readmission Agreement.  In  his  opinion
    the South Korean authorities would  not  accept  people  who  had  been
    outside South Korea for a period of 10 years who  did  not  express  an
    intention to be protected by South Korea. After having  considered  all
    the  evidence  before  it,  including  the  terms  of  the  Readmission
    Agreement, the Upper Tribunal found that the fact  that  a  person  had
    been outside South Korea for a period of over 10 years did  not  affect
    the  likelihood  of  admission  unless  they   had   acquired   another
    nationality [125]. It  mattered  not  whether  a  person  expressed  an
    intention to be  protected  under  Article  3  of  the  Protection  and
    Settlement Act because the Readmission Agreement provided  a  mechanism
    for  return  "which  is  not  dependent  on  the  genuineness  of   the
    individual's wish to live in  South  Korea"  [104].  Professor  Bluth's
    evidence in that case did not touch on whether  the  authorities  might
    refuse admission under Article 9 of the Protection and  Settlement  Act
    on public interest grounds. The only mention of Article 9 appears to be
    in the summary of the evidence given by Dr Hwang in Appendix C  of  the
    decision where it was noted that one of the potential  exclusions  from
    admission under the Protection and Settlement Act is  serious  criminal
    convictions [100-103].

20.   Professor Bluth has written  two  reports  in  this  case.  The  first
    report is dated 20 November 2017. Much of the first report  relates  to
    questions that have already been determined  such  as  the  appellant's
    likely nationality and risk on return to North Korea or China.  Section
    5 of the report discusses the attitude of the South Korean  authorities
    towards admission  under  the  protection  procedure.  Professor  Bluth
    explains that there is a difference between statements of principle and
    the practice of the South Korean authorities illustrated by information
    he has obtained from various contacts. He explains why the South Korean
    authorities are reluctant to encourage too many defections  from  North
    Korea and are  wary  about  infiltration  by  North  Korean  government
    agents. He repeats his opinion that those who do not express a  genuine
    intention to live in South Korea and those who have been outside  South
    Korea for more than 10 years are likely to be refused  admission  under
    the protection procedure.

21.   Professor Bluth states, even if the South  Korean  authorities  accept
    that there is a prima facie case to indicate that  a  person  is  North
    Korean and  might  be  eligible  for  admission  to  South  Korea,  the
    application will be subject to  in-depth  consideration  and  decisions
    will be made on a case-by-case basis with the ultimate approval of  the
    Minister of Unification. The South Korean authorities retain discretion
    to check that a person has not acquired status elsewhere and is  not  a
    criminal or a North Korean government agent.

22.   At [5.4.23] Professor Bluth discusses the  Readmission  Agreement.  He
    states that the agreement applies to people who have  already  been  in
    South Korea as implied by the term 'readmission'. He states:

            "5.4.23 ..... The clear and unambiguous understanding  in  Seoul
           is that the agreement applies to persons who have  already  been
           in South Korean (sic) and who  have  already  been  accepted  as
           eligible for South Korean citizenship. This issue is  determined
           by fingerprint evidence, on the basis that persons who have gone
           through the process of  vetting  by  the  National  Intelligence
           Service have been fingerprinted. When asked what would happen if
           the Korean  Embassy  was  given  the  details  of  North  Korean
           refugees for whom there were no fingerprints who did not want to
           come to South Korea or become citizens of the Republic of Korea,
           the answer was that these persons  would  not  be  admitted  and
           would have to remain in the United Kingdom or move  to  a  third
           country.


            5.4.24 The manner in which the agreement has operated so far  is
           that persons whose fingerprints have not  been  identified  have
           been rejected. This means that the agreement cannot be used  for
           persons who have never yet been  admitted  to  the  Republic  of
           Korea. But it also means that all those  North  Korean  migrants
           who have applied for asylum and whom the UK government seeks  to
           deport to South Korea will not be  accepted  if  they  have  not
           already been to South Korean (sic)  and  granted  status  there.
           This will equally apply to persons claiming to be  North  Korean
           in other countries."

23.   The source of the information contained at [5.4.23]  is  unclear.  The
    footnote state "Communication with Kwang Ho-chun, 21 December 2012" but
    this fails to explain who the source is. It is also out of date. It  is
    difficult to place weight on this assertion without  knowledge  of  the
    source's  position  in  order  to  assess  the   reliability   of   the
    information.

24.   The second report is dated 14 June 2018. It was prepared  in  response
    to the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.  Professor  Bluth  makes
    clear that he is not a legal  expert  but  is  a  country  expert  with
    knowledge of the practices of the South  Korean  government.  Professor
    Bluth repeats the assertion that the Readmission Agreement only applies
    to those who are already known to  the  South  Korean  authorities  and
    refers to "recent case law" to support this proposition. The  case  law
    referred to in the  footnote  cites  a  First-tier  Tribunal  reference
    number. No further information is provided. The citation  of  a  First-
    tier Tribunal decision is not precedent  and  does  not  establish  any
    binding principles.

25.   Professor Bluth goes on to outline anecdotal  evidence  from  his  own
    experience of dealing with North Korean asylum cases. He says  that  in
    every case he has been involved with where a North Korean went  to  the
    South Korean Embassy in the United Kingdom they have  "been  sent  away
    empty-handed". The report goes on to  state  that  in  2009  the  South
    Korean government "changed its rules and now will not  provide  support
    to any person claiming to be North Korean who has applied  for  refugee
    status in another country as this  is  considered  that  they  wish  to
    establish themselves in another country and acquire the nationality  of
    that country, thereby giving up their Korean nationality".  Again,  the
    source of this information is unclear. The footnote  cites  an  article
    from the Korea Herald dated  15  September  2010,  which  predates  the
    Readmission Agreement. It is unclear what "rules" this  aspect  of  the
    report is referring  to.  Finally,  Professor  Bluth  points  out  that
    Article 9 of the Protection and Settlement  Act  makes  clear  that  an
    application for  settlement  under  the  protection  procedure  can  be
    refused if a person has committed a serious criminal offence.  Although
    the Secretary of State now accepts that the appellant is likely  to  be
    North Korean, it does not follow that the South Korean authorities will
    take the same view.

Conclusion

26.   The Readmission Agreement is a  bilateral  mechanism  for  the  United
    Kingdom and South Korean governments to return people who are  accepted
    to be prima facie nationals. Nothing on the face of the wording of  the
    agreement confines its application solely to  those  who  have  already
    resided in South Korea or who are already  registered  with  the  South
    Korean authorities. The wording  of  the  agreement  makes  clear  that
    further enquiries can be conducted by an  official  of  the  "requested
    Contracting Party" to assess whether the relevant country, in this case
    South Korea, is satisfied that the person should be admitted.

27.   Professor Bluth is correct to point out that it is  within  the  realm
    of South Korean  law,  and  at  the  discretion  of  the  South  Korean
    authorities, whether a North Korean national  qualifies  for  admission
    under the Protection and Settlement Act. It would be open to the  South
    Korean  authorities  to  take  a  different  view  of  the  appellant's
    nationality. Even if the  South  Korean  authorities  accept  that  the
    appellant is a North Korean national it is a matter for them whether he
    should be excluded from settlement under Article 9  of  the  Protection
    and Settlement Act because he has been convicted of a serious  criminal
    offence in the UK. Clearly there could be grounds upon which the  South
    Korean authorities might decide to refuse settlement given the  serious
    nature of the offence.

28.   The difficulty is in the way in which this  case  has  been  put.  The
    arguments put forward with reference to the expert evidence assume that
    if there are grounds to believe  that  the  appellant  may  be  refused
    admission, either under the terms  of  the  Readmission  Agreement,  or
    could be refused settlement on grounds of his criminal conviction under
    the Protection and Settlement Act, then he cannot be removed  and  this
    would give rise to a breach of his human rights.

29.   However, the appellant can only appeal on the ground that his  removal
    would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998.  The
    wording of section 84  of  the  NIAA  2002  presupposes  a  theoretical
    removal from the UK. It is now  accepted  that  the  only  prospect  of
    removal is to South Korea. It is upon this basis that the human  rights
    claim must be assessed. There is no suggestion that the conditions  the
    appellant might face on return to South Korea would amount to a  breach
    of his human rights. Indeed, the Tribunal in GP  &  Others  made  clear
    findings that the conditions involved in the protection procedure would
    not amount to a  breach  of  human  rights  [117].  The  Tribunal  also
    recognised that removal is not possible until  such  time  as  a  South
    Korean travel document is issued under the Readmission Agreement [108].



30.   No evidence was put forward relating to the appellant's  ties  to  the
    UK or his personal circumstances  to  indicate  that  there  are  'very
    compelling circumstances' to outweigh the undoubted public interest  in
    deportation under Article 8 given that the appellant was sentenced to a
    period  of  seven  years'  imprisonment  for  a  serious  offence:  see
    paragraph 398 immigration rules and section 117C(6) NIAA 2002. The sole
    argument is that the appellant is not likely to be  admitted  to  South
    Korea.

31.   The evidence before me indicates that the Secretary of State may  have
    sent fingerprints to the South Korean authorities  but  it  is  unclear
    whether a formal request was  made  under  the  Readmission  Agreement.
    Professor Bluth's evidence goes to the assessment that is likely to  be
    undertaken by the South Korean authorities  under  the  Protection  and
    Settlement Act. In his opinion, it is unlikely that  the  South  Korean
    authorities would agree to admit the appellant. Whether there is, as  a
    matter of fact, a practical obstacle  to  the  appellant's  removal  to
    South Korea is yet to be determined.

32.   I am bound to follow the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  HF  (Iraq)  &
    Others v SSHD [2014] 1 WLR 1329,  which  considered  whether  practical
    obstacles to return might give rise to protection issues.

         "89. The question which then potentially arises is how someone will
         be  treated  who  is  forcibly  returned  without  the  appropriate
         document. The Upper Tribunal concluded that this would  not  happen
         because the Secretary of State had  stated  that  in  practice  she
         would not return anyone to Iraq  who  did  not  have  the  relevant
         identity documentation. It was suggested that this was her "policy"
         but in fact this  is  something  of  a  misnomer:  the  policy  was
         effectively forced upon her. Her evidence, as recorded by the Upper
         Tribunal, was that "without the necessary documentation  there  was
         no guarantee that they would be accepted by the  Iraqi  authorities
         in Baghdad."


         90. It was for this reason that the Upper Tribunal considered  that
         the issue was now academic: with the appropriate documentation, the
         appellants would not  be  at  risk  on  return  from  ill-treatment
         arising out of detention; without it, they would not  be  returned.
         It was of course within their  control  which  category  they  fell
         into.
         ...
         95. Mr Fordham submits that ... the Upper Tribunal  ...  could  not
         simply rely on an assurance from the Secretary of  State  that  the
         appellants would not be  returned.  Whilst  it  is  true  that  the
         individual would not be at risk whilst  the  Secretary  of  State's
         policy was in place, nonetheless the Tribunal was  obliged  to  ask
         itself the hypothetical question whether there would be a real risk
         of ill treatment constituting either  a  breach  of  Article  3  or
         entitling the appellants to humanitarian protection. The appellants
         were entitled to have their position determined not  least  because
         it affected their status,  and  hence  their  rights,  whilst  they
         remained in the United Kingdom.


         96. Moreover, Mr Fordham submitted that the fact  that  they  could
         secure safe return by obtaining the relevant documents was  not  to
         the point. It was immaterial to the Tribunal's  decision  that  the
         appellants may only be at risk because  of  their  refusal  to  co-
         operate. That is similarly the  position  with  certain  sur  place
         cases,  such  as  those  where  an   asylum   seeker   deliberately
         participates in activities in the UK which are  designed  to  catch
         the attention of the home state and thereby place him  at  risk  on
         return. If there is a real risk of  serious  harm  on  return,  the
         applicant should be granted asylum even though he has  by  his  own
         actions deliberately  chosen  to  bring  that  risk  upon  himself,
         perhaps specifically to secure asylum.


         97. I agree with Mr Fordham  that  if  the  reason  for  the  Upper
         Tribunal declining to deal with the  matter  was  simply  that  the
         Secretary of State had a policy not to return persons who could  be
         returned but would be at risk of ill treatment in their home state,
         that would constitute an error of law, essentially for the  reasons
         elucidated in JI.


         98. However, Mr Eadie submits that this is a  misrepresentation  of
         the true position. His contention is that, properly  analysed,  the
         practice of not returning  those  without  the  appropriate  travel
         documents is not a voluntary policy of the Secretary  of  State  at
         all. The lack of documentation  creates  an  impediment  to  return
         which the Secretary of  State  cannot  circumvent.  Iraq  will  not
         receive anyone from the UK without the relevant travel document. If
         an unsuccessful applicant  for  asylum  refuses  to  co-operate  to
         obtain the laissez passer document, he is  in  precisely  the  same
         situation as any other failed asylum seeker whom the  Secretary  of
         State is unable to return for one reason or another. The  assurance
         of the Secretary of State that she would not return someone to Iraq
         without the relevant documents is of no  special  significance;  it
         simply reflects realities. The  general  position  of  someone  who
         cannot be returned, whether because he cannot obtain the  requisite
         documents or for some other reason, is that he may be  detained  or
         granted  temporary  admission  pursuant  to  section  67   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  provided  at  least
         there remains a possibility of his being returned at some stage  in
         the future: see R (on the application of AR and FW) v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1310. As Lord Justice
         Sedley pointed out in that case, the condition of someone with that
         status is harsh, although being granted temporary admission does at
         least allow the unsuccessful asylum-seeker to  be  free  of  actual
         detention.


         99. Mr Eadie submits that these appellants  are  precisely  in  the
         situation of any other failed asylum seekers who would  not  be  at
         risk in their  own  state  but  cannot  for  technical  reasons  be
         returned home. The existence of such  technical  difficulties  does
         not entitle them to humanitarian protection. Article  8(3)  of  the
         Qualification Directive makes that plain where, as here, relocation
         is an option, and it is a fortiori the case where they are  not  at
         risk in their home area. Moreover, they can hardly be in any better
         position than any other asylum seeker who cannot  be  returned  for
         technical reasons given that the technical difficulty stems from  a
         deliberate refusal to co-operate.


         100. Mr Eadie says that this is not like JI or the sur place  cases
         where, if returned, the  appellants  would  potentially  face  ill-
         treatment meeting Article 3 standards. They can  only  be  returned
         with the necessary documentation, and if and  when  the  impediment
         caused by lack of the relevant documentation is overcome, they will
         be safe on return.


         101. In my judgment, this analysis is  correct.  I  accept,  as  Mr
         Fordham submits, that it  would  be  necessary  for  the  court  to
         consider whether the appellants would be at risk on return if their
         return were feasible, but I do not accept that the Tribunal has  to
         ask itself the hypothetical question of what would happen on return
         if that is simply not possible for one reason or  another.  Section
         67  of  the  2002  Act  envisages  that  there  may  be   practical
         difficulties impeding or delaying making removal arrangements,  but
         those difficulties do not alter the fact  that  the  failed  asylum
         seeker would be safe in his own country and therefore is in no need
         of refugee or humanitarian protection. I agree with  the  Secretary
         of State that the sur place cases are distinguishable because there
         the applicant could be returned and would be at risk if he were  to
         be returned. They are not impediment to  return  cases."  (emphasis
         added)

33.   I see no reason why these principles should not apply to human  rights
      issues as well. The  question  that  the  Tribunal  must  consider  is
      whether theoretical removal to South Korea  would  be  unlawful  under
      section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. For the reasons given at  [29-
      30] above I conclude that removal  would  not  be  unlawful  on  human
      rights grounds.

34.   The  evidence  indicates  potential  impediments  to  the  appellant's
      removal to South Korea, but there is no  evidence  to  show  that  the
      South Korean authorities have, as a matter of fact, refused  to  admit
      the appellant. The Secretary of State accepts the First-tier  Tribunal
      finding that the appellant is likely to be a  North  Korean  national,
      but this is a fairly recent development. It is  unclear  exactly  what
      steps the Secretary of State has taken  to  arrange  for  his  removal
      under the Readmission Agreement although there is some suggestion that
      his fingerprints were sent to the South Korean  authorities.  At  this
      stage, there is insufficient evidence before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
      conclude that the appellant cannot be removed in practice or  to  show
      that any uncertainty in the appellant's status has  caused  sufficient
      detriment to give rise to a potential human rights  claim.  If,  after
      further prompt investigation, the Secretary of State  takes  the  view
      that there are practical impediments to the  appellant  being  removed
      because the South Korean authorities refuse to  admit  him  under  the
      Readmission Agreement, then he will need to take a view as to  whether
      it is appropriate to grant leave to remain under relevant policies  or
      outside the rules.

35.   The appeal under the Refugee Convention must be dismissed because  the
      appellant failed to rebut the presumption that he is a danger  to  the
      community.

36.   The appeal brought on human rights grounds is  dismissed  because  the
      proposed removal to South Korea would not be unlawful under section  6
      of the Human Rights Act 1998.


DECISION

The appeal is dismissed on Refugee Convention and Human Rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date  12 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03099/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 18 June 2018                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:           Miss Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Ms K. Bennett of Kesar & Co. Solicitors
(Bromley)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, but technically the Secretary of  State
    is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 17  March  2017
    to refuse a protection  and  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of
    deportation proceedings. The appellant claimed  to  be  a  national  of
    North Korea although he spent most of his life in China. He  said  that
    after his parents died he was forced to  beg  and  thieve  for  a  gang
    master. He says that he was brought to the UK  by  smugglers  in  2000,
    when he was only 18 years old.  He was forced to work. On  15  November
    2013 the appellant was convicted of rape and sentenced to seven  years'
    imprisonment. The Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant
    was a national of North Korea as claimed. The appellant said his father
    was Chinese, so it was likely  that  he  could  obtain  citizenship  by
    descent. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim that he would be
    at risk in China because of his involvement with the Falun  Gong.  Even
    if he was a North Korean national, it  was  likely  that  he  could  be
    removed to South Korea: see GP  &  Others  (South  Korean  citizenship)
    North Korea [2014] UKUT 391.

3.    The respondent certified the Refugee Convention claim  with  reference
    to section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the
    NIAA 2002"). The consequence of the certificate is  that  a  First-tier
    Tribunal judge must start by considering whether the  presumption  that
    the person has been convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and
    constitutes a danger  to  the  community  has  been  rebutted.  If  the
    Tribunal finds that the presumption  has  not  been  rebutted  it  must
    dismiss the appeal in relation the Refugee Convention ground.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe ("the judge") allowed the appeal  in  a
    decision  promulgated  on  21  December  2017.  The  judge  began   his
    assessment by considering section 72  of  the  NIAA  2002  [23-24].  He
    considered the OASYs report, which assessed the appellant to be a  high
    risk of harm in the community. He continued to  deny  the  offence  and
    lacked motivation to complete any offence focussed work [25]. The judge
    concluded:

            "26. Against that background I am satisfied that  the  appellant
           has  not  rebutted  the  presumption  and  that  the   automatic
           deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 apply. I  note
           however that s.32(4)  and  (5)  are  subject  to  the  exception
           provided in s.33(2) where removal would breach convention rights
           or the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention."

5.    The judge went on to find that he could only place limited  weight  on
    the appellant's evidence, which had been inconsistent and was therefore
    unreliable. He went on to consider the  report  prepared  by  Professor
    Bluth. He noted that his  evidence  was  of  assistance  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in GP & Others [28].  He  attached  "considerable  weight"  to
    Professor Bluth's report. He accepted  Professor  Bluth's  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant is likely to be  North  Korean  [29].  He
    also accepted Professor Bluth's finding that the appellant would not be
    entitled to Chinese citizenship and concluded that the appellant  could
    not be returned to China [30]. The sole issue was whether the appellant
    could be returned to South Korea.

6.    The Secretary of State does not seek to challenge the judge's  finding
    relating to the appellant's nationality. It is therefore accepted  that
    he is likely to be a North Korean national. Nor has the judge's finding
    that the appellant could not be removed to China because of the risk of
    refoulement to North Korea been  challenged.  The  sole  focus  of  the
    grounds of appeal is whether, in the alternative, the  appellant  might
    be accepted in South Korea.

7.    The Secretary of State appeals the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

       i) The judge  erred  in  failing  to  follow  the  country  guidance
          decision in GP & Others. The  conclusions  in  Professor  Bluth's
          expert report were contrary to the findings in GP &  others.  The
          judge failed to give adequate reasons to explain why the evidence
          justified a departure from the country guidance.


      ii) The  second  ground,  as  originally  pleaded,  was  not  clearly
          particularised. Miss Ahmad clarified the ground at  the  hearing.
          She argued that the judge erred in allowing the appeal on Refugee
          Convention grounds when he had found that the appellant  had  not
          rebutted the presumption  that  he  is  a  serious  criminal  who
          constitutes a danger to the community under section 72.

Decision and reasons

8.    I take the second ground first. The judge's finding at [26]  discloses
    a clear error of law. Section 72(1) of the NIAA 2002 makes  clear  that
    the  provision  applies  for  the  purpose  of  the  construction   and
    application  of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention.  Section
    72(1)(b) states that  if  the  Tribunal  agrees  that  the  presumption
    applies, having given the appellant an  opportunity  for  rebuttal,  it
    must dismiss the appeal in so far as it relies on the ground  that  the
    decision would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention.

9.    The exception to deportation contained in section 33(2)(b) of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 ("the UKBA 2007")  is  not  a  separate  step  in  the
    process. The question of whether the exception to deportation contained
    in section 33(2)(b) applies is subject to the  findings  regarding  the
    section 72 certificate. The certificate determines whether  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention would  be  breached.
    Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention allows  a  signatory  state  to
    remove a refugee if they have been convicted by a final judgment  of  a
    particularly serious crime and they constitute danger to the  community
    of that country. Having found that the appellant failed  to  rebut  the
    presumption that he was a  danger  to  the  community,  the  judge  was
    obliged by operation of statute to dismiss the appeal in so far as  the
    appellant relied on Refugee Convention grounds.

10.   Although it was open to  the  judge  to  give  weight  to  the  expert
    opinion of Professor Bluth, if he was going to rely on the evidence  to
    allow the appeal, it was necessary to at least engage with  the  issues
    raised in the country guidance decision in GP  &  Others.  The  judge's
    brief statement that he had been "guided by the  findings  in  GP"  was
    insufficient given the Upper  Tribunal's  conclusion  that  most  North
    Koreans would be recognised as citizens in South Korea.

11.   It is at least  arguable  that  the  country  guidance  did  not  make
    findings on the specific point arising in this appeal, which is whether
    the appellant's criminal conviction  might  prevent  his  admission  to
    South Korea with reference to Article 9 of the  North  Korean  Refugees
    Protection  and  Settlement  Support  Act  1997  ("the  Protection  and
    Settlement Act"). The Upper Tribunal in  GP  &  Others  considered  one
    aspect of  the  provision  and  concluded  that  more  than  10  years'
    residence outside the country would not lead to rejection of  a  person
    returning to South Korea. But the Upper  Tribunal  did  not  appear  to
    consider the issue of serious criminal convictions.

12.   Professor  Bluth's  report  explained  in  some  detail  why,  in  his
    opinion, the appellant would not be admitted to South  Korea.  However,
    some analysis  was  needed  given  that  some  aspects  of  the  report
    conflicted with the findings in GP & Others. For example, at  paragraph
    5.4.13 Professor Bluth  continued  to  assert  that  the  South  Korean
    government takes the view that anyone who has lived outside the country
    for more than 10 years without claiming South Korean citizenship  would
    not be accepted. This is contrary to the findings made in GP &  Others.
    If the judge was to prefer the evidence of Professor Bluth he needed to
    give adequate reasons to explain why. In accepting the expert  evidence
    without putting it in the context  of  relevant  country  guidance  the
    judge failed to take into account a relevant consideration.

13.   It might also  be  arguable  that  the  appellant  may  not  have  the
    necessary documents to satisfy the readmission agreement procedure. The
    judge failed to deal with this issue at all. The Upper Tribunal in GP &
    Others reaffirmed the principles outlined by the Court of Appeal in  MA
    (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  289.  Professor  Bluth  acknowledged
    that the appellant might be interviewed by the  South  Korean  embassy,
    but no consideration was given to whether the appellant  had  made  out
    his claim that he would be rejected. While the judge  was  entitled  to
    consider and give weight to Professor Bluth's evidence, I conclude that
    his failure to analyse the expert evidence with reference to the issues
    raised in the country guidance also amounts to an error of law.

14.   Both parties suggested that  remittal  would  be  appropriate  if  the
    Upper Tribunal were to find an error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. However, remaking rather than remitting will  constitute  the
    normal approach to determining appeals where an error of law is  found,
    even if some further fact  finding  is  necessary  (see  paragraph  7.3
    Practice  Statement,  23/09/12).  This  is  not  a  case  where  it  is
    appropriate to remit the appeal for a fresh  hearing.  The  judge  made
    important findings of fact that have  not  been  challenged  and  which
    should be preserved. It is appropriate to list the appeal for a resumed
    hearing, at which the  Upper  Tribunal  can  consider  the  outstanding
    issues relating to the possibility of return to  South  Korea  in  more
    detail and in the proper context of the relevant country guidance.

Directions

15.   The Tribunal is conscious of the fact that the  appellant  remains  in
    detention. However, the appeal will be listed for a resumed hearing  on
    the first available  date  after  six  weeks  to  allow  time  for  the
    appellant to make enquiries with the South Korean embassy regarding his
    admission in accordance with the principles outlined in  MA  (Ethiopia)
    if he is so advised. There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant
    would have anything to fear from the South Korean authorities,  but  he
    may have everything to gain if Professor Bluth's opinion is correct.

16.   Permission is given for  any  further  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    parties to be served at least seven days before the next hearing.

17.    If  the  appellant's  representatives  consider  that  it  might   be
    necessary for him to  give  evidence,  they  should  notify  the  Upper
    Tribunal (and the respondent) at least  14  days  before  the  hearing,
    including any request for an interpreter.

18.   If further expert evidence is to be adduced,  or  it  is  intended  to
    call an expert to deal with any  outstanding  issues,  the  appellant's
    representatives should notify the Upper Tribunal (and  the  respondent)
    at least 14 days before the hearing.

19.   Both parties are at liberty to apply to amend the directions.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and the  appeal  will  be  listed  for  a  resumed
hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 09 August 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

