
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/03628/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23rd November 2017                        |On 19th December 2017          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel, instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Widdup
    made following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 21st March 2017.

 2. There is a history to this appeal.  The  appellant  claimed  asylum  on
    10th October 2015.  He claimed to be at risk on return  to  Afghanistan
    following the murder of his father by the Taliban after he  refused  to
    obey their orders.  It was accepted by the respondent that  his  father
    had worked for a local police commander and was killed as claimed,  but
    it was not accepted that the appellant himself would be at risk.

 3. The appellant appealed to an  Immigration  Judge  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 28th September 2016.  That decision was set aside by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 6th February 2017 and the appeal was remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Judge Widdup reached the same conclusion  as  the  respondent  and  the
    previous judge.  He rejected the  appellant's  account  of  his  mother
    leaving the village and remarrying and said at paragraph 53:

         "My findings of fact that the appellant has not  given  a  credible
         account of his family circumstances when he left Afghanistan is not
         a finding of fact that he has family waiting for him  in  his  home
         village.  However it is  for  him  to  show  that  he  will  be  an
         unaccompanied child  and  my  concerns  about  his  credibility  in
         relation to this mean that I am not satisfied that he does not have
         family in his home village."

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had approached his analysis of  risk  on  return  incorrectly  and  had
    failed  to  properly  apply  the  case  of  AA  (unattended   children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 0001.  In particular he had failed  to  take
    proper account of paragraph 123 of AA where the Tribunal  accepted  the
    expert's evidence referring to the Taliban in relation to un-associated
    relatives of those alleged to have collaborated with the government.

 6. The grounds also challenged the judge's approach  to  credibility  when
    assessing the plausibility of his account, failing to properly consider
    the appellant's evidence and misunderstanding his case in  relation  to
    whether his brothers and aunt had remained in the village  permanently.
    He had  also  dismissed  the  possibility  of  the  appellant's  mother
    remarrying  and  leaving  her  children  behind  based   on   his   own
    preconceptions about how she would have behaved.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Ford on  the  basis
    that the appellant had sought  permission  out  of  time  although  she
    considered that the grounds were arguable.

 8. Upon application to the Upper Tribunal, permission was granted and time
    extended by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt.

 9. Mr Melvin sought to defend the determination  and  submitted  that  the
    judge's credibility findings were  sound,  but  I  conclude  that  this
    determination is vitiated by errors of law.

10. First, the judge did not engage  with  the  evidence  accepted  by  the
    Tribunal in AA and referred to in the skeleton argument.  On  the  face
    of it, given the accepted facts, the appellant could potentially be  at
    risk as a young male relative of a person killed by the Taliban.

11. Second, the judge erred in his approach to assessing  the  plausibility
    of the claim for the reasons set out in the grounds.

12. Third, he failed to make clear findings about  whether  the  appellant,
    still a child, would have family support in his home village.  In  fact
    he specifically said that he had not made such a finding.  However, the
    judge was required to decide that issue in order to make a decision  on
    whether he would be at risk on return.

13. This is a matter which has been heard twice in the First-tier Tribunal.
     It was therefore agreed by both parties that it  should  stay  in  the
    Upper Tribunal and will be reheard by me on 23rd November  2017  for  a
    fresh hearing on all issues.

The resumed hearing

14. At the resumed hearing the appellant relied upon the previous bundle of
    papers which  his  representatives  had  produced  in  support  of  his
    original appeal.  Ms Patyna also produced a skeleton argument, a map of
    Taliban-controlled areas in Afghanistan, the reported  decision  in  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00016,  up-to-date
    Country Policy  and  Information  Notes  from  the  Home  Office  dated
    December 2016 in  relation  to  fear  of  anti-government  elements  in
    Afghanistan and a skeleton argument.

15. Mr Melvin provided a skeleton argument  together  with  copies  of  the
    cases upon which he intended to rely and the  most  up-to-date  Country
    Policy and Information Note on the Security and Humanitarian  Situation
    in Afghanistan dated August 2017.

16. Immediately before the hearing Ms Patyna sought permission to adduce  a
    further witness statement, from the  appellant's  foster  mother.   She
    gave evidence, as did the appellant, SM.

The Evidence

17. The appellant's evidence is set out in his initial statement and in his
    statement dated 2nd September 2016, which he adopted to  stand  as  his
    evidence-in-chief.  He is a minor, having been born on 1st January 2002
    and is therefore still only 15 years of age.

18. The appellant is the eldest of five sons.  He claims  that  his  father
    had worked for a local police commander and  had  been  threatened  and
    killed by the Taliban.  He fled Afghanistan with the help of  an  agent
    following his father's murder. In the  refusal  letter  the  respondent
    accepts that his father was killed by the Taliban  as  claimed  because
    his father was working for a government official.

19. Following his father's death his mother  left  the  family  home.   The
    appellant said in his screening interview  that  his  mother  remarried
    after his father had died.  At question 67 of the substantive interview
    he was asked how long after his father's death did his  mother  remarry
    and he replied "about five days".

20. In his comments on the refusal letter  at  paragraph  7  the  appellant
    said:

         "I maintain that my mother did leave after five days.   The  simple
         fact is that as far as I am concerned my widowed mother  could  not
         have chosen to leave us and gone away all by  herself.   I  assumed
         she must have got remarried.  If she is not with  us,  her  family,
         she must have remarried."

21. At his interview the appellant said  that  when  his  father  had  been
    killed, they did not know what had happened  to  him  initially.   They
    went to the Molvi, who told the family that his father had been killed.
     They were frightened and the family stayed in hiding in  their  house.
    The villagers said that the appellant could be killed as well  and  his
    life was in danger.  His brothers were sent to his aunt's home  and  he
    left with the help of an agent.  His uncle arranged everything.

22. The appellant was asked in his oral evidence  why  the  other  brothers
    were not sent away as well.  He said that maybe they did not  have  the
    money for them all or because they were younger.  He left  the  village
    five days after his father had died and not two months before he  left,
    as he had wrongly stated in his interview.

23. The appellant knew little about his family  in  Afghanistan.   He  said
    that he did not know what his uncle's job was, nor whether he  had  any
    other relatives who were alive aside from the aunt and  uncle  who  had
    helped him.  He had had one telephone call with his uncle when  he  was
    in Iran but had subsequently lost his telephone number.

24. The appellant was asked about whether he had tried to trace his  family
    through the Red Cross.  At first he said that  he  had  not  been  told
    anything about it but then said he had had an interview with his social
    worker and he had given the family details to him.  There had been  two
    interviews, once at school and once at home, because he wanted to  find
    his brothers.  He had no copies of any papers which had  been  sent  to
    him and he thought that the interview had been around two  months  ago.
    He then said he thought that he might have had a  paper  from  the  Red
    Cross.

25. The appellant's foster mother, MA, gave oral evidence.  She  said  that
    the appellant had had a number of different social workers and  one  of
    them had had an appointment with the appellant at the house and SM  had
    passed on the details to be given to the Red Cross to trace his family.
     He also had a meeting at  school.   In  oral  evidence  she  said  she
    thought that the  interview  had  taken  place  about  a  year  ago  in
    September 2016.  She named the social  worker  who  had  conducted  the
    meeting.  She said that she herself had seen  a  letter  from  the  Red
    Cross, confirming that they had been unable to  trace  the  appellant's
    family but it had never been mentioned to her that it was important  to
    bring the letter to the Tribunal.

Submissions

26.  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that,  even  after  making  allowance  for  the
    appellant's age, he had been deliberately evasive in his evidence.   He
    submitted that it was not credible that his mother would have remarried
    and left her sons in the care of the aunt so quickly after the father's
    murder.  The appellant's evidence was that the whole  family  had  been
    targeted and not just him and there was therefore  no  reason  for  the
    appellant himself to be the only one to have left.

27. The evidence in relation to contact with the family was  vague  and  he
    asked me to disbelieve both the appellant's  evidence  and  the  foster
    mother's evidence, because they  contradicted  each  other  as  to  the
    timing of the appointment with the social worker. His  credibility  was
    damaged by not having  made  any  attempt  to  contact  his  family  in
    Afghanistan.

28. In his submission it was not credible that  the  appellant  would  have
    been able to remain in the family home  for  five  days  following  the
    death of his father if the Taliban were genuinely  interested  in  him.
    Furthermore, it was not plausible that his mother would have  remarried
    so quickly and abandoned her children.

29. Ms Patyna submitted that the appellant had given credible evidence.  He
    was only now 15 and his level of understanding must be assessed in  the
    context of his very young age at the time  of  the  asylum  interviews.
    The only aspect of the claim which had not been accepted was  that  his
    mother had left the family home and got married following his  father's
    death.   Essentially  the  respondent  was  arguing  that  it  was  not
    plausible, but this was dangerous, particularly in the context  of  the
    evidence of a child.

Conclusions of the Credibility of the Appellant's Claim

30. The respondent accepted in terms that the appellant's father, who was a
    farmer, used to work for  a  local  police  commander  and  because  he
    refused to stop working for him he was killed by the Taliban.  The core
    of the appellant's story is therefore not in dispute.

31. The appellant is uneducated.  When he was in Afghanistan he  worked  in
    the bazaar putting goods in a handcart for people to take them to their
    cars.  He did not study.  I note that although  he  signed  his  second
    witness statement in September 2016 his first witness statement,  which
    was completed shortly after his arrival in the UK, is marked by a thumb
    print.

32. He clearly has difficulty with dates.  He said  at  one  point  in  the
    interview at question 63 that his father was killed  about  two  months
    before his  departure,  and  at  another  point  five  days.   He  also
    contradicted the evidence of his foster mother when he said that he had
    had the interview with the social worker about two months ago, and  she
    had said it was about a year ago.  I can place  no  reliance  upon  his
    ability to give an accurate timeframe.  However,  that  does  not  mean
    that the core of his story is not true.

33. I do not know how long it was between the murder and  his  leaving  the
    village but, the exact timescale does not matter. The  accepted  facts,
    namely his father's history of employment by a local police  commander,
    and his subsequent killing would be sufficient for  the  appellant  and
    his family to fear that the Taliban would have an interest in him.

34. It is not implausible that the appellant's mother would have remarried,
    given the difficulties she would face as a female  head  of  household,
    following the death of her husband.  The appellant said that he assumed
    that this is what had happened because she was  not  with  her  family,
    which is credible.

35. There is no merit in the respondent's argument that the fact  that  the
    boys remained in the  family  home  for  five  days  after  the  murder
    indicates that they were of no interest  to  the  Taliban.   Mr  Melvin
    submitted that it was the appellant's case that the  whole  family  had
    been targeted and not just the appellant.  However, the basis for  that
    submission appears to be the appellant's evidence that he was  told  by
    the villagers that whoever violated the order of the Taliban  would  be
    killed (question 66) and his father had been sent a night  letter.   It
    is logical that if the Taliban were interested in the  family  at  all,
    they would be most interested in the appellant as the eldest  son.   It
    is not illogical that the uncle and aunt decided to remove him from the
    perceived danger rather than the younger boys.

36. I do not accept Mr  Melvin's  rather  surprising  submission  that  the
    evidence of M.A should be discounted.   She  gave  her  evidence  in  a
    wholly straightforward manner, answering all  of  the  questions  which
    were put to her without any hesitation.  She named  the  social  worker
    who had conducted the interview with the appellant.  The fact that  her
    timing differs from  his  is  not  a  reflection  on  her  but  on  the
    difficulty which the appellant has with dates.  Both she  and  he  said
    that there were two interviews, one at school and  one  at  home.   She
    said that she had seen the letter herself,  which  said  that  the  Red
    Cross could not continue  searching  for  his  family  because  of  the
    security situation in Afghanistan.  There is  no  basis  whatsoever  to
    dispute that.

37. In conclusion, whilst I accept that aspects of the appellant's evidence
    were indeed vague, and that he was hopeless on his dates, this does not
    mean that the necessary conclusion is  that  he  is  being  untruthful,
    particularly when the core of his story has already  been  accepted  by
    the respondent. Moreover I accept, on the basis of the wholly  credible
    evidence from the appellant's foster mother,  that  the  appellant  has
    made an effort through the Red Cross to trace his family  and  that  he
    has been unsuccessful.

Findings and Conclusions

38. The appellant has leave to remain until October 2018, but his case must
    be assessed on the hypothetical basis that he  would  be  returning  to
    Afghanistan as at today's date.

39. There are two limbs to his appeal.  First is that he would be  entitled
    to asylum as an unattached child returned to Afghanistan without family
    support and second that he would be at risk from the Taliban on account
    of his perceived political opinion.

40. The appellant relies on the country guidance case of AA, in  which  the
    Tribunal accepted expert evidence that unassociated relatives of  those
    alleged to have collaborated with the government might be at risk.  The
    respondent has always accepted that his father is dead.  I  accept  his
    evidence that he does not know his mother's whereabouts and that he has
    lost contact with his family.  His village is in a  contested  district
    of Afghanistan and he has no  relatives  in  Kabul.   He  has  made  an
    attempt through the  Red  Cross  to  trace  his  family  but  has  been
    unsuccessful.

41. There is in fact no evidence that the  Taliban  sought  to  target  the
    appellant. I accept Mr Melvin's submission that there  is  no  evidence
    that the appellant has been directly  or  indirectly  targeted  by  the
    Taliban. They targeted his  father  because  of  his  occupation.   The
    appellant's evidence about the length  of  time  between  his  father's
    murder and his departure from Afghanistan is very unclear.   That  does
    not, however, mean that the appellant himself did not have a subjective
    fear of unwanted attention from  the  Taliban  or  that  the  relatives
    responsible for making decisions on his behalf  did  not  have  such  a
    fear.

42. Mr Melvin sought to distinguish AA because in that  case  the  Tribunal
    accepted that the Taliban were interested in that particular appellant.
     However, that is  to  ignore  the  alternative  basis  upon  which  AA
    succeeded. He relied on AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00163, but that of course was not a case dealing with minors.

43. The issue in this case is whether in fact the appellant has  family  to
    whom he could return.  In EU (Afghanistan) & Ors v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ
    32 the Court of Appeal accepted that the costs incurred by a family  in
    paying for a fare and an agent to arrange the journey of a child to the
    UK will have been considerable  and  they  are  therefore  unlikely  to
    cooperate with an agent of the Secretary of State  for  the  return  of
    their child to Afghanistan.  In KA (Afghanistan) [2012] EWCA  Civ  1014
    Elias LJ considered that an adverse inference was in principle open  to
    the Upper Tribunal on the evidence of a lack of cooperation.   However,
    that is not the case here.   There  is  no  basis  upon  which  it  can
    properly be said that the appellant has failed to cooperate.

44. In summary, whilst I accept that the appellant has not established that
    he would be at risk of persecution by the Taliban, I do accept that  he
    is entitled to succeed on return to Afghanistan as an unattached child.
     The respondent accepts that his father is dead.   I  accept  that  the
    appellant does not know where his mother is.  His evidence  has  always
    been consistent at its core.  The variation in the  dates  is  entirely
    explicable by his youth and lack of education.  He  has  made  attempts
    through the Red Cross to trace his family.  The risks  which  he  would
    face on a return to Kabul are set out  in  AA,  which  remains  country
    guidance to be applied in his case.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in law.  His decision  has  been  set  aside.   The
appellant's appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed[pic]                             Date 14 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


