
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03603/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 November 2017                      |On 27 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Gaisford, counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  SJ
    Clarke, promulgated on 2 August 2017. Permission to appeal was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic on 25 September 2017.

Anonymity

   2. An anonymity direction was made  previously,  and  is  repeated  below
      owing to the claimant's vulnerability.

Background

 3. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom, aged 17, during 1994. His
    asylum claim was unsuccessful but he was granted periods of exceptional
    leave to remain, the last  of  which  expired  in  February  1999.  The
    respondent also sought asylum in another identity during 1995  and  was
    granted leave to remain until November 1999. He was granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in his  own  identity  during  April  1999.  From  2003
    onwards, the respondent has received a series of criminal  convictions.
    Most notably, he was sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment for robbery  in
    2006 and 3 years' imprisonment for the same offence in 2011.

 4. The Secretary of State decided to deport the  respondent  on  3  August
    2007. His appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  on  1  November
    2007. The deportation order was signed on 4 March 2008.

 5. The respondent's application to have the deportation order revoked  was
    refused on 17 November 2010.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    allowed on Article 3 grounds and that decision was upheld by the  Upper
    Tribunal on 30  January  2012.  The  Secretary  of  State  revoked  the
    respondent's ILR and granted  six  months'  Discretionary  Leave  valid
    until 28 September 2014. The respondent applied, in time, for a further
    period of DL. On 28 April 2015, a decision to deport the respondent was
    made. Representations were made on the respondent's behalf  relying  on
    medical and protection grounds.

 6. In refusing the respondent's protection and  human  rights  claim,  the
    Secretary of State certified that section  72(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied. In considering the  protection
    claim, the Secretary of State acknowledged that respondent would not be
    able to travel between Mogadishu and Kismayo without risk and therefore
    consideration was given to his removal to Mogadishu, referring to MOJ &
    Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442. The  conclusion
    was that the respondent would be returning to Somalia as  an  'ordinary
    citizen' and would not be at risk simply on account of having lived  in
    Europe for  a  time.  Notwithstanding  the  respondent's  diagnosis  of
    paranoid schizophrenia, the Secretary of State considered that he would
    be able to work in Somalia and receive mental  health  treatment  while
    receiving assistance from his family in the United Kingdom as  well  as
    clan members in Mogadishu. It was not accepted  that  the  respondent's
    deportation would breach his human rights. While no Article 8 claim was
    raised, the Secretary of State concluded that the  respondent  did  not
    fall within the exceptions to deportation nor that there were any  very
    compelling circumstances which outweighed the public  interest  in  his
    deportation. In  addition,  the  outstanding  application  for  DL  was
    refused under paragraph 322(5) of the Rules, with no right of appeal.




The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  proceeded  by  way  of
    submissions alone. The judge had expert evidence before her in the form
    of a recent and unchallenged psychiatric report from Professor  Katona.
    The appeal was allowed on Article 3  grounds  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent's mental health was  likely  to  deteriorate,  that  he  was
    unable to support himself, that he had no family in  Somalia  or  known
    clan members in Mogadishu and that  there  was  no  evidence  that  his
    family members in the United Kingdom would be able to  remit  money  to
    him in Somalia. In the alternative, the judge  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds for the same reasons.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal in support of the  application  argued  that  the
    judge failed to give reasons why the respondent  could  not  expect  to
    benefit from remittances from family and friends at least in the  short
    term; that the judge failed to give clear reasons  why  the  respondent
    would not be able  to  access  relevant  medical  treatment,  with  the
    reasoning in Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 being applicable to his situation
    and it was said that the judge failed to properly apply MOJ.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

10. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 19 October  2017  argued
    that the judge's decision contained no material error of  law  and  the
    respondent's grounds constituted little more than an attempt to reargue
    the case.

The hearing

11. Ms Pal submitted a copy of Said and Mr Gaisford submitted  an  expanded
    Rule 24 response as well as a copy of  the  judgment  in  FY  (Somalia)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1853.

12. In her brief submissions, Ms  Pal  reiterated  what  was  said  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds regarding the Article 3  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. She referred to a failure by the judge to consider
    country guidance as well as specific facts relating to the respondent's
    circumstances. She submitted that there were no reasons provided as  to
    why there be a breach of Article 3 rights were  the  respondent  to  be
    removed to Somalia. The admitted challenges he  would  face  could  not
    possibly amount to such a breach. On Said Ms Pal  relied  on  what  was
    said at [18] of the judgment as  to  the  need  to  show  circumstances
    bringing the respondent within the scope of the cases of D and  N.  She
    argued that the claimant in Said suffered from mental health issues and
    the Court found that he could receive commonplace medical treatment  in
    Somalia. Furthermore, at [20] the Court considered that  conditions  in
    an IDP camp did not amount to an Article 3 breach.  Ms Pal argued  that
    the respondent's case was on all fours with Said, in that he has mental
    health conditions and is from a majority clan. She contended  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not make findings as to whether the  respondent
    could access relevant medical treatment in Somalia,  whether  he  could
    obtain clan support or whether his sister could send remittances. While
    it was accepted by the Secretary of State that the  respondent  had  no
    family members in Somalia, it was not accepted that he would face death
    or suffering in Somalia.

13. After Ms Pal completed her submissions, I commented that the appeal had
    also been allowed on Article 8 grounds for the same reasons as  it  was
    allowed under Article  3  and  that  it  appeared  that  there  was  no
    challenge to these findings. Mr  Gaisford  stated  that  was  also  his
    understanding. Ms Pal did not indicate otherwise.

14. In reply, Mr Gaisford, relying  on  FY,  emphasised  the  Secretary  of
    State's concession at [9] of that case that if a person ended up in  an
    IDP camp there would be a real risk of a breach of their  rights  under
    Article 3. At [10] of the decision and reasons it was  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had no objections to  the  content  of  the  medical
    evidence. On the contrary, he argued, at the hearing the  Secretary  of
    State's case had been put on the basis that Kismayo  had  improved  and
    was safe for returnees, the  judge's  findings  to  the  contrary  were
    unchallenged.

15. Mr Gaisford argued that the  case  of  FY  and  the  respondent  raised
    similar facts. At [24] the judge noted that the only  person  assisting
    the respondent in the United Kingdom was his sister who was in  receipt
    of benefits and had three children. He contended  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to  conclude  that  she  was  unlikely  to  be  able  to  send
    remittances to the respondent in Somalia. With regard to clan  support,
    Mr Gaisford maintained that the judge dealt with this  matter  but,  in
    any event, the respondent's clan was not based in Mogadishu; that  like
    the claimant in FY he had been out of Somalia for  over  twenty  years;
    the Court in FY was of the view that the expert's evidence in MOJ  that
    no clan help could be expected, was accepted by the Upper Tribunal  and
    that like FY, the respondent was a  minor  when  he  left  Somalia.  He
    further  argued  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  contention  as   to
    remittances were misconceived because the respondent  was  unlikely  to
    receive any, unlike the 20-30 per cent of other Somalis.

16. Mr Gaisford submitted that it was not enough for the Secretary of State
    to say that  the  respondent's  case  was  undistinguishable  from  the
    claimant in Said because both have mental health issues. The nature  of
    the  respondent's  illness  had  been  overlooked  as   well   as   the
    unchallenged  expert  medical  evidence.  It   had   never   been   the
    respondent's case that destitution alone would get him over the Article
    3 threshold. At [22], the judge gave cogent  findings  as  to  why  the
    respondent would not access medical treatment which were  unchallenged.
    Said indicated that individuals could  succeed  under  Article  3  with
    reference to the considerations at [407] of MOJ.  Mr  Gainsford  argued
    that all these matters were considered by the judge as  well  as  other
    relevant matters. Distinguishing Said,  Mr  Gainsford  pointed  to  the
    different diagnoses, that at most, the claimant in Said was found to be
    at risk of integration difficulties but that he had financial  support,
    family support, clan protection and available medical treatment. In the
    respondent's case, the medical treatment would be  inadequate  to  stop
    his decline and the  Tribunal  considering  his  first  appeal  made  a
    finding that he would have no support in  Mogadishu.  The  findings  of
    serious harm were open to the judge on the unchallenged  evidence  that
    he would enter a circle  of  mental  deterioration  and  owing  to  his
    presentation, the respondent was likely to stand out anywhere.

17. Ms Pal did not wish to respond to these submissions.




Decision on error of law

18. The grounds contended that the judge failed to  give  reasons  why  the
    respondent could not  expect  to  benefit,  at  least  initially,  from
    remittances from family and friends in the United  Kingdom.  The  judge
    made no error in this regard given the evidence  before  her  that  the
    only assistance the respondent  received  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    practical  support  from  his  sister  and  his  mental  health   team.
    Furthermore, at [24],  in  the  context  of  discussing  the  issue  of
    support, the judge found that there was "no  evidence"  of  any  family
    members in the United Kingdom able to remit money and that  his  sister
    was on benefits and had three children to support. The fact that up  to
    30 per cent of Somalis receive remittances does not amount to  evidence
    that this would be the case for the respondent.

19. The Secretary of State further argued that the  judge  failed  to  give
    clear reasons why the respondent would not be able to  access  relevant
    medical treatment, relying on the reasoning in Said.  The  severity  of
    the respondent's condition easily distinguishes his case from  that  of
    the claimant in Said. The judge had  no  hesitation  in  accepting  the
    unchallenged conclusions of Professor Katona who provided a psychiatric
    report on the respondent as well as an earlier  report  by  Dr  Hopkins
    that the respondent would find it very difficult to look after  himself
    and not draw attention to himself. That expert evidence, summarised  by
    the judge at [22], was that the stress caused by  the  removal  of  the
    respondent to Somalia with the concomitant loss of the support  of  the
    mental health team and his sisters would be  likely  to  aggravate  his
    paranoid  schizophrenia  and   result   in   the   worsening   of   his
    hallucinations. That in turn would risk the  respondent  becoming  more
    severely ill, disturbed and less likely to accept assistance  including
    medical assistance, in particular. Following on from this deterioration
    in his mental state, the respondent was  likely  to  self-neglect  and,
    furthermore, he would be unable to work to support  himself.  At  [21],
    the judge records Professor Katona's description of the  respondent  as
    "unkempt,  malodorous  and  restless"  and  suffering   from   auditory
    hallucinations despite the respondent benefitting from being  medically
    treated, abstinent of illicit drugs and under the close monitoring of a
    mental health team.

20. The judge's decision clearly expressed that the finding of serious harm
    was reached on the basis of the  respondent's  mental  health  and  not
    merely that he could not support himself. Nonetheless, it is  the  case
    that the evidence before the judge was that the  respondent  could  not
    support himself in the United Kingdom  where  he  had  not  worked  for
    years, had poor interpersonal skills and his physical appearance caused
    him to stand out. There was no evidence before  the  judge  to  suggest
    that the respondent would be one of those returnees at an advantage  in
    seeking employment in Mogadishu.

21. The Secretary of State's grounds and submissions regarding the  judge's
    application of MOJ were poorly  expressed  and  inaccurate.  The  judge
    considered the availability of clan support, correctly noting at  [24],
    that his clan was not one which was based in Mogadishu. Furthermore, it
    was not in dispute that the respondent had no relatives in Somalia.

22. Given the foregoing as well as what was said in FY about  the  accepted
    of the expert evidence in MOJ regarding the absence of any  expectation
    of support from one's clan, there is simply no merit in  the  Secretary
    of State's position.

23. In Said, at [21[, the Court confirmed that claimants could  succeed  on
    Article 3 grounds, "by showing they face particular (serious)  harm  to
    them or a combination of general  and  personal  dangers."  FY  was  an
    example of such a case and for very  similar  reasons,  the  judge  was
    right to reach the  conclusions  she  did  regarding  the  respondent's
    likely circumstances if removed to Somalia.

24.  The  Secretary  of  State's  arguments  amount  to  no  more  than   a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.




Conclusions


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 13 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

