

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03269/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: City Tower, Birmingham                     Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
|On 29 June 2017                        |On 6 July 2017                      |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     HNA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Ms Alban, Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born  in  1994.   He  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Thomas)
    dated 4th November 2016 to dismiss his appeal on protection grounds.








    Anonymity Order


 2. This case involves a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant is a Kurd from Sulaymaniyah. He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in October 2015 and claimed asylum on arrival.  He  claimed  to
    have a well founded fear of persecution for reasons  of  his  religious
    belief. He said that he was from a family of  radicalised  Muslims  but
    that he had converted to Christianity. He claimed that  if  retuned  to
    Iraq he would be at  risk  from  his  own  family,  from  armed  groups
    including al-Qaeda and from society in general. The Respondent rejected
    the entire claim as not credible and protection was refused.


 4. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the Appellant had
    converted to Christianity in Iraq or that his family  were  threatening
    him.  That said, the evidence overall,  in  particular  that  given  by
    Dorodian witness Pastor Steve Moseley, satisfied the Tribunal that  the
    Appellant had now converted to Christianity. He had been  baptised  and
    had been regularly attending church in the UK.

 5. The Tribunal was not satisfied that the  Appellant's  conversion  would
    place him at risk in Iraq if he went to live in the Kurdish Independent
    Region. At paragraph 39 the determination reads:

         "The background information, indexed in the appellant's  bundle  in
         summary, is that in the KIR, Christianity is permitted and Churches
         do operate. The constitution recognises the  freedom  of  religious
         belief and practice, and there is no state threat to Christians  in
         the KIR. It is true that  a  person  who  converts  from  Islam  to
         Christianity is likely to suffer discrimination and there  continue
         to be reports of harassment and abuses by the Peshmerga  and  other
         individuals, but there is no evidence to show that  such  treatment
         is contrary to Article 3 ECHR".


 6. Finding that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate that he may be  at
    risk of serious harm as a result of  his  conversion,  the  appeal  was
    thereby dismissed.




    The Appeal


 7. The point on appeal is a simple one. It is submitted that in making the
    findings that it did about  the  treatment  of  Christian  converts  in
    Kurdistan, the Tribunal failed to take material evidence into  account.
    For instance pages 70-71 of the Appellant's  bundle  was  a  report  by
    'Release  International  (UK)  which   states   "Muslim   converts   to
    Christianity face acute persecution. Even  outside  extremist-dominated
    areas, Christians face abduction  and  attack".  The  Respondent's  own
    Country Information and Guidance Note Iraq Religious Minorities (August
    2016) indicates that "given the widespread hostility  towards  converts
    from Islam and  the  general  climate  of  religious  intolerance,  the
    conversion of a Muslim to Christianity would likely result in ostracism
    and/or violence at the hands  of  the  convert's  community,  tribe  or
    family. Many, including (Sunni and  Shi'ite)  religious  and  political
    leaders, reportedly believe that apostasy from Islam is  punishable  by
    death, or even see the killing of apostates as a religious duty".




    The Respondent's Reply


 8. Although the Rule 24 response had indicated that the Respondent opposed
    this appeal, before me on the 12th May 2017  Mr  Mills  made  the  very
    realistic concession that the Tribunal did not appear to have taken all
    of the relevant material into account. He defended the reasoning to the
    extent that the situation in Kurdistan would appear to  be  better  for
    religious minorities than elsewhere in Iraq, and submitted that in  the
    final analysis the outcome may be the same, but agreed that  there  had
    been before the Tribunal evidence which indicated that the treatment of
    converts was markedly different from that concerned with Christians per
    se which the Tribunal appears to have focussed upon.  For  that  reason
    the Respondent was prepared to accept that the grounds of  appeal  were
    made out.




    Error of Law


 9. The error of law alleged in the grounds is made out. The  Tribunal  has
    failed to have  regard  to  the  totality  of  the  country  background
    material, much of which indicated that there may be a risk of  harm  in
    Iraq to a Muslim who had converted to Christianity.   The Tribunal  was
    not obliged to accept all of the evidence, but a reasoned decision  had
    to be made, and it had not been.  The determination  is  set  aside  to
    that extent only.


10. The Tribunal made two important findings of fact, neither of which  are
    challenged before me. First,  that  the  Appellant  had  not  converted
    before he left Iraq, and second that he has converted since his arrival
    in the United Kingdom. Those findings are to stand.


11. Turning to the remaking of the decision it became clear that there is a
    further omission in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Appellant claims to be part of an  evangelical  church  and  had  given
    evidence that he considered proselytising to be an inherent part of his
    faith. The First-tier Tribunal made no finding on that evidence. I  was
    not prepared to read in to its acceptance that he is a member  of  that
    church an implied finding that he would seek to proselytise  should  he
    be returned to Iraq. I directed that further evidence on this point  is
    required and that  this  should  be  provided,  in  the  form  of  oral
    testimony if necessary, at a resumed hearing.



    The Re-Made Decision

      The Evidence

12. At the resumed hearing I heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  and
    Pastor Steve Moseley of the Coventry Jesus Centre.


13. The Appellant adopted his witness statement dated 8th  June  2017.   He
    states therein that he has  continued  to  attend  the  Coventry  Jesus
    Centre even though he has now been moved to Birmingham. It is expensive
    but he still manages to attend twice a week.  On  Wednesday  nights  he
    goes to the 'catch the fire'  bible  study  group  and  on  Sundays  he
    attends the service. Sometimes he  goes  on  a  Saturday  as  well.  He
    regards spreading the word of God as an important part of his faith. He
    and his friend N, also a convert, spend a lot of time talking to people
    in their community about their faith and explaining  that  Christianity
    is a peaceful religion.  He concentrates on their community because his
    English is not yet good enough to speak  to  others.  He  tries  to  be
    careful because he knows that people who are Muslim  may  be  offended,
    but if the person is open  minded  he  will  try  and  engage  them  in
    conversation.   He gives instances of when he has publicly  helped  the
    church spread the word, such as an event in a park in August 2016  when
    he  handed  out  leaflets.  He  fears  that  in  Iraq  he  would   feel
    "suffocated". He is deeply opposed to Islam. He fears that he would not
    be able to openly practice his own  faith,  but  he  also  fears  being
    targeted  by  extremists.   The  Appellant  appends  to  his  statement
    photographs of himself engaged in evangelical prayer.


14. Mr Mills read to the Appellant from his statement. He said that he  did
    not want to offend people so he was careful in who  he  spoke  to.   Mr
    Mills put it to him that he could be careful in Kurdistan - just as  he
    is cautious here, so he could  be  cautious  there  before  introducing
    people to Christianity. The Appellant said that it would be  harder  in
    Kurdistan. There is not the same freedom there. People wouldn't take it
    as lightly as they would do here.  Mr  Mills  asked  the  Appellant  to
    clarify - would he only talk to open minded people in Kurdistan whom he
    had assessed to be no threat? The Appellant said again that he would be
    cautious: "it is dangerous there, but I would still continue to do it".
      Mr  Mills  asked  if  there  were  openly  evangelical  churches   in
    Sulaymaniyah. The Appellant said that people could  not  do  things  in
    Iraq like  his  church  does  here.  For  instance,  his  church  often
    evangelises on the streets in Birmingham - Christians could not do that
    in  Kurdistan,  their  lives  would  be  in  danger.    The   Christian
    population of Iraq only decreases in size; it never goes up.   That  is
    because people are being killed, and forced to leave.  People  are  not
    joining churches there.   Mr Mills put it to the  Appellant  that  many
    Christians from other parts of Iraq have  gone  to  live  in  Kurdistan
    because conditions for them are  better  there.   They  practice  their
    religion at home and do not feel the need to take it "onto the street".
    The Appellant said that those people are born Christian. He said it  is
    okay for them: "I converted so it's different for me".    The Appellant
    said that he regards it has part of his  religion  to  talk  to  people
    openly: "I can't just sit at home praying in a prison. I am happy  when
    someone is introduced into the church".


15. Pastor Moseley did not have a witness statement,  but  adopted  as  his
    evidence a long letter he had written to the Tribunal on the  8th  June
    2017. He is the senior pastor of the Coventry congregation of the Jesus
    Army/ Jesus Fellowship Church. He describes his church as  orthodox  in
    doctrine and evangelical.  He has known the Appellant  since  May  2016
    when he started attending their church. He is a regular attendee of the
    Wednesday meetings which are aimed at the Kurdish,  Iranian,  Arab  and
    Afghani members  of  the  congregation.  This  group  provides  baptism
    instruction and bible study. The Appellant also attends Sunday  service
    and the monthly Saturday evening celebrations. He regularly visits  the
    Pastor at home for evenings of  fellowship.   Pastor  Moseley  believes
    that the Appellant has a "very real commitment of heart  and  life"  to
    Jesus. From his own observations of him he can say that  the  Appellant
    is a morally  upright  person  who  conducts  himself  with  integrity.
    Pastor Moseley said  that  their  church  regards  evangelising  as  an
    important part of their faith and that he has personally witnessed  the
    Appellant enjoying his aspect of their worship.

16. In response to Mr Mills' questions Pastor Moseley said that his  church
    did not have a presence in Iraq. He was unable  to  say  whether  there
    were any  evangelical  congregations  there  and  he  had  no  personal
    knowledge of any Iraqis having gone back there having converted in  his
    church.  Asked whether he thought that  evangelising  was  an  inherent
    element of the Appellant's faith Pastor Moseley  said  this:  he  could
    imagine that the Appellant would be able to tolerate attending services
    conducted by other denominations but  it  was  his  assessment  of  the
    Appellant that he is a person who has found love  in  Jesus  -  like  a
    young man in love he is very enthusiastic and wants to talk  about  him
    all of the time.  Whatever church he went to he would continue to  have
    that enthusiasm and want to talk about his  faith,  regardless  of  the
    approach taken by those denominations.

17. Pastor Moseley was asked whether he ever exercised discretion  in  this
    country. Mr Mills asked him whether he would, for instance,  set  up  a
    stall outside a mosque? He replied:

         "In three weeks' time we are setting up a marquee in  the  park  in
         the Foles Hill area of Coventry as part of  a  Christian  festival.
         It is very multicultural area - lots of Poles, Indians, Muslims. We
         will have people giving out invitations, lots of sports  activities
         etc. I wouldn't march into a mosque and start discussing  Allah,  I
         would be more respectful than that, but on the  street  I  wouldn't
         hold back. We are respectful but we put across our views.  We  will
         be in that community and we will explain who we  are  and  what  we
         believe. It takes some guts for the converts from Islam to do  that
         -  they  may  well  encounter  hostility  from  their  former   co-
         religionists".


    Country Background Material


18. I have been provided with a very helpful report by Dr Farangis  Ghaderi
    of Exeter University. The Respondent makes no challenge to Dr Ghaderi's
    objectivity or expertise, and I am satisfied that  she  has  understood
    and applied the Ikarian Reefer approach. She has researched and written
    widely on Kurdish issues for many years and has spent ten years  living
    in Iraqi Kurdistan where inter  alia  she  advised  the  government  on
    gender issues.  I found her report to be  balanced  and  well-informed.
    As to the general background Dr Ghaderi reports as follows:


              i) There is some contradiction between the laws  on  religious
                 freedom in the KIR and the constitution. The latter  states
                 that the state shall protect the individual from  religious
                 coercion, but  there  are  examples  of  the  former  which
                 operate  in  a   discriminatory   way   against   religious
                 minorities.  For  instance,  Muslims  are  prohibited  from
                 converting to another faith and if  minority-faith  parents
                 convert to Islam, laws require  that  their  children  also
                 convert. Dr Ghaderi reports that there have been  instances
                 of Christian parents fleeing with their children  in  order
                 to avoid forced conversion;


             ii) The security situation in the KIR is generally  far  better
                 than the rest of the country, but the influx of  more  than
                 1.8 million refugees from Syria and ISIS-affected areas  of
                 Iraq has compounded  a  financial  crisis  precipitated  by
                 falling oil prices;

            iii) The  KIR  government  are  far  better  placed  to  provide
                 protection than that the government in the  rest  of  Iraq,
                 but  problems  in  governance   persist.   Corruption   and
                 political  influence  over  the  legal  system  remains   a
                 significant problem. An  individual  "without  connections"
                 may not be provided with protection;

             iv) The KIR has generally been a "safe haven"  for  Christians,
                 in the sense that they are not usually targeted by  radical
                 Islamists as they are elsewhere in  the  country.  The  KIR
                 government  has  been  keen  to  show   the   international
                 community that it will protect minorities;

              v) Christians do  however  face  some  difficulties  including
                 discrimination  and  unlawful  land  seizures,  which   the
                 government have failed to deal with;

             vi) Some Christian leaders have expressed concern about growing
                 extremism  in  the  Sunni  community,  and  fear  that  the
                 protections they enjoy could be eroded  if  the  government
                 are forced to appease such faction in the future;

            vii) Kurdish society  is  generally  conservative  and  although
                 reactions would differ depending on the family,  one  could
                 say that a convert would likely be treated as an outcast by
                 the majority of Kurdish Muslims


19. As to the specific issue in this appeal, risk to a convert from  Islam,
    Dr Ghaderi concentrates on the risk from Islamic extremists. She  notes
    that governance  and  politics  in  the  region  are  largely  secular.
    Islamist parties, which emerged in the late 1980s, have  been  co-opted
    into government  and  have  to  date  worked  alongside  their  secular
    colleagues in a peaceful way.  There has however  been  a  more  subtle
    increase in the influence of Islamist groups.   Some  sources  reported
    that the new generation are more under their influence that  the  first
    generation that fought for autonomy.   An example of open adherence  to
    Islamic principles has been attacks on stores  selling  alcohol  during
    Ramadhan. The most violent incident took place in  2011  when  over  30
    liquor shops belonging to Christians and  Yazidis  were  damaged.   One
    prominent extremist, a Mullah Hassib, has called for  apostates  to  be
    executed.   The increase in this type of  rhetoric  has  left  minority
    communities expressing fears  for  their  future:  the  leader  of  the
    Zoroastrian community is quoted as saying that he and his  people  fear
    for their safety every time they leave their centre.  Dr Ghaderi  could
    only find one example of a Christian convert facing violence. That  was
    the  incident  involving  'Priest  Abdullah'  reported  by  the  Danish
    Immigration Service. This convert was said to have been evangelising in
    the region  and  escaped  three  assassination  attempts  before  being
    arrested by the Asayish.  He is believed to have  left  the  region  to
    seek asylum in Europe.   Dr Ghaderi concludes that whilst the Appellant
    is not likely to come to harm at the hands  of  the  state,  the  state
    would be unlikely to recognise his  conversion  for  fear  of  inciting
    anger amongst conservative clerics.


20. All of the sources I was  provided  with  agreed  that  the  number  of
    Christians in Iraq has diminished since the fall of the Saddam  regime.
    The Minority Rights Group[2]  (MRG)  report  that  prior  to  2003  the
    population was estimated to be between 800,000 and 1.4 million; by 2017
    it is estimated to be  300,000.  The  US  Commission  on  International
    Freedom  note  that  inconsistent  census  gathering   makes   accurate
    reporting difficult, but state that between half to two-thirds  of  the
    population has left in the same period.

21. In respect of Christian IDPs the MRG report that as of the end of April
    2017 49% of the IDPs in the country are from Ninewa, the scene of major
    conflict with ISIS.  Christians from Ninewa  have  moved  to  the  KIR.
    Erbil hosts 11% of the IDPs in Iraq, and Dohuk 13%.   The  most  common
    living arrangement is for people to be  accommodated  by  relatives  or
    other 'host families'  from  their  ethnic  group.  Families  are  also
    renting privately but these houses are very overcrowded.  MRG note that
    a serious constraint  to  private  renting  is  the  lack  of  official
    documentation, as people  are  unable  to  enter  into  formal  tenancy
    agreements without  it.   Other  forms  of  housing  include  'critical
    housing' ie living in abandoned, half built or derelict buildings,  and
    24% of IDPs are in camps. In the KIR these camps  are  overcrowded  and
    have long waiting lists to gain entry. Those who are unable to  get  in
    are living in squalid 'informal settlements'.

22. The US Commission on International Freedom (the Commission)  have  very
    recently produced a comprehensive report on the situation in  the  KIR:
    Wilting in the Kurdish Sun: the Hopes and Fears of Religious Minorities
    in Northern Iraq, dated 1st June 2017. Its findings are  summarised  in
    this introductory paragraph:


         The Kurdistan Region  of  Iraq  (see  map  on  p.  7)  is  home  to
         considerable religious diversity and has provided  a  comparatively
         safe haven for minorities fleeing  violence  in  the  rest  of  the
         region. Compared  with  the  situation  in  many  of  its  regional
         neighbors, the Kurdistan Region of Iraq possesses a robust state of
         religious freedom. Even so, minority religious  and  ethnic  groups
         face  specific  challenges,  such  as  systemic  discrimination  by
         elements within the authorities or wider society. In addition,  the
         deteriorating political  and  economic  situation  in  the  region,
         combined with poorly enforced protections and relatively weak  rule
         of law, could put minorities increasingly at risk in the future.


23. The report describes Christians as a  "relatively  prominent  religious
    and political force" in the region.   Christian leaders  commended  the
    KIR government, with three  Archbishops  from  different  denominations
    reporting that they were provided with state funds to build and  repair
    churches; Christians who fled ISIS expressed gratitude to the  role  of
    the Peshmerga in their defence.  On a less positive note the Commission
    draws a strong link between religion and socio-economic  opportunities,
    noting  that  minorities  face  far  greater  challenges  in  terms  of
    employment and growth.   The findings suggest a systemic  bias  against
    economic achievement by minority groups.   There are  numerous  reports
    of  local  Christians,  particularly  in  Dohuk,  having   their   land
    appropriated by Kurds.


24. The Commission's findings on the rule of law as it applies to religious
    minorities echo the opinion given by Dr Ghaderi:


         In 2015, the Kurdistan Parliament passed the Law of Protecting  the
         Rights of Components in Kurdistan (The Minority Rights  Law).  This
         law lists national groups (Turkmen, Chaldeans, Assyrians,  Syriacs,
         and Armenians) and religious groups  (Christians,  Yezidis,  Sabian
         Mandaeans, Kaka'is, Shabak, Faylies, Zoroastrians, and  others)  as
         components of the citizenry of the KRI. The law enumerates a series
         of rights, including freedom  of  thought,  religion,  speech,  and
         culture. The law also mandates the government to guarantee equality
         and equality of opportunity to all component groups of the  region,
         while requiring religious discrimination to be punished.  This  law
         is notable for its comprehensive listing of the  various  religious
         groups and minorities, and its unambiguous granting of  rights  and
         religious freedoms to all. The law formalizes many of the  not  yet
         ratified provisions of the draft constitution  and  is  a  stronger
         legal protection, as  it  formally  acknowledges  all  of  region's
         specific groups, and grants them rights equally....


         However, although the Minority Rights Law is undoubtedly a positive
         step for religious freedom in the KRI and in Iraq,  it  is  unclear
         how effective it will be. Implementation of the law will require  a
         strong commitment to the rule of law,  for  prosecutors  and  local
         authorities to uphold the rights outlined, and for  the  courts  to
         administer the law fairly. It is too soon to know  how  effectively
         this nascent law will be implemented....


         Compared with much of the rest of Iraq, rule of law  is  strong  in
         the KRI.  Nevertheless,  access  to  justice  varies  depending  on
         location, connections,  ethnicity,  and  religion.  An  April  2016
         report produced by the Danish Refugee Council (DRC) and the  Danish
         Immigration Service (DIS) cited interviews with various experts  on
         KRI in collecting updated information relevant to  cases  of  Iraqi
         asylum seekers and their access to the KRI. In that  report,  Human
         Rights Watch  characterized  the  Kurdish  court  system  as  under
         political influence and used to stifle dissent. Further,  according
         to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees
         (UNHCR), the local population in KRI makes little use of the police
         or the  courts.  UNHCR  said  that  the  courts  are  not  seen  as
         responsive, even though, in principle, they have a number of  sound
         laws  that  meet  international  standards.  In   addition,   UNHCR
         explained that access to rule of law is  dependent  on  ethnic  and
         religious affiliation, tribe, connections,  family  and  relatives,
         and it is very difficult, if not impossible, for an  individual  to
         stand up for his rights by himself.


25. The report also notes discontent  in  respect  of  the  national  Iraqi
    legislation on ID cards, passed in 2015.  This  stipulates  inter  alia
    that a Muslim cannot convert to another faith, and that  an  individual
    born a Muslim must retain that identity on his ID card. This can create
    problems particularly for those  with  children,  whose  children  must
    remain Muslim. One priest related incidents  where  a  Muslim  who  had
    converted to  Christianity  was  unable  to  change  his  ID  card  and
    subsequently faced difficulty from security  services  when  trying  to
    attend churches in a Christian quarter.


26. There was limited evidence of an evangelical presence in the  KIR.  The
    Commission states that there are three main denominations, the Chaldean
    Catholics, the Assyrians and the Syriac  Orthodox.  These  groups  have
    distinct  ethnic  identities  from  the   Kurds,   and   adherents   of
    Christianity tend to ethnically identify with their  respective  sects.
    Each sect tends to live in its own geographic area, and share political
    affiliations. The MRG and the OHCHR both include Evangelicals in  their
    list of denominations present in the area but do not give  a  breakdown
    of numbers.


27. In respect of conversion to Christianity the evidence was also limited.
    A report by the World Watch Monitor dated 14th June 2017[3]  refers  to
    new converts to Christianity increasing numbers of the faith in Iraq; a
    respondent attributes this to a reaction against ISIS. The Commission's
    report  only makes one reference, to the man who faced problems because
    of his ID card.  The Commission did note that there  has  been  a  very
    substantial  increase  in  the  numbers  of   Muslims   converting   to
    Zoroastrianism,  a  phenomenon  attributed  to  a   rise   in   Kurdish
    nationalism: some estimates put the figure as  100,000  conversions  in
    2015 alone.

28. As to  potential  risk  the  Commission  identifies  a  rise  in  Sunni
    extremism in the region:

         Some Sunni extremism exists in the Kurdish  autonomous  region.  In
         the early 2000s Ansar al-Islam, a terrorist  insurgent  group,  was
         based in the KRI. In May 2015, Kurdish security forces prevented  a
         bombing plot in Erbil by  local  members  of  ISIS,  revealing  the
         group's societal reach beyond the front lines  of  Iraq's  disputed
         territories. Fears of terrorist infiltration have  alarmed  Kurdish
         authorities, leading to the imposition of strict travel limitations
         on Sunni Arab populations - though critics suggest this  policy  is
         also motivated by a desire to make life difficult for  Sunni  Arabs
         and to discourage them from remaining in the region.


         In addition, the economic downturn after the war on ISIS, declining
         global oil prices, increasing unemployment  rates,  and  widespread
         corruption and nepotism all add  to  the  risk  of  radicalization,
         especially among the region's youth. In the KRI, 36 percent of  the
         population is under the age of 14; the median age is slightly  over
         20.44 According to the Ministry  of  Social  Affairs,  unemployment
         skyrocketed from 7 percent in 2013 to 21  percent  in  2015.  Since
         June 2014, more  than  500  young  Sunnis  have  joined  ISIS  from
         Kurdistan.


         To counter the threat of radicalization, the  KRG  plans  to  offer
         "courses to retrain and attempt  to  'moderate'  the  nearly  3,000
         imams in the Kurdistan Region and to change the Islamic program  in
         public schools, which is under the authority  of  the  Ministry  of
         Education." Imams and  mosques  are  now  monitored  for  signs  of
         radicalism. Anecdotally, this has  led  to  radical  preachers  and
         recruiters meeting in secret.
         ....


         Some Christian leaders expressed concern to  the  researcher  about
         underlying hostility from some more extreme elements of  the  Sunni
         Kurdish majority. Priests unanimously warned of  growing  extremism
         emanating from the mosques  and  sections  of  society.  Christians
         acknowledge that the authorities have safeguarded them to date, but
         fear that these protections could  be  eroded  if  Kurdish  leaders
         choose to appease extremists  in  future  governments.  One  priest
         claimed that  Kurdish  contractors  had  refused  to  carry  out  a
         contract upon learning that the work was on behalf of  a  Christian
         church.



    Discussion and Findings


29. Having had an opportunity to hear from the Appellant and Pastor Moseley
    Mr Mills was able to immediately concede that the Appellant does openly
    practice his faith in this country and that this does include  speaking
    to non-Christians about his faith  and  trying  to  encourage  them  to
    convert.  Mr Mills further repeated his concession, made at the  'error
    of law' hearing, that in the Arab areas of Iraq an  individual  convert
    to Christianity who openly wished to practice his faith may well face a
    real risk of persecution. It is however the Respondent's case that  the
    Appellant's faith, and public demonstrations of it, would not place him
    at risk of such harm in  the  Kurdish  region  to  which  he  would  be
    returned. His home governate of Sulaymaniyah is part of  the  KIR;   no
    question of 'internal flight therefore arises. If he can make  out  his
    claim of risk  in respect of the KIR his appeal  must  be  allowed.  Ms
    Alban agreed that this was the framework for my enquiry.


30. I begin with finding that the Appellant is an evangelical Christian and
    that as such he does regard it as a fundamental part of  his  faith  to
    'spread the word'.  I  accept  Pastor  Moseley's  assessment  that  the
    Appellant is very enthusiastic and that he would not be able to contain
    that enthusiasm if faced with an opportunity to  convert  someone.    I
    also  accept  Pastor  Moseley's  evidence  that  the  Appellant   would
    'tolerate' attending services led by a different denomination,  in  the
    event that he was  unable  to  locate  other  evangelicals  to  worship
    alongside.  As here, I would expect that the Appellant would use common
    sense and good manners when speaking to  others.  In  his  evidence  he
    described not wanting to offend people; this  was  mirrored  in  Pastor
    Moseley's evidence that their approach is to speak to  receptive,  open
    minded audiences.  I find that he would be likely to  do  the  same  in
    Kurdistan. Just as Pastor Moseley would not enter a Mosque uninvited to
     start talking about Jesus, so too would the Appellant be judicious  in
    choosing his audience.

31. His evidence about his family,  and  their  attitude  towards  him  was
    expressly rejected by the First-tier Tribunal, who did not accept  that
    they posed a risk to him because he  had  converted  prior  to  leaving
    Iraq.  Dr Ghaderi opined that family reactions would vary depending  on
    the political or religious leanings of the family in  question.   I  do
    not regard it as necessary, for the purposes of this determination,  to
    evaluate what  reaction  the  Appellant's  family  might  have  to  his
    conversion today.  That is because he is a grown  man  with  no  health
    issues, who would be able to live independently from his  family,  just
    as he has done here.  What he would lack in respect of  familial  ties,
    he could make up for by building relationships with fellow  Christians,
    just as he has done here.   I proceed on the basis that  the  Appellant
    would choose to live away from his family in Sulaymaniyah city.

32. I must now consider, in light of the background evidence, whether there
    is a reasonable likelihood of serious harm for an individual with these
    characteristics in the KIR.

33. The background  evidence  indicates  that  there  are  three  potential
    problems faced by Christians in Kurdistan.

34. First, they clearly face some degree of discrimination. Notwithstanding
    the efforts of the  regional  government,  federal  Iraqi  law  clearly
    operates to their disadvantage. The law relating to ID cards stipulates
    that an individual who is  born  Muslim  cannot  change  his  religious
    designation on his ID card.  I accept that this would  be  frustrating,
    and perhaps insulting for the  individuals  concerned.  It  could  also
    result  in  inconvenience:  the  Commission  report  mentions  such  an
    individual who faced obstacles in getting past security personnel  into
    the Christian quarter in order to worship. I  accept  that  this  would
    certainly be difficult, but I do not accept  that  such  inconveniences
    would amount to persecution.   The ID card law can create real problems
    for families of mixed faiths. I accept that this could potentially lead
    to serious harm. For instance, where  the  family  have  hitherto  been
    Christian and one of the parents converts to Islam,  the  law  requires
    that the  children  also  be  converted.  I  would  comment  that  this
    stipulation appears to be wholly contrary to Islamic as well  as  human
    rights law, and accept that in some circumstances it could  be  classed
    as persecution. It is not however  a  matter  that  need  concern  this
    Appellant.   I accept that some members of Iraqi Kurdish  society,  and
    indeed some Christians, may view him with suspicion or  distain.   This
    may impact on his ability  to  make  friends,  find  accommodation  and
    employment. This leads me to  the  second  point  to  emerge  from  the
    country background material.


35.  Christians  as  a  class  do  appear  to  suffer  from   an   economic
    disadvantage. In a region already beset by financial crisis, where  1.8
    million  refugees  and  IDPs  have  further  destabilised  an   already
    precarious economy, people are likely  to  'stick  to  their  own'.  An
    incomer who  has  no  family  ties  and  no  immediate  ethno-religious
    affiliation  is  likely  to  find  it  difficult  to  find  work,   and
    accommodation.  I accept that it would be difficult, but  not  that  it
    would be an obstacle that could not be overcome.  I cannot accept  that
    the Appellant  could  be  unable  to  find  some  support  from  fellow
    Christians in the KIR. These churches have welcomed and supported their
    brethren  from Ninewa and other southern governates; it is  unthinkable
    that they would reject the Appellant.  The type of economic  harm  that
    features most prominently in the reports - illegal land appropriation -
    is not a matter that would impact upon the Appellant.

36. The final problem for Christians is the presence in the  KIR  of  Sunni
    extremism.  I have before me evidence  that  Sunni  'extremism'   -  by
    which I read a form of Islam  that  expresses  open  hostility  towards
    those of other faiths - is  on  the  rise  in  Kurdistan.  The  sources
    attribute this rise to several factors: the fall in the oil  price  has
    led to greater economic uncertainty, the  influence  of  this  ideology
    across the region generally,  the  failure  of  secular  ideologies  to
    deliver, and simple demographics, with  a  disproportionate  number  of
    young people who are traditionally more susceptible to  radicalisation.
    Dr Ghaderi gives the example  of  Mullah  Hassib  who  has  called  for
    apostates to be killed; Priest Abdullah, a vocal convert who was forced
    to flee, and the 2011 rioting  against  shops  selling  alcohol  during
    Ramadhan. The Commission reports on  a  2015  foiled  bomb  plot  by  a
    nascent ISIS cell in Erbil. These examples are very  concerning  in  an
    area otherwise praised for its "robust" attitude to religious  freedom.
    They must however be seen in the context of the overall evidence.

37. That evidence is that Christians, and other religious minorities, enjoy
    a greater degree of freedom and  protection  in  Iraqi  Kurdistan  than
    anywhere else in Iraq, and possibly the entire Middle East.  The  state
    has taken overt and concrete steps to protect them in law, and  Kurdish
    troops are committed on  the  frontline  to  defending  them  in  arms.
    Reading the background material I am struck by the  generous  plurality
    of the government policies,  which  appear  at  odds  with  the  trends
    emerging in other places in the  region.  The  US  State  Department[4]
    reports for instance that this year the 430 Jewish families  living  in
    the KIR were honoured with the first official Holocaust Remembrance Day
    and a special representative in the Ministry of Religious Affairs. Laws
    have been passed  specifically  to  defend  the  religious  freedom  of
    Christians - whilst simultaneously outlawing those  who  might  pose  a
    threat to them, such as Wahhabism. It may be that  these  policies  are
    driven by a genuine desire to create a secular and democratic  society.
    A cynic might suggest that the government are  keen  to  display  their
    human  right  credentials  to  the  international  community   as   the
    independence referendum looms later this year. Whatever the motivation,
    the evidence before me consistently suggests that significant effort is
    being made to  accommodate  and  protect  Christians.    There  may  be
    dangers in the future. Political expediency may mean that  the  KRG  is
    compelled to accommodate the religious right. ISIS  could  regroup  and
    strike north. Sunni extremists may consolidate their foothold.  All  of
    these things are possible, but on  the  evidence  before  me  they  are
    remote possibilities.  At present the KRG appears to be sticking to its
    policy of protection and accommodation.


38. I now turn to consider the specific threat, if any, posed to  a  person
    with the Appellant's characteristics. The reason for this remaking  was
    the agreed position between  the  parties,  that  a  convert  is  in  a
    markedly different position from a person who was  born  Christian.  In
    the KIR the principle reason why would appear to  be  the  question  of
    connections.  He is ethnically Kurdish. He  is  not  from  one  of  the
    established  ethnic  Christian  groups,  such  as  the   Chaldeans   or
    Assyrians. I find that as a result he is likely, on arrival  at  least,
    to face some degree of isolation, if he does not want to return to  his
    family.   If he were to find himself in any sort of trouble, this  lack
    of connections could present him with  difficulties,  for  instance  in
    accessing active support from the police. However I  consider  it  very
    unlikely that he would remain isolated for long. Pastor Moseley  -  and
    indeed the Appellant himself - was eloquent in expressing how motivated
    and keen the Appellant is to develop and share his knowledge of his new
    faith. I am satisfied that he would quickly be able to find some social
    and  economic  support  from  the  large  and   established   Christian
    community. I accept Pastor Moseley's evidence that  he  would  find  it
    tolerable to worship with another denomination if  he  were  unable  to
    locate other evangelicals.   Would he then find  himself  at  risk  for
    talking to other people about his faith?


39. The evidence of converts to Christianity in the KIR is thin.    I  note
    the evidence of the 'World Watch Monitor' that  revulsion  at  ISIS  is
    proving a strong recruiting mechanism for evangelical  groups.  I  read
    that evidence with some caution since it is not supported at all by the
    other evidence,  but  I  do  accept,  for  instance  in  light  of  the
    Commission's report, that there are isolated instances  of  conversion.
    Since both OHCHR and MRG report on the presence of evangelical churches
    I assume that they are actively evangelising. What the Commission  does
    detail quite extensively is the conversion - in fairly large numbers  -
    of Muslims  to  Zoroastrianism.  The  absence  of  evidence  that  such
    converts are suffering from  persecution  is  striking.   It  does  not
    support the Appellant's case that any Muslim who  leaves  his  religion
    would be risking death of serious harm in the KIR.

40. Considering all of that evidence in the round I  am  satisfied  that  a
    person  who   has   converted   to   Christianity   would   face   some
    discrimination, and significant socio-economic challenges in  the  KIR.
    He would not however face any sanction in law, nor  be  prevented  from
    practising his faith in an open manner. I accept that there may be some
    risk from violent extremists, but this is, on the evidence before me so
    limited that a real risk cannot be made out, even  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof.


    Decisions


41. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside to the  limited  extent  identified
    above.


42. The decision in  the  appeal  is  remade  as  follows:  the  appeal  is
    dismissed on all grounds.


43. There is a direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               5th July 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 19th January 2017 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Murray

[2] Crossroads: the future of Iraq's Minorities after ISIS, 6th June 2017
[3] Iraqi senior cleric shown calling for Christians to 'convert, pay tax
or be killed'
[4] Country Report on Human Rights Practices, 3/3/2017

