
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/03669/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2019                 |On 30th October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     TS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Kotak, of Counsel, instructed by Gurney Harden
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1988.  He arrived  in
       the UK in April 2011 as a Tier 4 student  migrant  with  leave  valid
       until November 2015. He returned in May 2012 to visit his father, and
       came back to the UK on 20th June 2012, lodging  an  asylum  claim  on
       24th July 2012. That claim was refused on 4th June 2014, and Judge of
       the First-tier Tribunal Courtney dismissed the appeal on 29th  August
       2014. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  that
       decision was refused.

    2. On 1st December 2015 the appellant made further  submissions  to  the
       respondent which were accepted as a fresh  claim  but  refused  in  a
       decision dated 1st April 2019.  His appeal against this decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Louveaux  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 5th August 2019.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Povey on 5th September 2019 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law in finding the court  documents
       and arrest warrant were forgeries.

    4. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Courtney dismissed  the  appellant's
       first appeal but she accepted that the appellant had  been  arrested,
       detained and tortured in Sri Lanka in 2012. She accepted that he  had
       been detained in June 2012 because he had assisted the  LTTE  in  the
       manner he claimed and that he was released by payment of a bribe, but
       she found he was not at risk on return because he had a low level  of
       involvement with the LTTE.

    6. Judge Louveaux had evidence before him from a Sri Lankan  lawyer,  Mr
       Poobalasingham, who represented the appellant's brother in Sri Lanka,
       and who agreed at the request of the appellant's solicitors to  check
       the court  records  relating  to  the  appellant.  Mr  Poobalasingham
       applied to Jaffna Magistrates court and obtained certified copies  of
       the case records including a  warrant  for  the  appellant's  arrest.
       Judge Louveaux found that these documents were  not  genuine.  It  is
       argued that he erred in this assessment because he failed  to  follow
       the country guidance in GJ; because  he  failed  to  take  the  right
       approach to the  respondent's  obligation  as  outlined  in  PJ  (Sri
       Lanka); and failed to assess the documents in  the  way  set  out  in
       Tanveer Ahmed.

    7. Ms Everett accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
       the decision at paragraph 33. I found that this was the case, and set
       out my reasoning below. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and also set aside findings at paragraphs 33 to 44  and  the
       private life findings at paragraph 59  to  60  of  the  decision.   I
       preserved findings that the appellant is largely a  credible  witness
       at paragraphs 30 to 32 and the negative findings to do  with  medical
       Article 3 and suicide risk at paragraphs 45 to  57  of  the  decision
       which are not challenged in the grounds of appeal.  The parties  were
       both happy to proceed with the remaking of the appeal immediately  on
       the basis of submissions only.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. At paragraph 33 of the decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considers
       that the arrest warrant  cannot  be  genuine  because  the  appellant
       managed to enter Sri Lanka via the airport at  a  time  when  it  was
       apparently extant. The First-tier Tribunal finds that the evidence in
       GJ is such that this would not be possible. I accept the  submissions
       of the appellant that this is  not  an  accurate  reflection  of  the
       evidence in GJ which is on the issue  of  whether  an  asylum  seeker
       might be able to leave, rather than enter, Sri  Lanka  when  actively
       sought by the authorities, and confirms that this is  plausible,  and
       finds that there is no evidence on whether a bribe must  be  paid  on
       exiting an airport in such circumstances.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal finds that if  there  was  a  genuine  arrest
       warrant the appellant would have been on a stop list in 2012,  rather
       than a watch list, and errs in law in  making  this  finding  without
       evidence or reasoning for this conclusion. This conclusion then leads
       the First-tier Tribunal to find that the  appellant  would  not  have
       been able to pass through the airport, which he did according to  his
       evidence, which again is said to lead to  doubt  as  to  whether  the
       arrest warrant is genuine.

   10. I find that the First-tier Tribunal also errs in law at paragraphs 34
       to 36 of the decision by failing to properly apply the Tanveer  Ahmed
       principles, and thereby consider the court documents  in  the  round.
       The First-tier Tribunal failed to consider relevant country  guidance
       information in an accurate way as  set  out  above;  failed  to  give
       consideration to a potentially relevant factor, namely the  obtaining
       of the court documents by lawyer to lawyer  communication;  and  also
       failed to weigh the generally positive findings with respect  to  the
       credibility of the appellant, as set out at paragraphs 30  to  32  of
       the decision.

Remaking - Submissions

   11. Ms Everett conceded that the appeal should be allowed as it had  been
       found that  the  appellant  had  been  detained  and  tortured  post-
       conflict, and given the particular facts of this  case  and  evidence
       before the Upper Tribunal. So ultimately, given the  guidance  in  GJ
       and the applicable standard of proof, there were no arguments  to  be
       put forward for dismissing the appeal.

   12. I did not need to call on Ms Kotak to make submissions.

Remaking - Conclusions

   13. I find, as conceded by the respondent, that the appellant has a  well
       founded fear of persecution if returned to Sri  Lanka  based  on  his
       imputed political opinions. In accordance with paragraph 339K of  the
       Immigration Rules I find  that  it  is  accepted  that  he  has  been
       subjected to persecution in the past, in the form  of  detention  and
       torture in June 2012 for delivering medical supplies to the LTTE, and
       I find  that  there  are  no  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
       persecution will not repeat itself. I find that the  appellant  falls
       within category 7(a) of GJ because he has shown to  the  lower  civil
       standard of proof that  he  is  perceived  to  be  a  threat  to  the
       integrity of the single Sri Lankan state because he is  perceived  to
       be someone who has a significant role in post-conflict separatism.  I
       therefore allow the asylum appeal. The human rights appeal  falls  to
       be allowed on the same basis as to remove the appellant would put him
       at a real risk of serious harm from the Sri Lankan authorities.




  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on  asylum  and
       Article 3 ECHR human rights ground.



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm  arising
to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.


Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    29th  October
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

