
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03674/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 October 2019                   |On 16 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UT JUDGES MACLEMAN & DAWSON


                                   Between

                                    M Z I
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Olabamiji, of DMO Olabamiji, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Buchanan,
    promulgated on 28 July 2019, dismissing his appeal against  refusal  of
    protection, based on being a gay man from Bangladesh.

 2. Ground 1, "error of law when looking for corroboration", (a) says there
    is no onus on an asylum seeker to produce corroboration, and (b) points
    to corroboration which was produced.

 3. This ground targets paragraph 9.18 of the decision,  which  ends  thus,
    "Although I recognise that there is no need  to  provide  corroborative
    evidence ... the absence of evidence which might reasonably be expected
    ... without explanation ... gives cause for me to give less  weight  to
    the appellant's account ...".

 4. We note that the judge expressed a similar approach  at  other  points,
    such as paragraph 9.5.

 5. The immigration rules provide at paragraph 339L as follows:

         'It is the duty of the person to substantiate the asylum claim or
         establish that they are a person eligible for humanitarian
         protection or substantiate their human rights claim. Where aspects
         of the person's statements are not supported by documentary or
         other evidence, those aspects will not need confirmation when all
         of the following conditions are met:


             (i) the person has made a genuine effort to substantiate their
             asylum claim or establish that they are a person eligible for
             humanitarian protection or substantiate their human rights
             claim;


             (ii)      all material factors at the person's disposal have
             been submitted, and a satisfactory explanation regarding any
             lack of other relevant material has been given;


             (iii)     the person's statements are found to be coherent and
             plausible and do not run counter to available specific and
             general information relevant to the person's case;


             (iv)      the person has made an asylum claim or sought to
             establish that they are a person eligible for humanitarian
             protection or made a human rights claim at the earliest
             possible time, unless the person can demonstrate good reason
             for not having done so; and


             (v) the general credibility of the person has been
             established.'


 6.  The  judge  did  not  think  that  there  is  a  legal  obligation  of
    corroboration (which would be  an  astonishing  error  to  make).   His
    observations and his  approach  are  consistent  with  the  immigration
    rules, which reflect the Qualification Directive, and with case law.

 7. Point (a) in ground 1 is not well founded.  Point (b) is a  recital  of
    evidence, leading nowhere.

 8. Ground 2 is "error of law in assessing sexuality".  It founds on  UNHCR
    guidelines on difficulty and delay in  disclosing  sexual  orientation.
    Mr Olabamiji (who took over acting only after the decision of  the  FtT
    was made) accepted that there was no reference to those  guidelines  in
    the FtT.  The ground lays no basis for finding  error  of  law  by  not
    mentioning materials which were not relied upon.  The ground  re-argues
    the case but does not show that the FtT's approach betrays ignorance of
    the principles  enunciated  in  the  guidelines.   The  ground  asserts
    irrationality, but does not approach that high target.   Finally,  this
    ground says that the FtT placed "undue weight" on absence  of  evidence
    from third parties, but that is only another way of formulating  ground
    1; and the degree of weight to be given  to  evidence,  or  absence  of
    evidence, is, within reason, up to the judge.

 9. The best point to be  gleaned  from  ground  2  was  emphasised  by  Mr
    Olabamiji in his submissions.  It is unrealistic to expect third  party
    confirmation of fleeting sexual encounters.

10. Ground 3 is "error of law in assessing medical  evidence".   Its  first
    point is that it was speculative of the judge to find that the stressor
    for the appellant might have been his dealings with  the  Home  Office,
    rather than tension with his family over his sexuality.  This does  not
    fairly represent the judge's close analysis at 9.47 - 9.49,  where  the
    finding that the  appellant's  GP  might  not  be  aware  of  the  full
    circumstances is carefully explained.

11. We note that the appellant advances no criticism of  the  judge's  view
    that the GP crossed into advocacy.

12. No error of law is shown to have been involved in declining at 9.49  to
    attach material weight to the GP's evidence.

13. The second point in ground 3 is that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  a
    conflict between the appellant at some points being wary of  disclosing
    his sexuality and at others being open, and in  failing  to  appreciate
    the appellant's strict Muslim and intolerant background.  In our  view,
    this also fails to reflect the full reasoning in the decision.  Some of
    the apparent self-contradiction was not in contexts where the appellant
    was hampered by his background.  There was a conflict in  the  evidence
    and the judge was entitled to find it difficult to reconcile.

14. Ground 4, "error of law in assessing material in support of the claim",
    uses language more of disagreement on the facts than of error  of  law:
    "undue emphasis", "reading too much into the contents  of  the  email",
    "not beyond the bounds of possibility", and so on.

15. It was open to the judge to note that emails and texts might have  been
    produced earlier than they were, even if the appellant had referred  to
    them generally in advance. Mr Olabamiji accepted our  observation  that
    the evidence which is said in ground 4 not  to  have  been  taken  into
    account is, in fact, all rehearsed in the decision.

16. Mr Olabamiji began to make a point which he said arose from paragraph 3
    of the grant of permission, although not foreshadowed in  the  grounds,
    of unfairness based on the appellant's difficulties in giving  evidence
    and on being on medication. On reflection, however,  he  withdrew  that
    line of submission; correctly, in our view, as no basis had  been  laid
    for it in the grounds or by way of evidence, and the judge, as shown by
    4.2 - 4.4, had been at pains to ensure fairness was applied.

17. Mr Olabamiji in the grounds and submissions has done his best to  probe
    selectively for error and for an alternative view of the evidence,  but
    we  find  that  the  challenge  is  essentially  only  insistence   and
    disagreement on the facts. The one point of which we were persuaded  is
    at  [9]  above,  but  that  is  a  small  element  of  a  detailed  and
    comprehensive decision.

18. The appellant has not shown that, read  fairly  and  as  a  whole,  the
    decision should be set aside for having  involved  the  making  of  any
    error on a point of law.  That decision shall stand.

19. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT, so anonymity is maintained herein.


      [pic]

      14 October 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




