
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03440/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st October 2018                           |On 26th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  zarda [b]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Trevelyan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    E. M. M. Smith, promulgated on 10th January 2018, following  a  hearing
    at Birmingham on 2nd January 2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, a female, and was born  on  7th
    January 1964.  She appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated
    24th November 2016, refusing her  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that she has been the  victim  of
    domestic violence at the hands of her husband and she is at risk of ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

 4. The Appellant had come to the UK by virtue of an arranged marriage that
    took place in 1984 in Pakistan to a Mr [MA], who  resided  in  the  UK.
    Initially  the  Appellant's  husband  would  visit  the  Appellant   in
    Pakistan, when he went to see his own family.   The  Appellant  claimed
    that during these visits her husband would try to abuse her, but at the
    time she was protected by her mother, who has  now  passed  away.   The
    Appellant states she has four sisters.  These all live in the UK.   She
    herself came to the UK on 29th June 2008, and initially lived in  Leeds
    with her husband.  However, she then discovered that he was in  another
    relationship and had  children  through  that  relationship.   She  was
    mistreated by her husband.  She remained virtually a  prisoner  in  her
    home.  She then moved to her sister's house, Mrs [KK],  in  Birmingham.
    Also living there was her younger sister, Miss [RK].   Her  application
    to remain in the UK was made on 21st January 2015.  Curiously,  as  the
    judge recalls, "This application  was  supported  by  her  husband  and
    encouraged by her sisters and maternal uncle" (paragraph  9).   It  was
    eventually refused on  3rd  December  2015.   Curiously  also,  in  the
    application, "the Appellant claimed to be living with her husband which
    was untrue" (paragraph 9).

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge  observed  how  in  2015  the  Appellant  had  made  a  false
    application for leave to remain in the UK upon the basis that  she  was
    still residing with her husband.  That application was made at  a  time
    when she and her sisters and the  maternal  uncle  knew  that  she  had
    claimed to be a victim  of  domestic  violence  at  the  hands  of  her
    husband.  As the judge observed, "There  was  an  opportunity  to  have
    claimed asylum then but she failed to  do  so.  To  that  extent  I  am
    satisfied that Section 8 applies to this Appellant and  I  will  factor
    that into my overall assessment of her credibility" (paragraph 22).

 6. The judge went on to recognise, and make allowance for, the  fact  that
    the Appellant was illiterate, and had little idea of the content of the
    early application, which the judge said had  been  created  falsely  to
    keep the appellant in the UK.  However, the judge's view was that those
    who assisted her did know that it was false, and they were a  party  to
    the application, and her maternal uncle accepted  during  his  evidence
    that  the  family  persuaded  the   appellant's   husband   to   supply
    documentation to support the application "even though it was at a  time
    when the Appellant had separated from her husband" (paragraph 23).

 7. Thirdly, the judge observed that prior to evidence before the  Tribunal
    the Appellant pleaded not to be sent back to Pakistan but that  "at  no
    time did she express in those pleas  a  fear  of  her  husband  or  his
    relatives" (paragraph 24).

 8. Fourth, at the hearing, her Counsel endeavoured  to  extract  from  the
    Appellant, whether her fear centred around her husband but as  hard  as
    he tried the Appellant repeated that "she wanted to  stay  in  the  UK"
    (paragraph 25).

 9. The judge found [KK] to be  credible  but  did  not  find  [RK]  to  be
    credible (paragraph 26).

10. The decisive factor, against these circumstances, that swayed the judge
    to make a decision  against  the  Appellant,  was  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had "at the least an uncle in Pakistan"  (paragraph  27),  as
    confirmed by Mr Ahmed, who lived in  Leeds,  and  gave  evidence.   She
    could turn to this uncle and other relatives  for  support  within  her
    community.

11. To sum up, the judge concluded that,

         "At the best, the Appellant's case is that it was  not  until  2014
         that she mentioned domestic abuse, some six  years  after  she  had
         arrived in the UK.  However, the fact that an application was  made
         for her to remain as a partner undermines her claims.  Further,  it
         has not been disputed that  when  she  spoke  to  the  Respondent's
         officers in 2015 (RB  at  B1)  there  is  no  suggestion  that  she
         complained of any domestic violence.  Indeed  only  complained  her
         husband had another partner" (paragraph 29).

12. In considering the scenario that the Appellant would be returning  back
    as a lone woman, the judge had specific regard to the country  guidance
    case of SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016]  UKUT  00067.   The
    judge observed  that  this  Appellant  was  indeed  "an  unskilled  and
    uneducated woman" who  "will  find  it  difficult  to  relocate  within
    Pakistan".

13. However, the matter did not end there because,

         "What is now clear from the evidence before  me  is  that  she  has
         relatives at her home village and nearby in Pakistan  and  will  be
         supported financially by her relatives in the  UK.   The  Appellant
         has not discharged the burden of proof  and  established  that  she
         would be unable to access effective support and protection from her
         relatives.  There is evidence before from the respondent that there
         is an effective support network for a lone woman  including  a  24-
         hour helpline" (paragraph 38).

14. The appeal was dismissed.





Grounds of Application

15. The grounds of application state that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  mental  problems,  lacked
    literacy, and also misinterpreted elements of the available evidence.

16. On 13th February 2018, permission  to  appeal  was  granted,  with  the
    observation that the grounds  were  prolix,  and  did  not  necessarily
    identify with any great clarity what the  alleged  error  of  law  was.
    Even so, it was arguable that the judge's reasoning is insufficient  in
    relation to humanitarian protection/Article 3 issues.  This is  because
    it is confined to simply three paragraphs (from paragraphs 37  to  39),
    and it is difficult to see from his reasoning throughout the  decision,
    why it has been concluded that there is an  effective  support  network
    for the Appellant in Pakistan.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me, Mr Trevelyan,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, as her Counsel, submitted  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    insufficient with regard to humanitarian protection principally because
    of the paucity of consideration at paragraphs 37 to 39.   At  paragraph
    37, the judge accepts that the Appellant is illiterate and a  separated
    married woman, as well as being a  person  with  no  education  skills.
    However, the judge then in the next paragraph goes on to say  that,  "I
    accept that this Appellant as an unskilled and  uneducated  woman  will
    find it difficult to relocate within Pakistan ..." (paragraph 38),  but
    fails, at this stage, to factor in the family background, that this was
    an Appellant who, following her marriage had moved  from  her  parents'
    home to her in-laws  and  resided  there.   The  husband's  family  had
    property.  That property was then the subject of a family dispute.  The
    father's nephews had stolen land from her.  She  could  not  in  actual
    fact return back to her own community and  face  a  hostile  situation.
    The judge makes no reference to this.  The judge  simply  assumes  that
    just because there is an uncle back in the village that this  would  be
    sufficient basis upon which family support would be forthcoming.

18. Second, whereas reliance is placed upon the country guidance case of SM
    [2016] UKUT 00067, it actually does not apply to this particular  case.
    That was a case where it had been stated that if a person relocated, as
    a lone woman to  one  of  the  major  cities,  there  was  evidence  of
    effective support networks for lone women  which  included  "a  24-hour
    helpline" (paragraph 38).  Such a facility, however, was  going  to  be
    singularly lacking in a  village  from  the  Appellant's  community  in
    Dadyal, or from her husband's village.  What the country guidance  case
    of SM stood for was that it would not be unduly harsh normally  for  an
    educated or a better off single woman to return.  The Appellant's  case
    was quite the contrary.  She was illiterate  and  without  any  skills.
    The judge had recognised this to be a feature in her case.  That  being
    so, a more particular assessment was required in the Appellant's  case,
    as to whether she stood to gain from him humanitarian protection in her
    circumstances because of the violation of her Article  3  rights.   The
    judge was obliged to do more than what he in  fact  did.   It  was  not
    enough to draw attention to a 24  hour  helpline  which  would  not  be
    available to this particular Appellant.

19. For her part, Mrs Aboni submitted that the findings made by  the  judge
    were entirely open to him.  The judge had concluded that the  relatives
    had played a particular part in this case to put forward an application
    which was untenable, because at the  time  she  was  supported  by  her
    husband, and she had drawn no attention to any domestic abuse even when
    being interviewed by the Respondent  authority.   The  judge  had  made
    allowance for the fact that the nephews had  been  involved  in  family
    property.  But the fact was that even the Appellant's own  Counsel  had
    failed to elicit any fear on the part of the  Appellant  of  anyone  in
    Pakistan, and the judge expressly pointed this out (at  paragraph  25).
    The judge had concluded effectively that there  was  no  need  for  the
    Appellant to relocate to a city because she had her own  relatives,  in
    the form of an uncle and others, who were there  to  provide  her  with
    assistance.  It was not irrational  for  the  judge  to  say  that  the
    Appellant's UK relatives would also provide her with financial  support
    (at paragraph 38).  It was not the  case  that  the  strictures  of  SM
    (Pakistan) [2016] UKUT 00067 had not been followed.

20. In  reply,  Mr  Trevelyan  submitted  that  the  judge  relied  on  the
    assistance of an uncle in Pakistan, without knowing whether that  uncle
    was even in a position to assist the Appellant, or willing  to  do  so.
    It was not clear whether he was rich or poor.  It was not clear whether
    he had the means or lacked the means  to  provide  support.   This  was
    something that the judge had to evaluate and assess before  a  decision
    could be made with respect to a possible violation of  the  Appellant's
    Article 3 rights.  Insofar as there had been credibility findings, this
    was "something of  a  red  herring"  because  whereas  credibility  was
    relevant to whether the Appellant had suffered domestic  abuse  at  the
    hands of her husband or not, it was not relevant  to  the  question  of
    whether the Appellant could return back to Pakistan as a "lone  woman",
    it being accepted by the judge that the marriage of the  Appellant  had
    broken down with her  husband.   The  only  other  relatives  that  the
    Appellant had was the father's nephews and they had sold the  land  and
    would be hostile to the Appellant's return.  This was a matter that had
    simply not been proved by the judge.

No Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision of  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

22. In what  is  a  comprehensive  and  careful  determination,  the  judge
    concluded that the Appellant was at no risk at all, whether in  the  UK
    from  her  previous  husband,  or  from  relatives  in  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant did not  say  to  the  Respondent's  officers  that  she  had
    suffered domestic violence (see paragraph 29).  The appellant  did  not
    say to her own Counsel, when giving evidence,  that  she  had  suffered
    domestic violence and that was the reason  why  she  could  not  go  to
    Pakistan, insisting simply that she wished to stay in the UK (paragraph
    25).  Mr Ahmed, when giving evidence did not say that the Appellant was
    a victim of domestic violence (paragraph 27).  The husband had in  fact
    indicated to support the Appellant's application.  The Appellant had an
    uncle in Pakistan, and this was accepted by Mr Ahmed, and  he  did  not
    say that the uncle would be unable to support the Appellant in any  way
    whatsoever.  As the judge concluded, not only was there  no  suggestion
    of the Appellant suffering domestic  abuse,  and  no  evidence  of  any
    injury,  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  suicidal  thoughts   either
    (paragraph 28).

23. On the question of the Appellant being  exposed  to  ill-treatment  and
    various other vulnerabilities as a lone woman, the judge was clear that
    "There are several close relatives in Pakistan that she can turn to for
    help if needed" (paragraph 37).  He was clear that she  was  unable  to
    show that she would be destitute in Pakistan and had nobody to turn  to
    (paragraph 39).  It may well be that this  analysis  is  undertaken  in
    three paragraphs (paragraphs 37 to 39), but that  does  not  in  itself
    show that the analysis was for that reason alone deficient.

24. The crucial issue here is that the Appellant herself did not  say  that
    she wished to remain in the UK because she would not  be  supported  by
    any relatives in Pakistan.  What she had said was that "She had nowhere
    to live and nothing to live on" (paragraph 25).  The judge's  view,  as
    explained above, was to the contrary.  He had made it  clear  that  the
    Appellant could live with the uncle, or with the other  relatives,  and
    there was also the possibility of financial help arising  from  the  UK
    relatives.

25. Accordingly, whilst Mr Trevelyan has sought to persuade me on the basis
    of  well-constructed  and  measured  submissions,  it  is  simply   not
    legitimate to assume more than the evidence actually suggested, and the
    evidence did not suggest what I have been asked  to  assume,  and  that
    being so the judge was not required to make findings, of the kind  that
    have been impressed  upon  the  Tribunal  today.   It  is  as  well  to
    recognise that,  "'perversity'  represents  a  very  high  hurdle"  see
    paragraph 1 of R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 per Brooke LJ.  That hurdle
    has not been met in this case.

Notice of Decision

26. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

27. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018

