
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03028/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                           |On 07 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    C V L
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Daykin, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-Tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the  Respondent"  and  C  V  L  "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Vietnam  who  made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was refused and he appealed and  following
    a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 24 September 2018, Judge of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Woolf  allowed  his  appeal  on  both  human
    protection grounds and human rights grounds.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert in a decision dated 17 October 2018.
    Her reasons for so granting are as follows: -

         "1. The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
         decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Woolf)  who,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 24/9/18 allowed on humanitarian  protection
         and  human  rights  grounds  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State decision to refuse asylum.

         2. The grounds take issue with the finding made by the  Judge  that
         the Appellant had  been  trafficked  to  the  United  Kingdom  from
         Vietnam, arguing failure in departing  from  the  decision  of  the
         Competent Authority to adhere to the Court of  Appeal  guidance  in
         SSHD v MS(Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594. The judge's  reasoning  as
         to the trafficking issue is detailed and refers to expert evidence.
         However it does not deal with the Court of Appeal decision  or  the
         argument put forward by the Respondent, particularly with reference
         to paragraphs 74 and 77 of MS, so that the grounds are arguable.

         3. There is therefore an arguable error of  law  disclosed  by  the
         application."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. At today's hearing Mr Howells handed up the Authority of MN, R (on  the
    application of) v SSHD & Anor [2018] EWHC 3268 (QB). Given the approach
    enunciated therein to trafficking  appeals  (the  authority  not  being
    incompatible with ES (S.82 NIA 2002; negative NRM) Albania [2018]  UKUT
    00335 (IAC)), as cited in the Appellant's  Rule  24  response,  it  was
    conceded that there was no material error within the  Judge's  decision
    and that the grounds seeking permission to appeal  could  not  be  made
    out.

 6. That is an analysis I share.

 7. The approach of the  First-tier  tribunal  Judge  in  considering  this
    appeal is consistent with relevant case law. It  contains  no  material
    error.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision did not involve the making of an error of law.

The appeal of the Respondent is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 4 February 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
