
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03476/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 15th January 2018                |On: 24th April 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                     AQL
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For AQL:         Mr M. Gill QC, Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
For the SSHD:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Case History


 1. AQL is a national of Vietnam born in 1993. On the 5th November 2015  he
    claimed asylum. Protection was refused on the 21st March 2016  and  AQL
    exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


 2. The matter came before Judge Chowdhury of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the 20th September 2016.   AQL advanced a claim  based  on  a  fear  of
    persecution in Vietnam for reasons of his  imputed  political  opinion.
    The determination contains no clear conclusion on  whether  the  asylum
    appeal is dismissed, but it is implicit in Judge Chowdhury's  reasoning
    on the substance of that claim that she considered it to be an  account
    fabricated, and provided to AQL, by traffickers. She went  on  to  find
    that AQL is a victim of human trafficking and 'allowed' the appeal with
    reference to Article 4 ECHR.   Judge Chowdhury further made  an  order,
    with reference to Rule  13  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (IAC) Rules 2014 in the following terms:

         "In respect of this Appellant  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
         disclosure of this decision to the Appellant  personally  as  I  am
         satisfied that  such  disclosure  would  be  likely  to  cause  the
         Appellant serious harm and I am satisfied,  having  regard  to  the
         interests of justice that  it  is  proportionate  to  give  such  a
         direction".


         [at paragraph 73 of the determination].

 3. The Secretary of State was  granted  permission  to  appeal  the  human
    rights decision on the 25th January 2017.  On the  28th  February  2017
    the matter came before Mrs Justice Laing DBE and Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Blum.  Those representing  AQL  submitted  that  they  were  unable  to
    effectively participate in the proceedings because the effect of  Judge
    Chowdhury's decision was that they had been unable to take instructions
    from AQL.   They had written to the First-tier Tribunal asking that the
    order be withdrawn, but had received no response. Laing J and UTJ  Blum
    decided that it would in the circumstances be  appropriate  to  adjourn
    the proceedings so that the President of the First-tier Tribunal  could
    make a decision about Judge Chowdhury's order.


 4. The matter came before me on the 21st November 2017.  I was informed by
    Mr Gill QC, who appeared for AQL, that there was some uncertainty as to
    whether Judge Chowdhury's order remained in force.  By a  letter  dated
    the 6th September 2017 the President of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clements indicated that Judge Chowdhury  has  agreed  to  "waive"  that
    order.  Mr Gill expressed doubt about this approach. The terms  of  the
    order are clear on the face of the determination, and in the absence of
    a re-promulgated decision minus the offending  paragraph,  he  and  his
    instructing solicitors could not be confident  that  they  were  acting
    properly in discussing  the  case  with  their  lay  client.  He  asked
    therefore that  order  be  set  aside,  in  order  that  any  doubt  be
    dispelled. For the Secretary of State Mr Melvin  had  no  objection.  I
    therefore set the order contained at paragraph 73 of the decision aside
    on the grounds that there was a procedural irregularity,  the  Tribunal
    having made the order without receiving any  representations  from  the
    parties.


 5. That matter having been settled Mr Gill made an out-of-time application
    for  permission  to  submit  a  cross-appeal,  against  the  Tribunal's
    decision on the protection claim. The reason for the delay was that the
    terms  of  the  order  had  prevented  AQL  from  consulting  with  his
    representatives.   I extended time and granted  permission.   Obviously
    that grant expanded the issues in the case and it was appropriate  that
    before I hear full argument the matter be adjourned to enable Mr Melvin
    to formulate a Rule  24  response  to  AQL's  cross  appeal.   Mr  Gill
    accepted that in the circumstances an adjournment was appropriate.


 6. The matter came back before me on the 15th January 2018  when  I  heard
    argument from both parties on whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred
    in law such that its decision should be set aside.


    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 7. The determination begins by setting out the evidence that AQL  gave  to
    the Secretary of State.  AQL stated that he left  Vietnam  because  his
    father was arrested and  detained  by  the  authorities  for  political
    opposition; his mother lost her job;  thereafter  his  mother  borrowed
    money from loan sharks and as a result the  family  were  harassed  and
    threatened.  There is no suggestion that it was  the  loan  sharks  who
    arranged for AQL to leave Vietnam: he states that it was  organised  at
    the instigation of his  mother's  friend.    Having  arranged  for  his
    journey from Vietnam to the UK AQL found himself in China,  Russia  and
    then in France. He entered the UK hidden  in  a  vehicle  in  September
    2010. When he came to the attention of UK immigration officers  he  was
    placed in the care of Kent social services because he was only 16 years
    old; they advised him to claim asylum.   AQL avers that he faces a real
    risk of harm in Vietnam because of his vocal  online  support  for  the
    'Assembly of Vietnamese  Youth  for  Democracy'  (AVYD).  He  has  also
    attended demonstrations in the UK.


 8. The  determination  then  rehearses  the  reasons  for  refusal  before
    summarising what happened at the hearing.  Insofar as it is relevant to
    this appeal this section notes that AQL was extensively  cross-examined
    about his involvement with the AVYD. He said he had not claimed  asylum
    because he was afraid of  being  deported.  People  in  the  Vietnamese
    community supported him with accommodation and food but had not advised
    him to claim.  The determination then reads as follows:

         "It was at this point in the proceedings that  I  became  concerned
         about the activities this Appellant was involved in for five years.
         I noted that the Appellant arrived in the UK when he was  16  years
         old. I asked him what he did 'for the community'  in  Deptford.  He
         said he cleaned houses and washed dishes and did  general  domestic
         work for  other  Vietnamese  people.  I  asked  the  Appellant  who
         currently lived with him. He said another Vietnamese man".

 9. The determination records that the Judge then asked Counsel for AQL and
    the Home Office Presenting Officer whether anyone  had  considered  the
    possibility that AQL was being trafficked for  the  purpose  of  forced
    labour.  A  short  adjournment  was  granted  for  them  both  to  take
    instructions. When the representatives came back into court neither had
    any  instructions  on  the  point.    The  summary  of  the  respective
    submissions indicates that no mention was made of trafficking.


10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge states at the opening  of  her  'Findings
    and Conclusions' that she is extremely disturbed by the case.  AQL  was
    very young when he arrived and quickly absconded from the care of  Kent
    Social Services. Despite having lived in this country all of this  time
    he could not speak one word of English.   Noting  some  discrepancy  in
    AQL's evidence about how he got in touch with the Vietnamese  community
    in Deptford the Tribunal concludes that it  is  more  likely  that  his
    absconding from social services care was orchestrated  by  others.  The
    Tribunal's view of the facts advanced by AQL about the  five  years  he
    had spent in the UK were that  he  was  being  "ruthlessly  exploited":
    "this was a boy seemingly  undertaking  unpaid  labour.  In  Article  4
    terms, his human dignity was relentlessly violated and he was denied  a
    fundamental freedom" [at �41].  The Tribunal  referred  itself  to  the
    Upper Tribunal decision  in  MS  (trafficking  -  Tribunal's  powers  -
    Article 4 ECHR)  Pakistan  [2016]  UKUT  00226  (IAC)  and  to  various
    statements of policy made by the Secretary of State in respect  of  the
    UK's obligations under the Trafficking Convention.  Noting  that  self-
    identification by the  victim  is  not  a  pre-requisite  the  Tribunal
    concluded that on the facts  before  it,  AQL  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking in the UK. It further found that the account he  had  given
    of political involvement was most likely  "learned  under  instruction"
    (ie an account given to him by traffickers).


11. In conclusion the  Tribunal  dismisses  the  protection  claim  on  the
    grounds that it is a fabrication, and allows the appeal "under  Article
    4 of the ECHR".


    The Secretary of State for the Home Department's Appeal


12. This was a case where the appellant himself had made no claim  to  have
    been trafficked. There had been no referral into the 'National Referral
    Mechanism' (NRM) and there was therefore no decision from the Competent
    Authority. At the request of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Counsel  for
    AQL had taken his instructions on the morning of the hearing and he had
    denied that it was part of his claim that he had been trafficked.  When
    asked under cross-examination whether he had felt exploited in any  way
    he had replied that he had stayed  with  Vietnamese  families  who  had
    given him food and shelter in exchange for his performance of household
    chores. That being so the Secretary of State submits  that  it  was  an
    error of law for the Tribunal to have concluded that AQL was  a  victim
    of trafficking, and further to have allowed the appeal on human  rights
    grounds for that reason.  In particular it is submitted that:

             i) There was a procedural irregularity in that there  had  been
                no referral under the NRM. If the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
                concerned that this was a case of modern slavery the  proper
                approach would have been to adjourn the  matter  so  that  a
                referral could be made;


            ii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in giving determinative weight
                to  immaterial  matters.  The  factors  that  the   Tribunal
                identifies as indicators of trafficking - that AQL absconded
                from Kent Social Services, that he is  young,  that  he  has
                been confined to the Vietnamese community and that  he  does
                not speak English - are not capable of demonstrating that he
                has been a victim of trafficking  and  to  that  extent  the
                decision is perverse;


           iii) The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  erred  in  failing  to  take
                material matters into  account.  In  finding  that  AQL  was
                subjected to "domestic  servitude"  the  Tribunal  fails  to
                consider his view that it was no such thing. In finding that
                AQL should be able to remain in the UK in order to assist in
                a police enquiry  the  Tribunal  has  failed  to  take  into
                account the fact that the police  have  already  encountered
                AQL and considered his circumstances, yet  no  investigation
                has been launched;


            iv) The issue of "trafficking" was plainly a "new  matter"  that
                had not been previously considered by the Secretary of State
                and as such the First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  entitled  to
                consider it without seeking the Secretary of State's consent
                to do so. No such consent having been  given,  the  Tribunal
                had no jurisdiction to consider the matter and its  decision
                is a nullity: see s85(5) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
                Act 2002.  In his submissions Mr Melvin  asked  me  to  note
                that the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  make
                no mention of trafficking or Article 4.

13. In response Mr Gill accepted that Article 4 had  not  featured  in  the
    grounds of appeal but submitted that there was no need for this  to  be
    pleaded separately, since all the facts were known to both  parties  at
    all times.   It is implicit in the language that where someone has been
    subjected to  slavery  they  have  also  been  subjected  to  degrading
    treatment, and so little turned on whether the case was  pleaded  under
    Articles 3 or 4.    The fact that the Secretary of State  had  analysed
    those facts poorly could not limit the jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal.
    The prima facie case of trafficking had been raised in the claim and as
    such there were no 'new' matters arising.  The First-tier Tribunal is a
    public body with its own obligations under the Convention. As  such  it
    could  not  as  a  matter  of  law  ignore  what  it  clearly  saw   as
    exploitation. It is completely wrong for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    suggest that there is any obligation on the victim to identify that  he
    has been trafficked.


14. Mr Gill further submitted, with reference to Mahmud (s85  NIAA  2002  -
    'new matters') [2017] UKUT 488 (IAC), that  the  amended  s85(5)  is  a
    provision concerned with procedural safeguards. It cannot rationally be
    interpreted to be limiting the overall jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal.
    The point is that if a new matter of fact arises that the Secretary  of
    State has not yet addressed, then she should be given  the  opportunity
    to do  so.  It  cannot  be  construed  so  widely  as  to  exclude  new
    interpretations, or legal submissions, on existing facts.  In this case
    it is apparent from paragraph 26 of the determination that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal considered  the  procedural  fairness  point.  The  Judge
    specifically puts the parties on notice that  she  is  concerned  about
    trafficking and invites their submissions on the  point:  if  the  HOPO
    felt unable to deal with it he could have raised s85(5) then.


    AQL's Appeal


15. Mr Gill's point is simple: the First-tier Tribunal failed in  its  duty
    to clearly determine the protection claim. In respect of the  claim  as
    originally advanced by AQL the Tribunal disparages it in  the  body  of
    its reasoning but it is clear  from  paragraphs  51  and  53  what  the
    Tribunal's case theory had  been:  this  claim  was  a  fabrication  by
    traffickers  from  whom  AQL  had  learnt  by  "instruction".  Mr  Gill
    submitted that AQL  was  entitled  to  a  discrete  assessment  of  his
    account. Further, it is submitted that having made the findings that it
    did about trafficking, the  Tribunal  failed  to  proceed  to  consider
    whether AQL faced a well-founded fear of persecution  from  traffickers
    should he be returned to Vietnam.


16. Mr Melvin pointed out that the determination gives  other  reasons  for
    rejecting the claim advanced by AQL.   The Tribunal found his  interest
    in politics to be "completely fabricated" and inconsistent with his own
    evidence. Even if it were true that  AQL's  father  had  been  sent  to
    prison for political opposition to the government and AQL was afraid of
    the local communist party, it remained open to him to  relocate  within
    the country, for instance to the anonymity of a large city like Ho  Chi
    Minh. Even on the Tribunal's limited findings there is no risk  to  AQL
    of being trafficked once back in Vietnam. If he wishes to  avoid  being
    exploited abroad he should simply avoid  contact  with  those  offering
    'work placements' outside Vietnam.


    Discussion and Findings


17. This appeal was "allowed" with reference to Article 4  ECHR.    Neither
    party was satisfied with that outcome. The Secretary of  State  because
    she submits that the decision was procedurally unfair  and  because  it
    was not, on the evidence before the Judge,  one  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses. AQL  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no
    findings on whether he faced a future risk as a result of  trafficking;
    as it stood the bare finding that he had been exploited in the  UK  did
    not entitle him to protection.


18. It should be noted that the parties made their  respective  submissions
    before the Court of Appeal handed down its  decision  in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v MS  (Pakistan)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  594,
    which roundly  rejects  the  approach  taken  by  McCloskey  J  in   MS
    (trafficking - Tribunal's powers - Article 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT
    00226  (IAC),  an  approach  specifically  adopted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in this case. I have considered whether to recall the  parties
    to hear their amended submissions in light of MS, but for  the  reasons
    set out below I have not found that to be necessary.  It is clear  that
    whichever way you look at it, this is  a  decision  that  must  be  set
    aside.


19. I am not prepared to say that this young man was  not  trafficked.   He
    cannot be expected to identify whether his working conditions  fell  so
    far below those routinely endured by the low-paid that it was in effect
    slavery.  In the final analysis it may be established that he has  been
    subject to exploitation such that the definition would be met.   It  is
    however manifestly the case that the unadorned  facts  asserted  before
    the First-tier Tribunal were not a  sufficient  basis  to  warrant  the
    conclusion that it reached. AQL was young, and although he has been  in
    this country since 2010 had learned no  English.  He  had  left  social
    services care. He was performing domestic chores in exchange  for  food
    and shelter.    There  was  nothing  on  those  facts  to  justify  the
    Tribunal's conclusion that he was being "ruthlessly exploited" or  that
    "his human dignity was relentlessly violated". His  evidence  was  very
    much to the contrary. At Q45 of the  asylum  interview  AQL  was  asked
    whether he feels that he has  been  exploited  in  any  way  since  his
    arrival in the UK, to which he replied:

         "No, since I arrived in  the  UK  I  have  stayed  with  Vietnamese
         families and people and they gave me food and shelter and in return
         I do some house work and cleaning but no I am not subject to  abuse
         in any way"

    There being no evidential basis for the  finding  that  AQL  was  being
    trafficked, that part of the decision must be set aside.


20. That lack of evidence  illustrates  the  merits  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's  second  ground:  procedural  irregularity.  It  was  perfectly
    legitimate for the First-tier Tribunal  to  have  raised  its  concerns
    about trafficking. A  judge  dealing  with  a  young  -  and  therefore
    vulnerable  -  appellant  should  be  alert  to  the   possibility   of
    exploitation and be mindful of her duties under the  Convention.  Those
    concerns having been raised, however, it seems to me  that  the  proper
    approach would have been to call a halt to the proceedings, and require
    a referral to be made to the Competent Authority.   Had that been done,
    it may be that the Authority,  as  the  specialist  body  charged  with
    investigating  such  crimes,  would  have   identified   a   sufficient
    evidential basis to justify a finding of trafficking.   But as it  was,
    this was not an  AS  (Afghanistan)  situation,  because  there  was  no
    decision to review.


21. I therefore find that the Secretary of State's appeal must  be  allowed
    and the part of the decision  dealing  with  trafficking  must  be  set
    aside. It is now a moot  point  whether  the  trafficking  was  a  'new
    matter'. Mr Gill may be right to say that this was not  a  new  factual
    matrix, but that is only one part  of  the  equation.   To  be  a  'new
    matter' it must be  something  capable  of  constituting  a  ground  of
    appeal. It is difficult to see what the new ground of appeal might have
    been, since the First-tier Tribunal stopped short of finding any future
    risk to AQL.


22. That brings me to his appeal. The  findings  on  the  protection  claim
    advanced by AQL are not limited to  the  conclusion  that  this  was  a
    narrative foisted upon him by traffickers, but it is  clear  that  this
    was the theory underpinning all of its findings. For that reason  I  am
    satisfied that if one part of this determination must be set aside,  so
    too should the remainder.  If the Tribunal was wrong about  AQL  having
    been trafficked, its reasoning on his asylum claim cannot  survive.  He
    is entitled to have that claim considered  discretely  on  its  merits.
    Conversely if the Tribunal was right about the trafficking,  it  should
    have gone on to make findings on whether there would be any future risk
    to AQL as a result. The peculiar outcome as  it  stands  was  that  the
    appeal was allowed simply because AQL is currently in the UK subject to
    modern  slavery.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  he  would  in  those
    circumstances be assisted by any 'period  of  reflection',  or  by  not
    being returned to Vietnam, a place where he was  apparently  free  from
    exploitation.


23.  Both  parties  have  established  material  error  of   law   in   the
    determination. I therefore set the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    aside in its entirety and remit the matter for hearing de novo  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


    Decisions and Directions


24. Those representing AQL are directed to consider whether  they  wish  to
    advance a case that AQL has been subject to  trafficking.  If  they  do
    then this must be communicated to the Secretary of State as soon as  it
    practicable and in any event no  later  than  three  weeks  after  this
    decision is received, and a referral sought to  bring  AQL  within  the
    NRM.


25. Those representing AQL must  further  consider  whether  they  wish  to
    advance a case that AQL would face a real risk of harm upon  return  to
    Vietnam in the  form  of  trafficking.  If  they  do  then  this,  with
    appropriate particulars, must be communicated to the Secretary of State
    as soon as is practicable and in any event no later  than  three  weeks
    after this decision is received.


26. If AQL makes no such submissions this should, as soon as is practicable
    and in any event no later than  three  weeks  after  this  decision  is
    received, be communicated to the Secretary of State and the  First-tier
    Tribunal, so that the matter can be listed for substantive  hearing  de
    novo.


27. If AQL submits that he has been trafficked, and/or that he has a  well-
    founded fear of being trafficked in the future, the Secretary of  State
    is directed to consider those matters  and  issue  a  written  decision
    explaining her response. The timing of such a response will  depend  on
    whether the NRM is engaged:

             i) If no referral is made the written response  must  be  filed
                and served within three weeks of notification of AQL's case


            ii) If a referral is  made  the  Secretary  of  State  must  (in
                accordance with her own policy) await  the  outcome  of  the
                Competent  Authority   investigation   before   giving   her
                response. In this case the Tribunal must be kept informed of
                any developments and an indication be made at  the  earliest
                possible stage whether the Secretary  of  State  intends  to
                maintain  or   withdraw   her   decision   pending   further
                investigation.

28. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  for  material
    errors in approach.


29. The decision in the appeal is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


30. There is an anonymity order in place.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             21st April 2018


