
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/03782/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 May 2017                        |      On 31 May 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                    Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

              mr Palliya Ralalage Chrishantha Brian De Almeida
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Kumudusena
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 6  April  1976.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 May 2015 pursuant to a visit visa
    which had been issued on 16 March 2015.  The visa was  valid  until  16
    September 2015.  He made a claim for asylum  on  4  August  2015.   The
    respondent refused the appellant's claim for asylum on 4 December 2015.
     The respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of
    persecution.  The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 20 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    D Ross dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    rejected the appellant's account of having been arrested  and  tortured
    in Sri Lanka.  The judge also dismissed the claim under Article 8.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and on 29 March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 4.  The  grounds  of  appeal,  as  amplified  during  the  hearing  by  Mr
    Kumudusena, set out a number of grounds of appeal.  However  the  grant
    of permission was in respect only one ground of  appeal,  namely,  that
    the judge approached the medical report incorrectly  particularly  with
    regard to the interpretation given to  the  phrase  'consistent  with'.
    The grounds of appeal in relation to the medical evidence are that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  as  he  made  findings  on  the
    medical evidence based on his own assumptions.  Mr Kumudusena submitted
    that the judge effectively placed himself as an expert in the  analysis
    of the appellant's injuries.  He asserted that  the  judge  misdirected
    himself with regard to what 'consistent' meant.  He submitted that  the
    judge did not identify any  significant  inconsistencies  but  referred
    specifically to the appellant saying that he had been hit on  the  back
    of the neck with a rifle but not on  his  face.   He  referred  to  the
    questions asked of the appellant in interview and submitted that  those
    questions were general questions about what the appellant had  suffered
    not specific questions with regard to where he had been  hit  and  that
    there was no real inconsistency.  The judge has failed to give adequate
    reasons for rejecting the medical evidence.

 5. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the expert did consider  that  the  injuries
    could  have  been  caused  accidentally.  The   judge   identified   an
    inconsistency with regard to where he was hit with the rifle butt.  She
    submitted that the  judge  was  not  using  the  word  'consistent'  by
    reference to the Istanbul Protocol but in terms of whether or not it is
    consistent with the appellant's account.  She referred to paragraph  15
    of the grounds of appeal and submitted that what was set out there  was
    incorrect.  It is not the role of the  doctor  to  assess  credibility.
    She referred to paragraph 29 of the case of S v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1153 where it sets out that  it  is
    not the role for a doctor to assess credibility.  This is exactly  what
    the judge is required to do - that is exactly what the judge is doing.

 6. Although oral submissions were made on the other grounds  of  appeal  I
    have not considered because I have found a material error of law in any
    event.




Discussion

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the evidence in the round.  It
    is clear that the judge had taken all the evidence  into  account  when
    arriving at conclusions on credibility.   At  paragraph  25  the  judge
    dealt with the medical evidence.  He set out:

         "25. The appellant also relies on the report into his injuries, but
             I can give  this  report  little  weight  because  whilst  the
             injuries are consistent with his account, all  this  means  is
             that they could have been caused in  the  way  described,  but
             there are many other possible causes.  The appellant  did  not
             mention in his evidence that he had been struck in the face by
             a rifle butt, which is one of the possibilities raised by  the
             expert, although he does mention being hit with a gun butt  on
             the neck.  It follows that the injuries may have  been  caused
             in the way described by the appellant, but they could  equally
             have been caused by his falling off a bicycle, or a myriad  of
             other possibilities.  I also consider that bearing in mind the
             very severe  beating  which  the  appellant  claimed  to  have
             received, in which he describes being beaten on every part  of
             his body, I  note  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  multiple
             injuries all over his body.  For example there are no injuries
             to his back, which are still visible, or to the  top  half  of
             his legs, or to his face, apart from his eyebrows, or  to  his
             head.  The injuries, in this case are mainly confined  to  the
             extremities of the body, the lower arm and the lower leg,  and
             the eyebrows, plus of course the injury to his hand.  I do not
             consider that these injuries  are  consistent  with  the  very
             severe beating which the appellant received.  It may of course
             be argued that the injuries have subsided after  a  period  of
             some months, but the fact remains that there is no substantial
             evidence which tends to support the appellant's account."

 8. A judge is entitled to place little weight  on  an  expert's  evidence.
    However, it is not clear why the judge in this case considered that  he
    was unable to place little weight on this evidence. It might simply  be
    because the injuries could have been  caused  by  many  other  possible
    causes.  As set out above the judge said "I can give this report little
    weight because ... all this means is that they could have  been  caused
    in the way described,  but  there  are  many  other  possible  causes."
    Whilst it may be the case that the judge  had  reached  the  conclusion
    that little weight could be placed on the report as a result of certain
    factors in the case, an alternative reading of this is, as  I  set  out
    above, that the judge proceeded on the basis that  because  the  expert
    found only that the injuries were consistent then automatically  little
    weight must be given to the report.  The judge  also  appears  to  have
    erred by entering into speculation with regards to alternative  reasons
    for the injuries.  Further, the judge again  entered  into  speculation
    and made a finding himself as to whether  the  injuries  noted  by  the
    expert were consistent with the  severe  beatings  that  the  appellant
    received.  This is a matter for a medical expert and is  not  a  matter
    that a judge has expertise in. I accept Mr Kumudusena's submission that
    the questions about where the appellant had  been  hit  in  the  asylum
    interview were not detailed so there was  no  real  inconsistency  with
    regard to the evidence concerning being hit  with  a  rifle  butt.  The
    judge has failed to give sufficient reasons for rejecting the  expert's
    report.  Whilst the judge was entitled to reject the  medical  evidence
    he must give sufficient reasons for that rejection and must  not  stand
    in the shoes of the expert  in  determining  for  himself  whether  the
    injuries are consistent with the account give by the appellant.

 9. Although I consider that this is a borderline case it is not clear that
    the judge would have arrived at the  same  conclusion  if  the  medical
    evidence had been considered correctly.

10. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').


11. There was no appeal against the findings of the judge on Article 8.

12. I considered whether or not I could re-make  the  decision  myself  and
    whether any findings could be preserved. I do not consider that  it  is
    possible to extricate the findings for each other.   I  considered  the
    Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I  am  satisfied
    that the nature and extent of judicial fact finding that  is  necessary
    in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is  such,  having
    regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate to remit the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal against  the
    asylum decision to be heard at Hatton Cross before any judge other than
    Judge D Ross pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the  TCEA.  A
    new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law. The decision on the asylum claim is  set  aside.  This  matter  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross to be heard before a judge other than Judge D Ross to be heard on
    the next available date in relation to the asylum claim only.




Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 28 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw



