
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03153/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2018                         |On 4th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     SH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Nicholson, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The procedural background:

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  28th
    September  2017,  dismissed  her  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection and on human rights grounds.

 3.  The Appellant's immigration history and factual background is set  out
    within the determination and in the papers  before  the  Tribunal.  The
    Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in or about December 2004.  She
    was referred to the NRM on the 28th August 2015 and claimed  asylum  on
    the 2nd December 2015.  The claim was refused by the Secretary of State
    on the 16th March 2017.

 4. In the decision letter, the Respondent relied upon the decision of  the
    Competent Authority. In their decision, it was stated that she was  not
    a credible  witness  and  therefore  no  weight  was  attached  to  her
    evidence. It was stated that her account of the circumstances contained
    some internal consistencies.  They  were  identified  as  follows:  she
    stated she had been living with and supported  by  friends  in  Nigeria
    following the death of her mother and that  she  met  a  woman  in  the
    church. Initially she said she had only met the woman on  one  occasion
    however she stated that she went to live with her at a  house  for  one
    month. It was stated that her account of a woman supporting her for one
    month and asking for nothing in  return was highly unlikely and that  a
    complete stranger would not help her to leave the  UK.  She  could  not
    recall how much she was asked to pay the men that she had met  who  had
    offered her employment as a cleaner and  did  not  ask  anything  about
    where she would be living or her accommodation in the UK. The  lack  of
    detail about the arrangements was considered inconsistent with the fact
    that  she  agreed  to  travel  overseas.  It  was  also  found  to   be
    inconsistent that she had good friends in Nigeria but she did not  tell
    them about her plans to leave Nigeria. It was also stated that she  was
    unable to provide full names and addresses of  the  families  that  she
    lived with during the ten-year period which  damaged  her  credibility.
    Consideration was given to the letter from a psychologist who had  seen
    between April - November  2015  and  who  diagnosed  the  Appellant  as
    suffering from moderate to severe depression and anxiety attributed  to
    difficulties adjusting to HIV diagnosis and also that she had  referred
    to being a victim of trafficking.  It  was  stated  that  she  give  no
    details about the experience to the psychologist  because  it  was  too
    upsetting to talk about. Whilst the letter stated she could present  as
    "forgetful and confused" it did not state her memory  was  impaired  or
    that she could not give a consistent and  coherent  account.  Thus  the
    psychologist could not provide evidence to support the details  of  the
    account.

 5. In the alternative, it was  stated  that  even  if  account  is  to  be
    believed, it was indicative of a  working  arrangement  as  opposed  to
    trafficking. It was further stated there was  nothing  in  her  account
    would indicate that the males intended to subject her to  any  form  of
    exploitation. As to the employment in the  UK,  having  considered  the
    details of her work, there were no claims that she  worked  excessively
    long hours and that she was paid by  most  of  her  employers  and  not
    forced to stay with any particular family. The circumstances  described
    were not considered similar to descriptions of domestic  servitude.  It
    is therefore decided that she was not a victim of human trafficking.

 6. The decision letter issued by the Home Office went on to  consider  the
    risk of re-trafficking but concluded that there was  no  real  risk  of
    being trafficked in Nigeria.

 7.  In the alternative her  claim  was  taken  at  its  highest  and  thus
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation was assessed. It  was
    asserted  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  the
    authorities of Nigeria would be unwilling or unable to provide her with
    protection making reference to the NAPTIP and assistance that could  be
    given to former victims of trafficking. In terms of relocation, it  was
    stated that Nigeria was a large country with a population of  over  170
    million and that it was reasonable for her to relocate to  a  different
    area of Nigeria given that she left the traffickers in 2004 and has had
    no contact with them in the last 12 years and therefore she had  failed
    to demonstrate that they would be  aware  of  her  return  to  Nigeria.
    Whilst she had stated she had no family support, it was considered that
    as there was state protection and NGO assistance available so that  she
    could return to Nigeria utilising any skills, including any ability she
    had to gain lawful employment.

 8. Her appeal came before the FTT on the 15th  September  2017  and  in  a
    decision  promulgated  on  the  28th  September  2017  her  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 9. The judge set out his findings and conclusions at paragraphs 23  -  44.
    It is plain from reading the findings of fact  and  assessment  of  the
    evidence that the judge did not accept her claim as credible. The judge
    concluded that he was not satisfied that it had been established to the
    lower standard that she would  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm in Nigeria. Thus the judge dismissed her appeal.

10. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  on  the
    21st November 2017. Thus the appeal came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    After some discussion with the advocates it became common  ground  that
    the judge had made a factual error in his assessment of credibility  as
    set out in the grounds at paragraphs 5 - 6 and that this had the effect
    of undermining the overall findings of adverse credibility.

11. In a decision promulgated on the 16th June 2018,   the  Upper  Tribunal
    reached the conclusion that the decision did demonstrate the making  on
    an error on a point of law and set aside the decision  (  see  decision
    annexed to this decision marked "Annex A").

12. There were two issues identified by myself which the  parties  had  not
    dealt with. Firstly, whilst it was not raised expressly in the grounds,
    it not appear that the judge considered whether  the  Appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness or not. The  Appellant  suffers  from  a  depressive
    disorder which has been attributed to  difficulties  adjusting  to  her
    diagnosis and her experiences of being a victim of  trafficking.  There
    is reference in the material from 2015 referring to her being  confused
    and forgetful (see report at F 21).  In  these  circumstances,  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to adopt and apply the approach set out in the
    Joint Presidential Note.

13. Secondly, neither advocate before me made any reference to  the  recent
    jurisprudence relating to statutory decisions made in the context of  a
    claim where it is asserted the Appellant was a victim of trafficking or
    modern slavery.  Whilst the decision of AS(Afghanistan)  was  available
    but not referred to by the judge or the advocates, there  were  then  2
    decisions that post-dated the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    therefore the law had changed since the hearing on 15 September  (  see
    MS (Afghanistan) and AUJ ( as cited below).

14. In the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AUJ  (Trafficking  -  no
    conclusive grounds decision) Bangladesh [2018]  UKUT  00200  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal gave some guidance on those issues. There  is  no  dispute  in
    this case that there is a negative "conclusive grounds decision" and in
    the light of the material set out above that the Appellant did continue
    to rely in this appeal upon evidence that she  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking and is at risk of re-trafficking. The Appellant also relied
    upon further factual evidence that was not disclosed previously.

15.  In that decision the Tribunal set out the position as follows:

     "62.In my view, applying AS (Afghanistan) and MS (Afghanistan),  cases
    in which the Competent Authority  has  reached  a  "Conclusive  Grounds
    decision" should be approached as follows:
    (i) Where there is a positive "Conclusive  Grounds  decision"  and  the
    Secretary of State has complied with her duty to provide reparation are
    unlikely to come before the Tribunal before such time as the individual
    concerned is refused a  renewal  of  his  residence  permit  and  faces
    removal. In such cases, the judge should not go behind the decision  of
    the Competent Authority that the Appellant was a victim of  trafficking
    or modern slavery.  The  focus  will  be  on  whether  removal  of  the
    Appellant at that stage would be in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention or in  breach  of  his  rights
    under the ECHR.
    (ii) In cases in which the Competent Authority has reached  a  negative
    "Conclusive Grounds decision" but the Appellant continues to  rely  (in
    his statutory appeal) upon evidence  that  he  has  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking or modern slavery, the judge should decide, at the start of
    the hearing and before oral evidence is given, whether the decision  of
    the Competent Authority was perverse or irrational  or  not  reasonably
    open to it. At this stage, evidence subsequent to the decision  of  the
    Competent Authority must not be taken into account. If  (and  only  if)
    the  judge  concludes  that  the  Competent  Authority's  decision  was
    perverse or irrational or one that was not reasonably open to it,  that
    the judge can then re-determine the relevant facts and take account  of
    subsequent evidence."

16. The appeal was therefore to listed in the Upper Tribunal as  a  resumed
    hearing taking into account those two issues and in the  light  of  the
    "vulnerability" issues raised in respect of the Appellant and I made  a
    direction for the Appellant's solicitors  to  consider  what,  if  any,
    evidence concerning the Appellant's mental health  was  to  be  adduced
    and, if appropriate, to agree any ground rules for the conduct  of  the
    hearing with the Tribunal and the Respondent and/or list before me  for
    directions.

17. The case was listed for hearing on the 18th September. At  the  hearing
    there had been  no  compliance  with  the  directions  as  to  skeleton
    arguments to deal with the issues of law raised nor had there been  any
    compliance with the guidance or the points I had set out in my decision
    relating to the Appellant's vulnerability. I  gave  further  directions
    and the case was relisted.

The re-making decision before the Upper Tribunal:

18. At the resumed hearing both parties were represented by new  advocates;
    the Appellant was represented by Mr J. Nicholson  of  Counsel  and  the
    Respondent by Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer. Both  parties  had
    submitted their submissions on the law as directed. In the  intervening
    period the law had been clarified further.

19. It is accepted by both advocates that the decision in ES (s82 NIA 2002;
    negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC) applies which stated  the
    following:

    "Following the amendment to s 82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'), effective from  20  October  2014,  a
    previous decision made by the Competent Authority within  the  National
    Referral Mechanism (made on the balance of  probabilities)  is  not  of
    primary relevance to the determination of an asylum appeal, despite the
    decisions of the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA
    Civ 1469 and SSHD v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.

    The correct approach to determining whether a person claiming to  be  a
    victim of trafficking is entitled to asylum  is  to  consider  all  the
    evidence in the round as at the date of  hearing,  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof.
    Since 20 October 2014, there is also no right of appeal  on  the  basis
    that a decision is not in accordance with the law and  the  grounds  of
    appeal are limited to those set out in the amended s  82  of  the  2002
    Act."

The evidence:

20. The Appellant's solicitors had provided a copy of the  original  bundle
    and the skeleton argument and authorities/policy  drafted  by  previous
    Counsel. For the hearing, a  bundle  of  additional  documentation  was
    provided by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  which  included  in  it  the
    following documents:-

        . Witness statement of the Appellant dated 23/8/2018,

        . Psychiatric report dated 13/9/2018,

        . Letter from the psychotherapist dated 7/6/2018,

        . UK Home Office CPIN - Nigeria, Trafficking women ( November 2016)

        . Avert (UK) HIV in Nigeria dated 16/10/17,

        . International Journal of Mental Health Systems, dated 24/10/17,

        .  US  Department  of  State  2017  country  report  Nigeria  dated
          20/4/2018,

        . HD (trafficked women) Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454.

21. The Respondent relied upon the  material  in  the  Respondent's  bundle
    including the refusal letter, the decision of the Competent  Authority,
    the visa details of what are said by the Respondent to relate to family
    members of the Appellant ( under cover of letter  dated  28/4/170.  The
    CPIN for Nigeria (updated since November 2016 dated August 2018).


22. I have also reminded myself of the case of the case of AM (Afghanistan)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 in
    which Sir Ernest Ryder, Senior President, referred to the Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult and
    Sensitive Appellant ("the guidance note") and also the Practice
    Direction, First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult and
    Sensitive Witnesses. He went on to state that "the directions and
    guidance contained in them are to be followed and Failure to follow
    them will most likely be a material error of law".


23. Paragraph 2 of the Guidance Note states that, when considering whether
    an individual is vulnerable, any mental health problems, his or her
    social and cultural background and any domestic circumstances are to be
    taken into account. In the Appellant's case, there is expert evidence
    from a psychiatrist and from other professionals who have been working
    with the Appellant, including counsellors and psychologists who make
    reference to her mental health problems and her diagnosis. The report
    of the psychiatrist confirms that she is fit to give evidence before
    the Tribunal.

24. On the basis of this evidence,  and as both advocates accept, I find
    that the Appellant is a vulnerable witness and thus steps were taken to
    ensure she was able to give evidence  in accordance with  the Guidance.
    The Home Office Presenting Officer had discussed with her Counsel prior
    to the hearing the type of questions that would be asked and the manner
    of them. The Appellant's solicitors had ensured that the Appellant had
    attended the hearing accompanied by a lady who had been described as an
    intermediary but who gave support to the Appellant and was present
    sitting alongside her during the hearing.

25. The questions asked both in evidence in chief and in cross examination
    were given in a calm and measured manner and if anything was unclear,
    questions were rephrased. We reconvened the Court in a less formal way
    and set out breaks in the proceedings. In any event the oral evidence
    given was of a very short duration and I was satisfied that the
    Appellant was able to participate fully in the hearing and no concerns
    were raised during the hearing in this respect.

The Appellant's factual claim:

26. The basis of the Appellants claim is set out in the witness statements
    and the interviews that took place, both with the Home Office and with
    the psychiatrist.


27. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. She grew up in a place called
    xxx and lived there until she was a teenager. Her father, who was a
    fisherman died approximately 20 years ago. It is said that after his
    death the Appellant continued to live with her mother but that her half-
    brother who had lived there left when her mother died. She continued to
    live in the family home with other family relatives (see witness
    statement 20/4/17) but it is stated that they were abusive to her (see
    witness statement 23/8/18) although she stated she had friends who were
    supporting her. It is also recorded that she had a relationship with a
    man in Nigeria and three children were born to that relationship but
    that following allegations of witchcraft made against her, he threw her
    out of the house would not let her see her children ( See psychiatric
    report);p13).

28. In or about 2004 her entry to the UK was facilitated by a woman that
    she met at a church in Nigeria. It is stated that following the loss of
    her parents and the mistreatment that she alleges took place, she met a
    woman in a church who offered her the opportunity to travel and work
    abroad. The Appellant could not remember her name. She spent a period
    of four weeks in her accommodation where she was introduced to 2 men
    whom it was said would get her to London and obtain employment for her.
    In interview she said that the water she would have to pay back the
    money and that the kind of work that she will be doing would be
    "cleaning jobs".

29. The men transported her to the UK who took her to a property in London.
    There were two other women also in the accommodation. She stayed for a
    period of approximately four weeks in the property but the women were
    not allowed outside on their own. The Appellant states that during the
    time that she was present she was the victim of sexual abuse from these
    men. On a day when the two other women had left the property, she was
    able to leave the property herself. She found assistance and
    accommodation through members of the local African community initially
    living in a household as a nanny and there after resided with a number
    of families providing domestic labour/help in return. It is recorded in
    the Appellant's personal history (GP notes) that in 2008 she had a
    partner.

30. The Appellant re-established contact with her brother and moved into
    his property.


31. In or about October 2014 she was diagnosed as HIV-positive. It is
    recorded in the skeleton argument that there had been a marked change
    in the treatment she received from another family member and thus left
    the property (see paragraph 6).

32. A referral to the "National Referral Mechanism" (hereinafter referred
    to as the "NRM") was made by the Salvation Army (a designated "first
    responder") on 20 August 2015. This resulted in a "positive reasonable
    grounds decision" being issued on 4 September 2015. An asylum claim was
    made on or about 2 December 2015. An interview took place on 26 October
    2015 and following an unexplained delay, a further interview took place
    on 26 July 2016. On 16 March 2017 the NRM decision and the Appellant's
    asylum decision were issued to the Appellant; both decisions refused
    her claim.


The Law:


33. I have reminded myself that, when considering whether the Appellant has
    a well-founded fear of persecution for the purposes of the Refugee
    Convention, the burden of proof lies with the Appellant but that I have
    taken into account the fact that she is a vulnerable witness, which may
    have affected her ability to give evidence. The standard of proof is
    that of a reasonable degree of likelihood or a serious possibility. In
    contrast, when a person has been referred into the National Referral
    Mechanism, as a potential victim of human trafficking, the standard of
    proof when making a conclusive grounds decision is that of a balance of
    probabilities. Therefore, I have to apply the requisite low standard of
    proof for considering an asylum appeal and not just rely on the
    decision reached by the Competent Authority.


34. A person is entitled to refugee status under the Refugee Convention if
    she has a well-founded fear of persecution on account of her
    nationality, religion, race, membership of a particular social group or
    political opinion.

    37. Regulation 6(1)(d) of the Qualification Directive states that:

    "A group shall be considered to form a particular social group where in
    particular

    a) members of that group share an innate characteristic, or a common
    background that cannot be changed, or share a characteristic or belief
    that is so fundamental to identity or conscience that a person should
    not be forced to renounce it, and
    b) that group has a distinct identity in the relevant country as it is
    perceived as being different by the surrounding society".

Internal Relocation
35. Of particular relevance to part of the guidance given in this  case  is
    paragraph 339O headed "Internal Relocation".  This states:


36. 'i.      The Secretary of State will not make:
    (a)     a grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin a person
    will not have a well-founded fear of being persecuted  and  the  person
    can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of the country; or


    (b)    a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the country of
    return a person would not face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm,
    and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of  the
    country.
    ii. In examining whether a part of the country of origin or country of
    return meets the requirements in i. the Secretary of State, when making
    his decision on whether to grant  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection,
    will have regard to the general circumstances prevailing in  that  part
    of the country and to the personal circumstances of the person.


    iii.     It applies notwithstanding technical obstacles  to  return  to
    the country of origin or country of return."


37. In considering the proper approach to the issue of internal  relocation
    I have also to apply the principles set out by the House  of  Lords  in
    Januzi [2006] UKHL 5  (which  adopts  the  criteria  now  contained  in
    paragraph 339O but also contains more detailed guidance) and AH (Sudan)
    [2007] UKHL 49.


38.  In Januzi their Lordships held that the test for whether it  would  be
    unreasonable for an asylum seeker to relocate to a  safe  haven  within
    his own country, was not whether the quality of life  there  failed  to
    meet the basic norms  of  civil,  political  and  socio-economic  human
    rights, but whether he would face conditions such as utter  destitution
    or exposure to cruel or inhuman treatment, threatening his  most  basic
    human rights.  There was no presumption that when persecution  emanated
    from agents of the state or where the state encouraged or  connived  in
    that persecution by others, there could be no  viable  internal  flight
    option.  The greater the power of the  state  over  all  parts  of  the
    asylum seeker's country the less viable such an  option  would  be  and
    vice versa.



39. In AH (Sudan) their Lordships  repeated  that  the  test  to  determine
    whether internal relocation was available was  as  set  out  in  Januzi
    namely whether it was reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate or
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.   The  'unduly
    harsh' test did not require conditions in the place  of  relocation  to
    reach the Article 3 ECHR level.  The inquiry was to be directed to  the
    situation of the particular Appellant, whose age,  gender,  experience,
    health, skills and family ties might all be very relevant.   Cases  had
    to  be  assessed  holistically  with  specific  reference  to  personal
    circumstances, including past persecution or fear thereof in family and
    social relationships.


40. Sufficiency of Protection
    As the House of Lords decision in Horvath [2000] UKHL 37  demonstrates,
    to qualify as a 'non state agent of persecution' it is  not  enough  to
    show the person or group concerned has a  real  potential  to  cause  a
    claimant serious harm. There must also be a  protection  the  non-state
    actor simply remains an 'agent  of  serious  harm'  not  an  'agent  of
    persecution'. As Lord Hope stated:

    "The standard to be applied is therefore not that which eliminates  all
    risk and would thus amount to a guarantee of  protection  in  the  home
    state.  Rather it is a practical standard which takes proper account of
    the duty which the state owes to all its nationals."



41. At paragraphs 11-13 of the refusal letter dated 16th March 2017, the
    Respondent accepted that women who have been victims of trafficking for
    the purposes of sexual exploitation do share an immutable
    characteristic which cannot be changed. The letter also accepted that a
    former victims of human trafficking and women who are such victims from
    Nigeria are members of a particular social group on that account (see
    paragraph 14).

42. Thus the Respondent accepted that the Appellant was a national of
    Nigeria but did not accept that she had been trafficked from Nigeria or
    was a victim of modern slavery. Therefore, for the purposes of re-
    making her asylum appeal, I must consider whether there is a serious
    possibility that the Appellant was trafficked as claimed and any risk
    on return.

43.  Section 2 of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 states that:

    (1) A person commits an offence of [human trafficking] if the person
    arranges or facilitates the travel of another person with a view to V
    being exploited.

    (2) It is irrelevant whether V consents to the travel (whether V is an
    adult or a child).

    (3) A person may, in particular, arrange or facilitate V's travel by
    recruiting V, transporting or transferring V, harbouring or receiving
    V, or transferring or exchanging control over V.

    (4) A person arranges or facilitates V's travel with a view to V being
    exploited only if-
    (a) the person intends to exploit V or
    (b) the person knows or ought to know that another person is likely to
    exploit V?

    (5) "Travel" means-
    (a) arriving in, or entering, any country;
    (b) departing from any country;
    (c) travelling within any country".


44. When considering the credibility of the Appellant's account of travel
    and exploitation, I have taken into account that in Karanakaran v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA Civ 11 Lord
    Justice Brooke held that:

    "when considering whether there is a serious possibility of persecution
    for a Convention reason if an asylum seeker is returned, it would be
    quite wrong to exclude matters totally from consideration in the
    balancing process simply because the decision-maker believes, on what
    may be somewhat fragile evidence, that they probably did not occur.
    Similarly, even if a decision-maker finds that this is no serious
    possibility of persecution for a Convention reason in the part of the
    country to which the Secretary of State proposed to send an asylum
    seeker, it must not exclude relevant matters, from its consideration
    altogether when determining whether it would be unduly harsh to return
    the asylum seeker to that part, unless it considers that there is no
    serious possibility that those facts are as the asylum seeker
    contends".

45. Therefore, it is necessary to consider all relevant evidence before
    reaching a holistic assessment of the credibility of the Appellant's
    account. However, the credibility of her account can also be assessed
    holistically by looking at its consistency and plausibility, as above,
    and also by comparing it to what is known about trafficking in Nigeria.

46. The fact that the Government decided to adopt a balance of
    probabilities as the appropriate standard of proof for a conclusive
    decision within the National Referral Mechanism, as opposed to the far
    lower standard of proof applicable in Refugee Convention decisions,
    indicates that it did recognise that the two processes were to be
    distinguished from each other.


47. For all of these reasons, the fact that the Competent Authority did not
    find, on a balance of probabilities, that the Appellant was a victim of
    human trafficking does not prevent the Tribunal finding that she is
    entitled to asylum as a person who has been subject to human
    trafficking on the lower standard of proof and in the light of all
    relevant evidence.



The CG decision of HD (Trafficked women) Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454

48.  The headnote of the decision sets out the following:


   1. The guidance set out in PO (trafficked  women)  Nigeria  [2009]  UKAIT
      00046 at paragraphs 191-192 should no longer be followed.

   2.  Although the Government of Nigeria recognises that the trafficking of
      women, both internally and transnationally, is a  significant  problem
      to be addressed, it is not established by the evidence that for  women
      in general in Nigeria there is a real risk of being trafficked.

   3. For a woman returning to Nigeria, after having been trafficked to  the
      United Kingdom, there is in general no real risk of retribution or  of
      being trafficked afresh by her original traffickers.

   4. Whether a woman returning to Nigeria having previously been trafficked
      to the United Kingdom faces on return a real risk of being  trafficked
      afresh will require  a  detailed  assessment  of  her  particular  and
      individual characteristics. Factors that  will  indicate  an  enhanced
      risk of being trafficked include, but are not limited to:

        a.   The absence of a supportive family willing to  take  her  back
           into the family unit;


        b.   Visible or discernible characteristics of vulnerability,  such
           as having no social support network to assist her, no or  little
           education or vocational skills, mental health conditions,  which
           may  well  have  been  caused  by  experiences  of  abuse   when
           originally trafficked, material and financial  deprivation  such
           as to mean that she will be living in poverty or  in  conditions
           of destitution;


        c.   The fact that a woman was previously trafficked is  likely  to
           mean that she was then identified by the traffickers as  someone
           disclosing characteristics of vulnerability such as to give rise
           to a real risk of being trafficked. On returning to Nigeria,  it
           is probable that those characteristics of vulnerability will  be
           enhanced  further  in  the  absence  of  factors  that   suggest
           otherwise.


   5. Factors that indicate a lower risk of being  trafficked  include,  but
      are not limited to:


        a.   The availability of a supportive family willing  to  take  the
           woman back into the family unit;


        b.   The fact that the woman has acquired  skills  and  experiences
           since leaving Nigeria that better equip her to have access to  a
           livelihood on return to Nigeria, thus enabling  her  to  provide
           for herself.

   6. There will be little risk of  being  trafficked  if  received  into  a
      NAPTIP shelter or a shelter provided by an NGO for the time  that  she
      is there, but that support is likely to  be  temporary,  possibly  for
      just a few weeks, and there will need to be a  careful  assessment  of
      the position of the woman when she leaves the shelter.

   7. For a woman who does face a real  risk  of  being  trafficked  if  she
      returns to her home area, the question of whether internal  relocation
      will be available as a safe and reasonable alternative that  will  not
      be unduly harsh will require a detailed assessment of  her  particular
      circumstances. For  a  woman  who  discloses  the  characteristics  of
      vulnerability described above that are indicative of a  real  risk  of
      being trafficked, internal relocation  is  unlikely  to  be  a  viable
      alternative.

Analysis of the evidence:

49. The core of the Appellant's case relates to  her  account  having  been
    trafficked to the UK from Nigeria in 2004. The claim  in  this  respect
    was not made until 2015. The circumstances in which it was made is  set
    out in the evidence namely that a referral was made to the NRM  by  the
    Salvation Army at a time  when  she  was  destitute  and  having  being
    diagnosed as HIV positive.  This  resulted  in  a  positive  reasonable
    grounds decision issued on 4 September 2015. Thereafter the  claim  for
    asylum was  registered  on  2  December  2015  and  the  NRM  interview
    conducted on 26 October 2015. There was a lengthy delay until a  second
    interview was conducted on 22 July 2016  before  a  decision  was  made
    rejecting her asylum claim alongside the NRM decision both  being  made
    on 16 March 2017.

50. The credibility points relied upon by the  Respondent  (in  the  asylum
    decision) are  essentially  those  set  out  in  the  decision  of  the
    competent authority. Those points can be summarised as follows:-

               1) it is highly unlikely that a stranger would have given her
                  support in Nigeria;

               2) that there was a lack of detail about the arrangements for
                  her travel;

               3) the plausibility of her account was an issue  as  she  did
                  not tell her friends that she was leaving to go overseas;

               4) the method of her escape;

               5) she was unable to provide details/names and  addresses  of
                  those people she lived with;

               6) Whilst there was a diagnosis of anxiety and depression  no
                  detail was given to the psychiatrist concerned.

51. Mr McVeety on behalf of the Respondent submits that the  Appellant  has
    given an inconsistent account and that this undermines the  credibility
    of her account of being trafficked to the UK. He makes three  principal
    submissions. Firstly, she has not been consistent  about  whether   she
    was  a  victim  of  sexual  harm  in  2004  and  he  relies  upon   the
    inconsistencies and  varying  accounts  given  and  in  particular  the
    information that she gave to  the  psychiatrist  in  2018  when  it  is
    recorded that she was adamant that the event did not  occur.  Secondly,
    that the evidence set out in the psychiatric report (the GP's  records)
    make reference to her partner in United Kingdom and thus he submits  it
    undermines her account to have been kept akin to a  prisoner.  Thirdly,
    he submits there is information in the form of Visa applications  which
    suggests that she has family in the UK. He thus  submits  overall  that
    her account its entirety should be wholly disbelieved.

52. By way of reply, Mr Nicholson submits that it is important to  consider
    that there are no significant inconsistencies in her account  and  that
    she had a subsequent diagnosis of HIV which  was  consistent  with  her
    account of being trafficked and sexual abuse  having  taken  place  and
    that  there  are  proper  and  persuasive  reasons  for  the  late  and
    inconsistent disclosure of the sexual harm given her experiences in the
    UK and treatment from her family members and  that  she  has  found  it
    shameful to disclose such details. He further submits that in the light
    of the medical evidence she is exhibiting signs of trauma which  should
    be taken into account when making an assessment  of  these  issues  and
    that  there   are   good   reasons   for   the   late   disclosure   of
    trafficking/sexual harm.

53. As to the evidence of family members, he submits that the  Home  Office
    questions during the interview were not clear and she was a  vulnerable
    witness at the time of the interview which was not taken  into  account
    by the interviewer.

54. As to the GPs records, he submits that even if she did have  a  partner
    it does not necessarily undermine her account as having been  initially
    trafficked to the UK and her circumstances and medical condition.

55. I have therefore  considered  the  submissions  in  the  light  of  the
    Appellant's account, medical evidence and country materials.

56. I have set out above that it is common ground between the parties  that
    the Appellant is a vulnerable witness by reason of  her  mental  health
    condition. I have therefore taken account  of  and  applied  the  Joint
    Presidential Note. In this context I make reference to the case  of  JL
    (medical  reports-credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT  00145  (IAC),   in
    particular paragraph 6,  which  referred  to  the  situation  where  an
    Appellant was vulnerable and said that it was of particular  importance
    to take into account the possible relevance of the  Appellant  being  a
    vulnerable person to the credibility findings.


57.  At paragraph 27 of the decision in JL judges are reminded that
    applying this guidance entails asking whether any of the
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account could be explained by her
    being a vulnerable person.


58. The guidance at 10.3 at page 6, which gives guidance on assessing
    evidence, and paragraph 14, which says that where there were clear
    discrepancies in the oral evidence, consideration should be given to
    the extent to which the age, vulnerability or sensitivity of the
    witness was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.



59. Paragraph 15 states that the decision should record whether the
    Tribunal has concluded that the Appellant is a child, vulnerable or
    sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered the identified
    vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and whether the
    Tribunal was satisfied whether the Appellant had established his or her
    case to the relevant standard of proof. It is noted that in asylum
    appeals weight should be given to objective indications of risk rather
    than necessarily to a state of mind.


60. The importance of applying the guidance in an appropriate case was
    emphasised by the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan). Indeed, the
    Senior President of Tribunals, Sir Ernest Ryder (with whom Gross and
    Underhill LJJ agreed) said at [30] that a "failure to follow [the
    guidance] will most likely be a material error of law".

61. At para [31], the Senior President set out, in agreement with
    submissions made on behalf of the Lord Chancellor in that case, five
    key features of the joint Presidential Guidance Note and the Practice
    Direction of the Senior President, "First-tier and Upper Tribunal:
    Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Witnesses (30 October 2008) as
    follows:
    "31. The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance] provide detailed guidance
    on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal to an incapacitated or
    vulnerable person. I agree with the Lord Chancellor's submission that
    there are five key features:
    a. the early identification of issues of vulnerability is encouraged,
    if at all possible, before any substantive hearing through the use of a
    CMRH or pre-hearing review (Guidance [4] and [5]);
    b. a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will only need to attend
    as a witness to give oral evidence where the tribunal determines that
    'the evidence is necessary to enable the fair hearing of the case and
    their welfare would not be prejudiced by doing so' (PD [2] and Guidance
    [8] and [9]);
    c. where an incapacitated or vulnerable person does give oral evidence,
    detailed provision is to be made to ensure their welfare is protected
    before and during the hearing (PD [6] and [7] and Guidance [10]);
    d. it is necessary to give special consideration to all of the personal
    circumstances of an incapacitated or vulnerable person in assessing
    their evidence (Guidance [10.2] to [15]); and
    e. relevant additional sources of guidance are identified in the
    Guidance including from international bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to
    [27])."


62. Further, at para [21] (agreeing with the submissions made on behalf of
    the Appellant in that case), the Senior President dealt with the
    importance of considering the circumstances of a child or vulnerable
    witness when assessing their evidence in an asylum claim as follows:
    "21. It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the agreed basis
    for allowing the appeal on the merits reflects core principles of
    asylum law and practice which have particular importance in claims from
    children and other vulnerable persons namely:
    a. given the gravity of the consequences of a decision on asylum and
    the accepted inherent difficulties in establishing the facts of the
    claim as well as future risks, there is a lower standard of proof,
    expressed as 'a reasonable chance', 'substantial grounds for thinking'
    or 'a serious possibility';
    b. while an assessment of personal credibility may be a critical aspect
    of some claims, particularly in the absence of independent supporting
    evidence, it is not an end in itself or a substitute for the
    application of the criteria for refugee status which must be
    holistically assessed;
    c. the findings of medical experts must be treated as part of the
    holistic assessment: they are not to be treated as an 'add-on' and
    rejected as a result of an adverse credibility assessment or finding
    made prior to and without regard to the medical evidence;
    d. expert medical evidence can be critical in providing explanation for
    difficulties in giving a coherent and consistent account of past events
    and for identifying any relevant safeguards required to meet
    vulnerabilities that can lead to disadvantage in the determination
    process, for example, in the ability to give oral testimony and under
    what conditions (see the Guidance Note below and JL (medical reports -
    credibility) (China) [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC), at [26] to [27]);
    e. an Appellant's account of his or her fears and the assessment of an
    Appellant's credibility must also be judged in the context of the known
    objective circumstances and practices of the state in question and a
    failure to do so can constitute an error of law; and
    f. in making asylum decisions, the highest standards of procedural
    fairness are required."



63. It is correct that the Appellant has not given a consistent account  of
    the events when she first came to the United  Kingdom,  in  particular,
    whether she was a victim of sexual harm  during  that  period.  In  the
    first interview she gave an account that during  that  period  of  time
    when resident with those who she states had brought her to  the  United
    Kingdom, that she had not been forced to sleep with  anyone  (including
    those who had been complicit with her having been trafficked). Nor  did
    she make a claim in her self-written witness statement (set out at  C1)
    but stated that the men involved had come to  her  to  carry  out  such
    abuse but that they had not succeeded. In a witness statement  made  on
    20 April 2017 she also made a similar reference to attempts being  made
    but that she had managed to avoid the harm. However before the FTTJ she
    did make the disclosure of a serious sexual assault  (see  decision  at
    paragraph 36) and in a witness statement dated 23 August 2018 she  made
    reference  to  the  sexual  assault  again  at  paragraph  28.  However
    following this on 29 August 2018 at a meeting with the psychiatrist she
    denied any assault and the doctor described her as being "adamant" that
    she had not had consensual or coercive sex with anyone, either  in  the
    UK or in Nigeria (see paragraph 18).

64. The psychiatrist in the report  also  identified  difficulties  in  his
    interview with her and that reaching a diagnosis was difficult  without
    a full picture of her life experiences and the problems of  identifying
    what was accurate information and what was not (see paragraph 10).

65. There are also elements her account which have not been consistent. For
    example, in the account given in interview in 2015 she appears  to  say
    that she had not been married/had children in Nigeria (see D 11; Q  28)
    and there was no reference to  her  having  had  a  husband/partner  in
    Nigeria and having given birth to 3 children. However  in  the  account
    given to the psychologist, in February 2018, she makes reference to her
    family excluding her, including her husband who had not allowed her any
    access to  the  children.  In  her  account  to  the  psychiatrist  she
    similarly referred to having a husband and that she  had  children  but
    that she had been separated from them due to allegations of witchcraft.

66. In the interview (B 18; Q252) she was asked if she had ever been  in  a
    relationship in the UK. She said that she had not  and  similarly  told
    the psychiatrist (see paragraphs 10 and 24). This is inconsistent  with
    the material in the GP's records which  refers  to  her  being  with  a
    partner in or about May 2008 and there is a  letter  dated  the  5/1/09
    which refers to her being with a partner and trying for  a  child.  She
    was seen with her partner in July 2008. In her oral evidence  she  said
    she did not have a partner. She could not remember any details of  what
    had happened in 2008.

67. I have had to consider the issue  of  credibility  and  consistency  in
    account with the medical evidence and of those  who  have  also  worked
    with the Appellant. She was not able to  give  any  detail  when  asked
    questions and the majority of her answers were to that  she  could  not
    remember or did not know. Her  presentation  before  the  Tribunal  was
    consistent with that set out in the psychiatrists report.  Consequently
    there were few questions asked of her in evidence.

68. There is a body of evidence referred to in  the  psychologist's  report
    and the psychiatrist report which give details of the problems that the
    Appellant has had with her memory and also problems of confusion.

69. In the GPs notes (14/9/15) there is reference to  the  Appellant  being
    confused and in November 2015 the Appellant was referred to the  memory
    clinic. The entry of  December  2015  refers  to  recent  clinic  notes
    highlighting a history of forgetfulness and appearing at  times  to  be
    "confused" and struggling  to  find  the  right  words.  She  had  been
    referred for a neuro psychiatric  assessment  but  that  is  not  taken
    place. There is also an entry in January 2016 which refers to  her  not
    appearing  to  be  confused.  The  evidence  of   her   confusion   and
    difficulties with her memory was contained in a report  that  had  been
    before the competent authority, who had made reference to her inability
    to give details on events  which  in  part  formed  the  basis  of  the
    rejection of her account. It is also right to observe that in the  same
    report (which  is  also  exhibited  in  the  Respondent's  bundle)  the
    Appellant had told the  psychotherapist  in  2015  that  she  had  been
    trafficked  but  that  did  not  wish  to  talk  about  her   traumatic
    experiences.   The   psychologist's   opinion   was   that   this   was
    understandable and that she "might not  feel  safe  to  explore  highly
    traumatic experiences" at that time.

70. There is therefore evidence that at the time of her interview there had
    been concerns raised  as  to  her  confusion  and  memory  and  medical
    referrals were made on this basis but that she was never the subject of
    any assessment (see psychological opinion page  13).  The  psychiatrist
    notes that there is nothing to suggest that she suffers currently  from
    any serious cognitive impairment (see page 13) when he  considered  her
    account of the vagueness relating to  her  siblings  and  denial  of  a
    sexual relationship and he did not find that that was  related  to  any
    mental or physical disorder. It is unclear to me  what  that  means  in
    terms of her ability to remember events. However the overall  diagnosis
    made  is  that  the  Appellant  has  a  chronic   depressive   disorder
    characterised by low mood and anxiety.

71. The psychiatrist makes reference to the psychotherapist in 2018  having
    referred to the Appellant as having PTSD. He refers to  that  diagnosis
    but that the psychologist had not provided details of  any  experiences
    or flashbacks and that  for  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD  there  had  to  be
    identifiable trauma. While the doctor observes that the  Appellant  was
    not able to give details, it does appear that such detail was given  to
    the psychotherapist who has been undertaking therapy with the Appellant
    since February 2018 and there is also reference to this in  an  earlier
    recording made during the periods of April-November 2015 and  therefore
    it does not necessarily mean that whilst she was not able to  refer  to
    it in his interview, that she had not made any disclosures previously.

72. In any event, the doctor's opinion is  that  she  has  had  an  extreme
    reaction to the HIV diagnosis and that this  has  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of past trauma which he has identified as being the allegations
    of witchcraft, shame, isolation and  rejection  having  been  a  social
    outcast. At paragraph 10 of the report he refers to the  bad  treatment
    that she experienced in Nigeria. He further states that if  it  is  not
    those experiences, "then some experiences which she  has  not  revealed
    have given rise to the chronic depression and anxiety described in  the
    medical records symptoms of which worsen." He gives examples of how her
    anxiety affects her and that it disrupts her concentration so  severely
    that it gives rise to  mental  confusion  and  something  in  her  past
    experiences have affected her ability to trust people to make  positive
    relationships.

73. Having summarised the medical evidence and having considered it in  the
    light of the guidance note and the decision of AM (Afghanistan) as  set
    out in the preceding paragraphs, I have reached the conclusion that her
    past history and account should be properly considered in the light  of
    her diagnosis and past medical history. It is of  particular  relevance
    to the issue of credibility and consistency in  the  NRM  letter  which
    pays no regard to the issues raised in relation to the  confusion,  her
    inability to remember details  and  have  memory  problems  which  were
    clearly apparent in 2015 and at a time when she  was  interviewed.  The
    subsequent medical evidence post-2015 now gives greater detail  of  the
    possible reasons for this including having experienced past trauma.

74. The credibility issues raised in the competent authority decision  also
    failed to take account of her HIV diagnosis and the  effect  that  this
    plainly has had on the Appellant. She had been interviewed at the  time
    when she had been diagnosed as HIV positive in or  about  October  2014
    and the  medical  evidence  suggests  that  this  diagnosis  led  to  a
    moderate/severe depression and had a  "major  negative  impact  on  her
    life".

75. Furthermore the  psychiatrist  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  extreme
    reaction to this was likely to be triggered by the  existence  of  past
    trauma. This evidence had not been available to the competent authority
    when reaching its overall analysis as to her past experiences  or  when
    considering the reliability of her account.

76. It is also important to note that in the competent authority  decision,
    emphasis and weight was placed on the Appellant not being able to  give
    an account of her past experiences. However it is  plain  from  reading
    the November 2015 report it states that it was too early at that  stage
    to expect her to give full details and following this in 2017  in  2018
    further details had been given by her.

77. Therefore when looking at her consistency of account and of  being  the
    subject of a sexual assault, I place weight on the psychiatric evidence
    which makes reference to  the  anxiety/fear  that  she  has  which  has
    disrupted her concentration  so  severely  it  has  given  her  "mental
    confusion" and that there has been something in  her  past  experiences
    that have affected her  ability  to  trust  people  and  make  positive
    relationships. It is against this background  evidence  that  her  late
    disclosure should be viewed, including the sexual assault.

78. In conclusion, I am satisfied from the evidence  that  any  failure  or
    inconsistency or inability to give a full account must be viewed in the
    light of the medical evidence, memory problems and confusion exhibited,
    her diagnosis of HIV and her reaction and its effects upon her and  the
    inability  to  discuss  her  traumatic  experiences.   Therefore   when
    considering her account had been trafficked  to  the  UK,  it  must  be
    considered against the background evidence and  in  the  light  of  her
    particular vulnerability.

79. I have also had regard to the objective evidence and having done  so  I
    make the following findings of  fact.  I  am  satisfied  to  the  lower
    standard of proof that following the death of her mother she  continued
    to live in the family home. Her account was that she had remained there
    with relatives (see witness statement 20/4/17) and her account  in  her
    recent witness statement (23/8/18) was that family members were abusive
    to her, called her names had isolated her. This is consistent with  the
    evidence she gave to the psychiatrist and the psychotherapist  in  2018
    as to her circumstances in  Nigeria.  They  both  refer  to  her  being
    isolated and refer to her being treated badly  by  her  relatives.  The
    psychiatric  opinion  is  that  when  she  gave  her  account  of  past
    experiences in Nigeria she was at her most forthcoming  and  displaying
    emotion that was consistent with those negative experiences.

80. It is against that background that the Appellant claims that she met  a
    woman who assisted her to come to the  United  Kingdom.  The  objective
    evidence  makes  reference  to  Nigeria  as  a  source  of  transit  or
    destination country for women and children being subjected to  domestic
    servitude and trafficking for sexual exploitation. The country guidance
    decision  of  HD  (as  cited)  sets  out  the  evidence   of   domestic
    exploitation at paragraphs 35 - 52. At paragraph 62 of the decision  it
    sets out the victim profile  and  those  subjected  to  trafficking  or
    individuals at risk. Many of the characteristics identified are present
    on the facts of this particular Appellant. They are  as  follows:  they
    are mainly female, from  a  financially  poor  family,  had  a  limited
    education, had to carry out daily chores, brought up in  the  community
    that practised or believed in  the  power  of  juju;  was  promised  in
    education or employment, is happy to leave the home  environment  where
    they were ill-treated, does not have a  passport,  travel  arrangements
    made by the person, does not know the name of the person  bringing  her
    to the UK, scared of authorities, distrusting of other persons, suffers
    nightmares,  victims  of  sexual  assault/abuse   once   in   the   UK,
    inconsistencies or gaps within the account, able or unwilling to  speak
    about those who traffic them.

81. The evidence in the GC decision does not suggest that it was  necessary
    for a victim to present with all of the characteristics in order to  be
    recognised as a victim of trafficking or to be at real  risk  of  being
    trafficked   but  that  the  existence  of   a   selection   of   these
    characteristics referred to in the decision are to be viewed or seen to
    be "strong identifiers".

82. I am satisfied that her circumstances that she has described in Nigeria
    were such that she was vulnerable to trafficking taking  place.  Whilst
    the decision letter refers to the Appellant's account that it  was  not
    plausible that a stranger would support  her  for  one  month  that  is
    consistent with the methods employed by professional traffickers in the
    initial stages of exploitation according to the objective material.

83. When looking at the account given by the Appellant when set against the
    objective evidence, it does not  suggest  that  she  was  subjected  to
    trafficking for sexual exploitation. The reasons that this can be taken
    from the evidence referred to in the country guidance case of HD;  that
    there was no evidence of any sexual grooming in the UK/Nigeria, she was
    not given a "legend", the costs of the trafficking is  high  and  there
    had been no attempt made to recoup the costs by forcing her to work  as
    a prostitute and no attempts were made to trace her in the UK since her
    escape in 2004.

84. I consider that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  she  was  originally
    trafficked for the purposes of domestic servitude and  it  is  in  this
    context that she was the subject of a sexual assault. As I have set out
    in the earlier part of this decision, there is a body of evidence which
    is capable of  providing  support  for  her  having  suffered  such  an
    assault. There is evidence that  she  disclosed  sexual  abuse  to  the
    counsellor  in  October  2015  (see  F2).  She  has   been   undergoing
    counselling since January 2015 and it refers  to  her  at  registration
    having relayed physical, emotional and sexual abuse that she  had  been
    subjected to. Furthermore in the interview which took place in 2015 she
    did refer to "abuse" although she did not give details.  She  also  had
    given further details in February 2018 which the  psychotherapist  made
    reference to which included sexual harm.

85. I therefore do  not  accept  the  submission  made  in  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that her entire account should be  disbelieved  because  she
    been inconsistent as to whether or not she been subjected to  any  such
    mistreatment. It is plain  from  the  evidence  that  in  2015  it  was
    considered too early  for  her  to  relay  the  traumatic  experiences.
    Furthermore in 2018 the psychiatrist  made  reference  to  her  anxiety
    being at such a level that it disrupted the concentration  so  severely
    that it gave rise to mental confusion and that her past experiences had
    affected her ability to trust people.  Against  that  background  I  am
    satisfied to the lower standard that her  consistency  of  account  has
    been affected by her experiences and I accept the submission made by Mr
    Nicholson in this regard. This is supported  by  the  medical  evidence
    which has not been challenged and therefore the inconsistencies in  the
    reports do not by themselves demonstrate that  her  account  should  be
    wholly disbelieved.

86. As to the events in the UK thereafter, I have  considered  the  matters
    raised in the competent authorities decision (which is relied  upon  in
    the asylum claim). It is submitted that she was unable to give  details
    as to the full names and addresses of those that she lived  within  the
    UK. However as a skeleton argument  sets  out,  the  questions  in  the
    interview demonstrates that she was never asked to give full details of
    the people that  she  lived  with  therefore  it  cannot  be  a  proper
    criticism to make when she was not asked to give such evidence. She did
    give some names of those she lived with.

87. The  decision  letter  also  refers  to  the  treatment  the  Appellant
    described as being an indicator of a working arrangement as opposed  to
    trafficking. However as the guidance  sets  out  there  is  no  typical
    experience of people who have been trafficked  and  the  only  relevant
    consideration is the purpose for  which  she  had  been  recruited  and
    transferred to the UK.

88. I am satisfied to the lower standard that she has  been  trafficked  to
    the UK for reasons set out previously and had managed  to  escape/leave
    after a period spent in the accommodation provided.

89.  As to her account thereafter, I  do  not  find  that  the  experiences
    described are ones of being subjected to modern slavery.  Her  original
    interview she referred to being able to leave the  house  and  she  was
    able to take the children to school in her care. She  agreed  that  she
    had been free to leave and in the second interview she  confirmed  that
    she was not the subject  of  a  mistreatment  during  this  period  and
    question 214 she confirmed that none of the families tried to force her
    to stay with them.

90.   Furthermore  in  establishing  the  factual   background   there   is
    independent evidence concerning the period  of  time  spent  in  United
    Kingdom post 2004 which is contrary to her claim that she  was  kept  a
    "prisoner" for that period (which is what is set  out  in  the  witness
    statement).  The  GPs  records  are  independent  and   contemporaneous
    evidence of events which set out that in 2008 she was presented with  a
    partner seeking to start a family. The GPs notes  do  not  support  her
    account to have been subjected to domestic servitude thereafter.  There
    is also no evidence to suggest that any of the arrangements  that  were
    made for the Appellant were made by the  original  traffickers  or  any
    other person. I am therefore satisfied that during the period post-2004
    she lived "under the radar" undertaking work in the domestic context as
    she had no leave to remain in United Kingdom. This is  consistent  with
    what was set out in the original report at F2 that  after  fleeing  her
    original traffickers she  was  able  to  sustain  herself  by  offering
    childcare to various families.

91. I am further satisfied from the evidence that there is no  evidence  in
    support to demonstrate those she worked for were related to or knew  or
    were involved with the original traffickers. There is also no  evidence
    that she was forced to stay with any particular family and no  evidence
    that the original traffickers had attempted to find  the  Appellant  in
    United Kingdom, despite her having not paid any "debt" for the original
    expenditure used to bring her to the United Kingdom.

92. Whilst it has been submitted on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  the
    entire account should be disbelieved because she had not told the truth
    about  period  after  trafficking,  I  have  considered  the  objective
    material and the other evidence as set out above which is supportive of
    her account as to how she came to United Kingdom. Whilst have not found
    her account thereafter to have been reliable that does not  necessarily
    undermine the whole of her account.

93. Mr McVeety also relies upon the evidence to demonstrate that she is not
    been truthful about her family  members  in  Nigeria.  He  relies  upon
    information set out in these applications made by VW as supported by AE
    (who is said to be her brother). The Visa information demonstrates that
    AE came to the UK as a student in 2005 and his sponsor was listed as NH
    (his sister; see A6). The information also demonstrates that a lady  of
    the name VW came to the UK in September 2002 and made an application to
    remain as a dependent relative of her daughter NH. She did  not  return
    to the UK and in 2012 made a further  application  for  residence  card
    sponsored by AE (the person said to be the Appellant's brother). In the
    application for leave to remain (as a dependent)  was  refused  because
    she had four children in Nigeria. After the evidence  had  been  filed,
    the Appellant made a witness statement, supported by a letter from  her
    purported brother stating that AE was her half-brother  and  that  they
    shared the same father that had different mothers. The children that VW
    had in Nigeria were half siblings whom she had had no contact with.

94. Having carefully considered the evidence in the Visa applications, I am
    satisfied to the lower standard that she does not have family that  she
    would be able to live with in Nigeria. While she refers to  having  one
    brother in the UK and no siblings in the UK (question  221)  that  does
    not undermine her later account that the brother that she has  referred
    to and is set out in the Visa application is her half-brother. I accept
    the submission made by Mr Nicholson that her reference to  her  brother
    does not necessarily undermine her account or her brother's letter that
    they are half siblings. Her evidence to the psychologist refers to  her
    father having had "several wives" and it was  their  treatment  of  her
    which led her to seek to leave Nigeria.

95. Furthermore, it was a position that VN was  her  birth  mother  as  the
    Respondent contends, she has  not  been  in  Nigeria  since  2002.  The
    application made to remain in the UK was as a dependent of her daughter
    NH (see D5), who was a British citizen. There is no evidence  from  any
    of the professionals who have  been  involved  with  the  Appellant  to
    demonstrate that she has had any ongoing contact with either  a  sister
    or her mother. In fact the evidence before me demonstrates that she has
    been living a solitary life and outside the community groups which  she
    has been able to attend she has not had any relationships  with  others
    or any friendships; something that she was  able  to  confirm  in  oral
    evidence. I do not consider that she would have been living in  the  UK
    in those circumstances without any contact to have  family  members  if
    she in fact had a full sibling or a parent living in United Kingdom.

96. Furthermore it appears be common ground that there is evidence that her
    half-brother, was initially assisting her, has refused to  provide  any
    further help for her (see skeleton argument at paragraph 6).

97. An important aspect is that she has no family upon whom  she  can  rely
    upon for support. Even if it were the position that she had  a  brother
    in UK, he has not been assisting the Appellant for a significant period
    of time and there is no evidence of  any  contact  between  them.   The
    objective material in the  Appellant's  bundle  refers  to  the  stigma
    attached to HIV status in Nigeria (see document at page 83  dated  27th
    of December 2013). The material demonstrates that HIV  stigma  operates
    on individual, family and community and institutional levels (page 84).
    At page 87, it is recorded that 75% reported life had become  traumatic
    due to stigmatisation from friends, family, healthcare workers  and  in
    the workplace and 27.3% who had experienced stigmatisation had PTSD. It
    is right to observe that the evidence  shows  that  the  level  of  HIV
    stigma in Nigeria has declined in the last two decades  (see  page  91)
    but HIV stigma still exists beyond the individual  level  and  persists
    within the family, the community and in  the  workplace.  Against  that
    background I accept the submission made by Mr Nicholson that the likely
    position (even if there were family members) is to be the same  as  has
    occurred with those in United Kingdom.

98. It is therefore against that background that I  have  to  consider  the
    risks to the Appellant  of  being  re-trafficked.  In  this  context  I
    considered the CG decision and the conclusions drawn from the objective
    material referred to in that decision. I have not been directed to  any
    objective material by either advocate to demonstrate that  the  present
    circumstances have altered from those set out in the CG decision.

99. As the decision sets out, for  a  woman  returning  to  Nigeria,  after
    having been trafficked to United Kingdom, there is in general  no  real
    risk  of  retribution  or  being  trafficked  afresh  by  her  original
    traffickers. Furthermore in light of the  findings  that  I  have  made
    concerning the length of time since  the  original  trafficking  events
    that also supports that general principle.

100. The country guidance decision states that whether a woman returning  to
    Nigeria having previously been trafficked to the United  Kingdom  faces
    on return a real  risk  of  being  trafficked  afresh  will  require  a
    detailed assessment of the particular and  individual  characteristics.
    The factors that will indicate an enhanced risk of being trafficked are
    set out in the headnote at paragraph 4 (a) -(c) and paragraph 5  (a)  -
    (b).

101. When applied to the circumstances of this particular  Appellant,  I  am
    satisfied that she has the visible and discernible  characteristics  of
    vulnerability. This is set out in the report of the psychotherapist and
    that of  the  psychiatrist  (dated  September  2018)  who  reached  the
    conclusion that she was suffering from chronic depression and  anxiety.
    It is submitted by Mr McVeety that the diagnosis of PTSD cannot be made
    by the psychologist as set out in her  report  and  that  it  has  been
    discounted  by  the  psychiatrist  who  observed  that  there  was   no
    flashbacks exhibited in his discussions with the Appellant  and  whilst
    it appears that that may have been referred to by the Appellant to  the
    psychologist, details had not been set out in the original letter. Thus
    the psychiatrist could not diagnose PTSD. The  psychiatric  report  has
    not been the subject of any challenge and it is set out in that  report
    that her mental health condition therefore in part may well  have  been
    caused by experiences of abuse or earlier trauma.

102. I am also satisfied that she is a single woman with  no  skills.  There
    is no evidence before me that she has any partner in United Kingdom and
    all that she has obtained any qualifications whilst resident in the UK.
    She has no discernible support from anyone in the  UK  other  than  the
    community groups who form her support network and  has  no  independent
    financial support.

103.  There  is  no  evidence  of  her  family  being  complicit  with   the
    traffickers but it is plain from the account  given  that  what  family
    members were in Nigeria previously were not supportive  to  her  before
    she left. Given her medical condition and status, it is not  reasonably
    likely that even if such family members were in Nigeria, they  will  be
    likely to be supportive of her as demonstrated by  her  experiences  in
    the UK and in light of the objective material relating  to  the  stigma
    that attaches to those diagnosed with HIV. The Appellant has not  lived
    in Nigeria since 2004 and there is no evidence that she has any form of
    support, either ongoing friendships, or any accommodation that would be
    available to her. She has no vocational skills that she  could  utilise
    to obtain accommodation or independent financial support. I  take  into
    account that in her interview with the psychiatrist she made  reference
    to children in Nigeria. Given their dates of birth they are  likely  to
    be adults now but in the light of her account given to the psychiatrist
    that she was parted from them even before she left  Nigeria,  I  cannot
    reach the conclusion that against that background there  would  be  any
    support forthcoming from them either.  For those  reasons,  I  consider
    that she has characteristics of vulnerability.

104.  I  therefore  considered  the  objective   material   concerning   the
    availability of  NAPTIP  shelters  however  it  demonstrates  that  any
    assistance would likely to be temporary for a  period  of  six  months.
    There is no evidence that she would be able  to  function  on  her  own
    after any residence in such a shelter. Whilst I am not  satisfied  that
    she will be targeted by the same personnel  who  originally  trafficked
    her, her vulnerabilities are such that she does not have the  level  of
    personal skills to enable  her  to  live  independently  without  those
    characteristics of vulnerability giving rise to a risk of further abuse
    which would be reasonably likely to render her susceptible  to  further
    trafficking.

105. I accept  Mr  Mcveety's  submission  that  the  decision  letter  makes
    reference to the availability of mental health provision in Nigeria and
    access to HIV medication and  that  the  evidence  does  not  meet  the
    threshold of severity to demonstrate a breach of Article 3 applying the
    decision of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31. It is right to observe that  there
    is no recent medical evidence as to her HIV diagnosis.  However that is
    not the issue; as set out  in  the  country  guidance  decision  it  is
    whether  the  extent  of  the  mental  health   condition   and   other
    characteristics would render her vulnerable to trafficking  because  of
    inability to protect herself.

106.  Having considered the evidence holistically, I am  satisfied  that  it
    has been demonstrated that she has  such  vulnerabilities  which  would
    place her in that category despite her age.  As  the  country  guidance
    decision sets out at paragraph 7 of  the  headnote,  for  a  woman  who
    discloses characteristics of vulnerability that  are  indicative  of  a
    real risk of being trafficked, internal relocation is unlikely to be  a
    viable alternative.

107. For those reasons I am satisfied that there is a reasonable  likelihood
    that she would be  at  risk  of  persecutory  harm  by  reason  of  the
    membership of a social group and therefore her  appeal  is  allowed  on
    asylum grounds and human rights grounds (Article 3).



Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and the decision is set aside; the appeal  is  re-made  as
follows: the appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]
                                Date:  21/1/ 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

