
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03376/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2017                    |On 6 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                    [g a]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C. Record, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon who appealed against a  decision
    of the respondent refusing him international  protection.   His  appeal
    was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andonian  who,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 23 June 2017, dismissed it.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ransley on 19 July 2017.   However,
    that application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and  granted  on  30
    August 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds.  Her reasons for so granting
    are:-

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal against the  decision
             of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Andonian)  who,  in   a
             determination promulgated on 23 June 2017 dismissed his appeal
             against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his
             protection claim and on human rights grounds.

         2.   It is arguable that the judge  erred  in  fact  and  law  when
             reaching his conclusions on the Article 8 issues; the judge at
             paragraph 39 made reference to there  being  no  court  orders
             relating to the family proceedings however in the  appellant's
             bundle at pages 11-13 there was an order from the family court
             setting  out  the  order  for  supervised  contact.  Thus  the
             conclusion that there was no family life  was  arguably  wrong
             and affected the Article 8 analysis.

         3.   The  grounds  also  seek  to  challenge  the  judge's  adverse
             credibility findings as to his membership of a political party
             and consequent risk by a failure to assess  all  the  evidence
             including the documentary evidence.  In this regard I  observe
             that the judge gave a number of evidence based reasons  as  to
             why he rejected his account and therefore found that on return
             he would be of no interest to the  authorities.   However  the
             judge did reject a newspaper report as having no  weight  when
             the  document  was  not  produced  although  it  was  in   the
             possession of the respondent.  I therefore do not restrict the
             grant of permission.  The document must be produced before the
             Upper Tribunal."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4.  At  the  outset  having  considered  the  Upper  Tribunal's  grant  of
    permission and the appellant's bundle,  Mr  Tarlow  accepted  that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing  on  the  basis  that  in  the  circumstances  this  particular
    appellant had not had a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Suffice it so say that Miss Record supported this submission and it  is
    an analysis of this individual appeal that I share.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any judge aside from Judge Andonian.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 6 November 2017.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
