
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03819/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2019                            |On 27 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                             MRS JUSTICE FARBEY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YC
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Capel of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State appeals (with the permission of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge H. H. Storey) against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FTT") allowing the respondent's appeal on human rights  grounds.  The
    respondent is an Algerian national born in February 1983. She  and  her
    father entered the United Kingdom on 21 June 1994  on  six-month  visit
    visas which her father had procured. Neither  the  respondent  nor  her
    father departed from the United Kingdom at the expiry of their leave to
    enter.  The respondent has never gone out of the United  Kingdom  since
    her arrival in 1994.

 2. On 26 April 2016, the respondent made a  ten-year  family  and  private
    life application which was refused. On 7 November 2016, she was  served
    with the relevant papers as an overstayer.

 3. On 28 August 2017, at Cheshire Magistrates' Court, the  respondent  was
    convicted of eight charges of theft and sentenced  to  a  total  of  26
    weeks imprisonment. This was not isolated offending: she has a  lengthy
    criminal record for numerous other offences committed between September
    2008 and May 2017.  We will return  to  her  criminal  record  in  more
    detail below.

 4. As a consequence of her offending, on 15 September 2017, the respondent
    was served with the Secretary of State's decision to deport  her  under
    section 5(1) of the  Immigration  Act  1971  on  the  ground  that  her
    deportation was deemed to be  conducive  to  the  public  good.  On  14
    November 2017, she  made  representations  against  deportation,  which
    included both an asylum and a human rights claim.  In a  decision  sent
    by letter of  8  March  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the
    representations. The asylum and human rights claims were refused.

 5. The respondent appealed to the FTT. By a determination  promulgated  on
    19 July 2018,  the  FTT  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds but allowed the appeal under article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The  FTT  judge  concluded
    that the respondent's deportation would amount to a breach of the right
    to respect for private life.

 6. Permission to appeal from the FTT was granted on the single ground that
    the judge had failed to conduct a lawful or  reasonable  assessment  of
    whether  the  respondent  had  established  exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances outside the Immigration  Rules  so  as  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in her deportation.

    The FTT's determination

 7. We turn to the FTT's determination in more detail.  The FTT reached its
    conclusions having seen and heard the respondent and  her  father  give
    evidence. The respondent's evidence was found to be generally credible.
     Her father was found to be  credible.   In  any  event,  there  is  no
    challenge to any of the FTT's findings of fact.

 8. As regards asylum, the respondent claimed to have well-founded fear  of
    persecution on the basis that she would face mistreatment as a Buddhist
    and that she would be the victim of gender-based harm and  violence  in
    Algeria. The FTT judge rejected that claim. The claim for  humanitarian
    protection was likewise dismissed.  We need say no more about asylum or
    protection issues, which are not the subject of this appeal.

 9. As regards the respondent's private life, the FTT accepted that she had
    moved away from her father at around the age of 15 or 16 years old. She
    suffered a "fractured and  disrupted  childhood  with  little  parental
    support and has lived in the UK for over 20 years being more than  half
    her life". Her GP records in April 2001 (when she was aged  18)  record
    her as having no permanent home and as having taken  an  overdose.  She
    had tried to jump off a  bridge  and  was  in  a  persistent  state  of
    depression and anxiety.

10. In 2002, she was the victim of an attack which was so serious that  she
    lost the sight of one eye. The FTT essentially found that she could not
    cope and became addicted to heroin which was in turn the  catalyst  for
    her offending which began in 2008.  The FTT was presented with  medical
    documentation that prior to her  first  offending,  she  had  attempted
    suicide, taken overdoses and self-harmed.

11. The FTT took into consideration that the respondent accrued a number of
    convictions for theft (shoplifting) between 2008 and 2009, receiving  a
    three-month prison sentence in May 2009. After her release, she managed
    to stop taking drugs, began employment and returned to college. She was
    convicted  of  criminal  damage  in  2011,  receiving   a   conditional
    discharge. Her next offending took place in 2014. The FTT records  that
    the respondent attributed that offending to problems arising  from  her
    lack of immigration status which was by that time  apparent  and  meant
    that she was unable to continue her studies or to work. She began self-
    harming again and turned to drug abuse. This led to further convictions
    predominantly for shoplifting and other theft.

12. The FTT noted that, although she had a  large  number  of  convictions,
    they related to a more limited number of incidents. Her longest  period
    of imprisonment was six months. All her offending had been  dealt  with
    in the Magistrates' Court. There was clear evidence that the pattern of
    offending was linked to drug use. She had demonstrated the  ability  to
    rehabilitate herself in the period between 2009 and 2014 (when it seems
    that her personal circumstances were more stable) save for the criminal
    damage offence which the FTT did not regard as serious. The  respondent
    was motivated to remain drug-free.

13. The FTT accepted the respondent's evidence that she was unaware of  any
    difficulties with her immigration status until 2014: she had  no  cause
    to know that she did not have lawful status in the United  Kingdom  and
    could not be blamed for unlawful stay as a child.  The  FTT  took  into
    consideration that, at the date of the appeal hearing,  the  respondent
    had lived in the UK for 24 years. Her only  close  family  relationship
    was with her father who had indefinite to remain.

14. The FTT found that all of the respondent's social,  cultural,  familial
    and other ties were in the United Kingdom. She had no ties to  Algeria.
    She would face serious obstacles to integration into Algerian  society,
    given her mental state, the absence of any family support  in  relation
    to employment or accommodation, and the  length  of  her  absence  from
    Algeria.

15. The FTT held that the respondent was completely  westernised.  She  was
    not fluent in French; and her lifestyle and behaviour were likely to be
    at  odds  with  Algerian  norms.  In  addition,   her   mental   health
    difficulties "would add to her vulnerability in what would be an  alien
    society".

16. Against this background, the FTT judge concluded:

         "In considering the evidence in the  round,  I  do  find  that  the
         [respondent] had  established  that  there  are  truly  exceptional
         circumstances which would outweigh the public interest in deporting
         her. To rebalance the scales in favour of the [respondent]  against
         deportation there must be very compelling  reasons  which  must  be
         exceptional. I find that in weighing up all  the  relevant  factors
         that the [respondent] has established that very compelling  reasons
         exist to outweigh the public interest".

    Legal framework

17. The FTT  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  respect  the  high  level  of
    importance  which  the  legislature  attaches  to  the  deportation  of
    criminals (NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662, [2017] 1 W.L.R. 207, para 22). Under paragraph 396
    of the Immigration Rules, where a person is liable to  deportation  the
    presumption shall be that the  public  interest  requires  deportation.
    The presumption does not apply in "automatic" deportation cases, but we
    are not concerned with the provisions for automatic deportation in  the
    present appeal.

18. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules insofar as material  applies  to
    persistent offenders like the respondent and provides:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and

         ...

         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State...they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
         particular disregard  for  the  law,  the  Secretary  of  State  in
         assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph  399  or  399A
         applies and, if it does not, the  public  interest  in  deportation
         will only be outweighed by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         paragraphs 399 ".

19. Paragraph 399  of  the  Rules  applies  if  a  person  has  a  parental
    relationship with a child under the age of  18  years  or  relationship
    with a British or settled partner.  The respondent does not fall within
    its  provisions.  Paragraph  399A  concerns  the  social  and  cultural
    integration of a person in the UK but applies only if a person has been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of his or her life, such  that  it
    does not apply to the respondent.

20. It follows that the question which fell to be determined by the FTT was
    whether the public interest  in  deportation  was  outweighed  by  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph
    399 and 399A. That is undoubtedly a very high test.

21. The test in the Rules (and the corresponding test in  section  117C  of
    the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002)  is  nevertheless
    intended  to  "provide  a  structured  basis  for  application  of  and
    compliance with Article 8, rather than to disapply it" (NA  (Pakistan),
    above, para 26). The Secretary of State and any tribunal "must look  at
    all the matters relied on collectively, in order to  determine  whether
    they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the high  public  interest
    in deportation" (NA (Pakistan), above, para 32). A claimant who  cannot
    meet the test for social and cultural integration under paragraph  399A
    (because he or she does not have the requisite  lawful  residence)  may
    meet the "very compelling circumstances" test in paragraph 398  on  the
    basis of integration; but such cases must be especially strong and will
    therefore be rare (NA (Pakistan), above, paras 29 and 33).

Analysis and conclusions

22. In our view, the FTT did not make a material error of law. There are  a
    number of highly particular  features  which  lead  us  to  uphold  the
    judge's determination. A combination of  unusual  factors  enabled  the
    "very compelling circumstances" test to be met in this case.

23. First, there can  be  no  challenge  to  the  FTT's  finding  that  the
    respondent's social, cultural and  family  ties  are  entirely  in  the
    United Kingdom: she has no ties at all with  Algeria.  Arriving  as  an
    eleven-year old child, she has not left the UK on  any  occasion  since
    then. It is strong mitigation for overstaying her  visa  that  she  was
    brought to the United Kingdom as a child by her father.

24. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Melvin submitted that  even  if
    she was blameless as a child, the respondent failed  to  get  in  touch
    with the Home Office to regularise  her  status  when  she  turned  18.
    However, the FTT accepted that the respondent had no knowledge  of  her
    irregular status until 2014, when she would have been 31 years old. The
    FTT found as a fact that she suffered serious  mental  health  problems
    when she found out that she did not have immigration  status.  She  had
    made an application to regularise her status  by  2016.  These  unusual
    circumstances mitigate the overstay and so reduce the harm to effective
    immigration control which may usually be implied from remaining in  the
    United Kingdom without leave.

25. Secondly, the respondent has been the victim of violent  crime,  losing
    vision in one eye. After that happened, she descended into self-harm to
    the extent that she tried to jump off a bridge. Uncertainty in relation
    to her immigration status triggered other acts  of  self-harm.  In  our
    view, these compassionate factors are relevant to the question  whether
    the public interest demands that the respondent should be removed  from
    the entirety of her social and familial ties. The FTT Judge found  that
    the respondent had been rehabilitated between 2009 and  2014  and  that
    she was at the time of the hearing  drug-free  with  the  intention  of
    remaining so. Mr Melvin failed to persuade us that the FTT was bound to
    conclude  that  the  public   interest   in   these   very   particular
    circumstances outweighed other factors.

26.  Mr  Melvin  emphasised  those  factors  which  weigh  in   favour   of
    deportation.  He emphasised that the respondent is a  repeat  offender.
    We have considered her criminal record.  Prior  to  the  2017  offences
    which triggered the deportation decision, the  respondent  had  already
    been convicted of 29 other offences of theft.  She  pleaded  guilty  to
    battery on 15 January 2009 and to common assault on  21  January  2009.
    Those are her only violent offences and they plainly fall at the  lower
    end of the scale. She pleaded guilty to criminal damage in 2011 and was
    (as we have set out above) sentenced to a  conditional  discharge.  She
    has on a number of occasions been convicted of failing to surrender  to
    custody at the appointed time.  Many entries  on  her  criminal  record
    relate to resentencing for earlier offences after  community  sentences
    were not effective to prevent further offending.  She has  nevertheless
    for the most part received either non-custodial or suspended sentences.



27. We do not minimise the public interest  in  deporting  offenders  whose
    convictions may be comparatively low level but whose repeated offending
    may in principle require their deportation as being  conducive  to  the
    public  good.  However,  we  have  formed  the  view  that  the   FTT's
    conclusions about  the  respondent's  offending  and  its  causes  were
    rationally open to it. There is also no suggestion that the  respondent
    has ever supplied drugs to anyone else, which would have  elevated  the
    seriousness of her offending considerably and shifted the balance.

28. In relation to other parts of the evidence, Mr Melvin pointed out  that
    an OASys report before the FTT had assessed the respondent as posing  a
    medium risk of serious harm to the public. Although  the  report  noted
    that she was using skills provided through programmes and  counselling,
    he submitted both orally and in writing that the FTT  had  given  undue
    weight to the respondent's  prospects  of  rehabilitation  contrary  to
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Olarewaju [2018] EWCA  Civ
    557 at [17] and [26].  However, we do not accept  that  the  FTT  judge
    ignored the effect of the OASys report or afforded undue weight to  the
    prospects of rehabilitation.   Rather,  the  evidence  about  risk  and
    rehabilitation was elucidated as part of the FTT's consideration of the
    evidence as a whole.   Neither  of  these  factors  were  in  our  view
    decisive one way or the other.

29. The FTT was entitled to consider all the evidence in the round. It  was
    a matter for the FTT to accord weight to the  various  strands  of  the
    evidence as it saw fit. This Tribunal will only interfere if the  FTT's
    conclusions were unreasonable. In our view, the FTT reached conclusions
    that were open to it on the evidence before it.

30. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the FTT's assessment
    of the case  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  was  flawed.  The  FTT's
    analysis of the law is at times confusing; it seems to combine the test
    under paragraph 398 of the Rules with its  consideration  of  the  case
    outside the Rules. Nevertheless it is plain that  the  FTT  appreciated
    the high threshold which the respondent needed  to  meet  and  that  it
    applied the test of very compelling circumstances, which is the correct
    test under paragraph 398 and the corresponding provisions of  the  2002
    Act. Any lack of clarity in the exposition of the law does not  in  our
    view give rise to any error which  could  affect  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

31. Our conclusion turns on the unusual facts of this case. Nothing that we
    have said is to be regarded as laying down any sort of principle that a
    repeat low-level offender will be  immune  from  deportation  on  human
    rights grounds.

32. On this basis, the appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed. The First  tier  decision
allowing the respondent's appeal is to stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 25 March 2019

THE HON MRS JUSTICE FARBEY sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge.





