
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03215/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd August 2019                           |On 4th September 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                    ASSM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Bayoumi (instructed by Ferial Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons of Judge N M K Lawrence promulgated on 23rd  May
    2019.  The Decision followed a hearing at Hatton Cross on 9th May when,
    as now, the appellant was represented by Miss Bayoumi.  The appellant's
    case is that he is an Egyptian national born in 1987.  He came  to  the
    UK, initially as a visitor, but then made a protection claim which  the
    Secretary of State refused on  22nd  March  2019.  It  was  the  appeal
    against that decision which came before Judge Lawrence.

 2. At the substantive hearing the judge had the benefit of a large  bundle
    of documents, submitted on the appellant's behalf, running to some  451
    pages and included in that bundle was an expert's report provided by Dr
    Fatah, itself very lengthy.

 3. The appellant's claim was that he is the son of a prominent  member  of
    the Muslim Brotherhood.  So much  was  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, as was the fact that his father had been previously detained and
    by  the  time  of  the  hearing  had  been  prosecuted,  convicted  and
    imprisoned.  That latter fact seems to have escaped the judge's notice,
    despite it being referred to in the expert's report.   The  expert  was
    asked to deal with a number of matters:- whether the appellant would be
    at risk on account of his connection with his father, whether he  would
    be at risk on account of his own activities  either  in  Egypt  or  sur
    place activities in the UK and whether  he  would  be  perceived  as  a
    member or supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood.  The judge found against
    the appellant on all matters.

 4. In her submissions Miss Bayoumi pointed to the  part  of  the  expert's
    report which the judge failed to take into  account,  particularly  the
    numerous references to harm that has been suffered by family members of
    prominent members of the Muslim Brotherhood.   The  Judge,  in  dealing
    with that issue found it to be purely coincidence that  family  members
    had been arrested and detained and that that was on  account  of  their
    own activities rather than those of their parent.  That is not what the
    expert said and on numerous occasions  referred  to  the  reason  being
    their links to their parent.  Furthermore, in one part  of  the  report
    the expert concludes that the appellant would be highly  likely  to  be
    arrested at the airport on his return.  I therefore accept, as does  Mr
    Walker  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,   that   the   judge
    misunderstood or did not properly taken into account  the  findings  of
    the expert in the report and in doing so made a material error of  law,
    the expert report being a fundamental part of the evidence in the  case
    asserted by the appellant.

 5. There are a significant number of findings to be  made  in  this  case.
    The credibility of who the appellant is is not one  of  them,  that  is
    accepted and the situation of his father is also accepted.  What is  to
    be decided is whether the appellant himself carried out any  activities
    in Egypt; whether that would put him at risk; whether he  would  be  at
    risk, even if he has done nothing, on account of his father; whether he
    has carried out sur place activities in the UK and if so  whether  that
    would put him at risk, and finally, would he be perceived today by  the
    Egyptian authorities as a member or supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood
    and if so would he be at risk?

 6. The expertise of the expert appears to have been  accepted  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and therefore  ought  to  have  been  engaged  with
    properly and findings made on the contents of that report.

Notice of Decision

 7. The judgment of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  in  its  entirety
    and  the  matter  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    rehearing. It is likely to take a considerable portion of the day given
    the amount of evidence, the fact that there are witnesses  in  addition
    to the  appellant.   An  Arabic  interpreter  will  be  required.   The
    appropriate hearing centre is Hatton Cross.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed [pic]                            Date 28 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


