

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03045/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 April 2016                         |On 15 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum and to refuse to recognise a right of residence  under  European
    law as an extended family member.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge A. Kelly ("the judge")  allowed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 17 February  2016.  The  judge  noted  the
    following concession made by the  respondent's  representative  at  the
    hearing:

           "15. Mr Bassi conceded that if  the  Appellant  is  genuinely  a
           practicing homosexual, then he would be at risk  of  persecution
           in Pakistan and therefore entitled to asylum. However, Mr  Bassi
           maintained the respondent's position that the Appellant  is  not
           in fact in a genuine relationship with the Sponsor  and  is  not
           genuinely of homosexual orientation."

4.    The judge went on to consider  the  relevant  law  and  evidence.  She
    found the appellant and the sponsor to be credible  and  accepted  that
    they were likely to be in a genuine relationship. Her conclusions  were
    as follows:

           "38. I have found on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
           Appellant is gay  as  claimed.  I  have  therefore  gone  on  to
           consider how he would choose to live if  returned  to  Pakistan.
           Whilst I suspect that the Appellant's natural inclination  would
           be to keep his sexual orientation as private as possible and  to
           attempt to be discreet about any gay relationships that  he  may
           have, I also find that the Appellant's  sexual  orientation  and
           relationship with the Sponsor are already known  by  members  of
           the Appellant's family in Pakistan and that there is a real risk
           that it would become common knowledge if he were  to  return  to
           Pakistan. This is particular  so  as  I  have  found  the  civil
           partnership between the Appellant and the Sponsor to be  genuine
           and therefore a relationship that is likely to subsist  even  on
           the Appellant's return to Pakistan.  I  accept  the  Appellant's
           evidence that his father heard about the relationship  from  the
           cousin who stood surety for the Appellant in respect of his bail
           application. I also accept the  Appellant's  evidence  that  his
           relatives ascribe to Sharia law and may seek to harm  him  as  a
           result of the shame that he will be perceived to have brought on
           his family. As a result, I find that even were the Appellant  to
           attempt  to  be  discreet  about  his  personal  life,  he   may
           nevertheless suffer persecution  and  be  at  risk  of  harm  in
           Pakistan on the basis of information already  known  by  certain
           family members.

           39. Accordingly, having accepted the Appellant's claim to  be  a
           practicing homosexual and having considered  the  Home  Office's
           Country Information  and  Guidance  entitled  "Pakistan:  Sexual
           orientation and gender identity", I find that there  is  a  real
           risk that he would be persecuted in Pakistan as a result of  his
           sexual orientation and that he would be at risk of serious  harm
           or even death. Indeed,  during  the  appeal  hearing,  Mr  Bassi
           conceded on behalf of the Respondent that if the Appellant  were
           found to be homosexual then his  asylum  claim  should  succeed.
           ..."

5.    The  respondent  did  not  seek  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision allowing the appeal under The Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006. The application for permission  to  appeal  was
    confined solely to the First-tier Tribunal's findings relating  to  the
    asylum claim. The respondent sought  to  appeal  the  decision  on  the
    ground that the judge misdirected  herself  in  relation  to  a  proper
    assessment of the principles outlined in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [201] UKSC 31
    in light of her  finding  that  the  appellant  would  choose  to  live
    discreetly in Pakistan. The grounds also  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to consider the availability of internal relocation.

6.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted  permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal in the following terms:

           "It is not arguable that the Judge  erred  with  regard  to  the
           conclusion that his sexuality might become common  knowledge  as
           his family was aware of it and wished to  do  him  harm.  It  is
           arguable that the Judge should have gone on to consider internal
           relocation in those circumstances."

7.    There was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing.  The  Upper   Tribunal   made   enquiries   with   the   legal
    representatives on record  who  confirmed  that  they  were  no  longer
    instructed. I was satisfied that there was evidence to  show  that  the
    appellant had been sent a notice of hearing. He provided no explanation
    for his absence. In the circumstances I  was  satisfied  that  I  could
    proceed to hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant.

8.    Mr Wilding  acknowledged  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  only
    granted permission in relation to the  second  ground  of  appeal.  The
    first ground would, in any event, have been difficult  to  argue  given
    the  fact  that  the  judge  accepted  that  the   appellant's   sexual
    orientation had become known to his family and that he would be at risk
    as a result. He accepted that it was not arguable that the judge  erred
    in failing to consider  internal  relocation  in  light  of  the  clear
    concession made by the Home Office Presenting Officer at the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing i.e. if the appellant was found to  be  gay  then  his
    asylum claim should succeed.

9.    The judge made clear and unchallenged findings that the  appellant  is
    gay and that his family were likely to know about the  relationship.  I
    find that she was entitled to rely on the clear concession made by  the
    respondent's representative at the hearing. In light of that concession
    it was not necessary for her to go  on  to  consider  whether  internal
    relocation was a reasonable alternative despite her finding that he was
    likely to be discreet about his sexual orientation.

10.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law
The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand
Signed   [pic]   Date 13 April 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
