
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03713/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                     |On 29 April 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SAA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmad
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1993 and is a female citizen of  Iraq.  By  a
    decision dated 25 February 2018, the Secretary  of  State  refused  her
    application for international protection. She appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated  on  18  December  2018,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Diwnycz,  who
    appeared for the Secretary  of  State,  told  me  that  the  respondent
    accepted that the judge had erred in law for the reason stated  in  the
    grounds of appeal  and  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  remake  the
    decision. In the circumstances, I shall be brief in giving reasons  for
    setting aside the judge's decision.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is problematic in a number of  ways.
    First, there is a clear error of fact in the  analysis.  At  [51],  the
    judge found that the husband of the appellant (who is a British citizen
    and also Kurdish) had 'spent  significant  time  in  the  IKR  and  has
    friends and family there.' Mr Diwnycz accepted that that statement  was
    not accurate; the only evidence on the husband's connections  with  the
    IKR showed that he had been a visitor there for  a  maximum  period  of
    three weeks and that he had no family or friends living in the  region.
    I acknowledge that the judge has found the appellant  and  her  husband
    not to be credible witnesses but I do not consider that finding to be a
    proper basis for the findings at [51].  Secondly,  although  the  judge
    later stresses that in determining whether it would be  reasonable  for
    the child of the appellant husband to live in Iraq, he  has  discounted
    the conduct of the appellant, the judge has reached  findings  at  [57]
    which, by any standard, cannot not supported  by  his  reading  of  the
    evidence. The judge  writes  that,  'the  appellant  has  a  very  poor
    immigration history, having repeatedly and  deliberately  breached  the
    immigration rules...' [my emphasis]. The only evidence which exists  as
    to the appellant's immigration history reveals that the  appellant  has
    made a single claim for asylum which the respondent and the judge  have
    rejected;  it  is  unclear  how  that  application  can  accurately  be
    described as a 'very poor immigration history'  still  less  'repeated'
    breaches of the immigration rules.

 4. The judge states several times in his decision that he finds  it  would
    be reasonable to expect the British child  of  the  appellant  had  her
    husband to live in Iraq (more particularly, the IKR) with his  parents.
    However, there is little reasoning to support that  finding.  At  [56],
    the judge writes, 'whilst no decision I make  compels  the  appellant's
    husband or child to go to Iraq with the appellant, on taking all of the
    above factors into account, I am  satisfied  that  if  the  appellant's
    appeal was to be refused she would be able to return to Iraq and  would
    be joined by her family.' I do not consider that to be an assessment of
    the reasonableness of the child returning to  Iraq  with  his  parents;
    rather, the  judge  has  avoided  assessing  reasonableness  by  simply
    observing that the husband and child would, in any  event  and  whether
    reasonable or not, accompany the appellant to live in Iraq. The judge's
    finding is, therefore, not  supported  in  this  instance  by  adequate
    reasoning.

 5. It is also the case that the judge  has  not  sought  to  consider  the
    respondent's published  instructions  (IDI)  in  the  context  of  this
    family's circumstances. The instructions provide that, 'where the child
    is a British citizen, it will not be reasonable to expect them to leave
    the UK with the applicant parent  or  primary  carer  facing  removal.'
    Accordingly, the judge's analysis is insufficient.

 6. I set aside the decision of the judge and have remade the  decision.  I
    have had regard to the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in  JG  (s
    117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019]  UKUT  72  (IAC).  The
    headnote reads:

         Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         requires a court or tribunal  to  hypothesise  that  the  child  in
         question would leave the United Kingdom, even if this is not likely
         to be the case, and ask whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect
         the child to do so.

    Mr Diwnycz did not seek to persuade me that, in the  light  of  current
    country guidance, the appellant can safely  live  in  Baghdad.  In  the
    light of the appellant's husband's lack of connections with the IKR, it
    seems unlikely that he would readily find employment and  accommodation
    in that region. There must be significant doubt that the appellant, who
    would be returned to Baghdad, would safely be able to access the IKR at
    all. On the evidence, I do not accept that it would be  reasonable  for
    the child to live in any part of Iraq. Likewise, as the child is  still
    very young (there is reference  to  breastfeeding  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal) it would be wholly unreasonable to  expect  him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom with his mother for such time as would be  required  for
    her to make an out of  country  application  for  entry  clearance.  In
    consequence, the public interest does not require the appellant  to  be
    returned to Iraq because it is not reasonable to expect  the  child  to
    leave the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom.

 7. I have not been asked to revisit the judge's findings in respect of the
    appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds.  Those  findings  shall  stand.
    However, I allow the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).



Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  remade  the
decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
State  dated  25  every  2018  is  dismissed  on  asylum  and   humanitarian
protection grounds. The appeal is allowed on human rights  grounds  (Article
8 ECHR).


Signed                              Date 22 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
