
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03454/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2018                   |On 02 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                FERROUDJA [Z]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan of Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Keefe promulgated on 22 August 2008 dismissing the appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 12 February 2018 refusing a protection
    claim. The appeal was dismissed on  protection  grounds  and  on  human
    rights grounds.



2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria born  on  6  December  1965.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 September 2002,  entering  pursuant
    to entry clearance as a visitor.  On  30  September  2002  she  claimed
    asylum. Her application was refused and a subsequent  appeal  dismissed
    in a decision promulgated on 1 April 2003  (ref.  HX/74165/2002  -  see
    Appendix D of the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal).



3.   Nothing further is recorded in respect of the  Appellant's  immigration
    history until March 2010 when the Respondent wrote to her asking for up-
    to-date information as to her  circumstances.  Correspondence  followed
    culminating in the Respondent sending the  Appellant  a  'no  basis  to
    stay' letter dated 20 March 2011 (Appendix E). A further review of  the
    Appellant's circumstances was conducted in January 2014 pursuant to the
    so-called 'Legacy' policy, with the Appellant again being informed that
    she had no basis to stay in the UK (Appendix F). Yet a  further  review
    followed in June 2014 with the same outcome (Appendix G).



4.   The Appellant  then  made  further  submissions  via  the  Respondent's
    Further Submissions Unit in Liverpool relying "on her right to a family
    life under Article 8 ECHR and her continuing  fear  of  persecution  in
    Algeria" (letter dated 23 July 2014, Annex H).  Further  correspondence
    followed (Annex J).



5.   In due course the  Appellant's  representations  were  refused  by  the
    Respondent for reasons set  out  in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter
    ('RFRL') dated 12 February 2018. Nonetheless  the  Respondent  accepted
    that the Appellant's representations relied in part  on  "new  evidence
    not previously considered" (RFRL at paragraph 12), and it was  accepted
    that the further submissions amounted to a fresh claim, the refusal  of
    which attracted a right of appeal.



6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.



7.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe promulgated on 22 August 2018.



8.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchison  on  14
    September 2018.



9.   Although the Appellant had  raise  protection  issues  in  her  further
    submissions, and in her appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    rejection of this aspect of her case has  not  informed  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal. Accordingly the issues before the Upper  Tribunal
    are - as the representatives agreed before me - in respect of Article 8
    only.



Consideration: Error of Law

10.  At the core of the Appellant's Article 8 case is her relationship  with
    Mr Anthony Woods, a British citizen born on 22 July 1964.  It  was  the
    Appellant's  case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  between  her  and  Mr  Woods
    continuing in Algeria. In support of this  case  the  Appellant  placed
    reliance in particular - although not exclusively - on a country expert
    report prepared by Dr David Seddon  dated  19  July  2018  (Appellant's
    supplementary bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at pages D1-D14).



11.  The grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is based on  it
    being

         "arguable that the Judge has misdirected [her]self  by  failing  to
         place sufficient weight on the expert  report  of  Dr  Seddon  with
         particular reference to the difficulties that the Appellant and her
         partner could have if they relocated to  Algeria  considering  that
         the Appellant's partner will not be able to  acquire  residence  in
         Algeria because he is a British citizen, the  fact  that  he  is  a
         Christian and that they would be living together  as  an  unmarried
         couple".



12.  By way of context it may be noted  that  the  Respondent  in  the  RFRL
    accepted that the Appellant satisfied  the  'suitability'  requirements
    under Appendix FM, and accepted that the Appellant was in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with Mr Woods. In this regard it was said  that
    the  Appellant  had  not   provided   satisfactory   documentation   to
    demonstrate cohabitation for  the  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of
    application in July 2014  (RFRL  at  paragraph  74);  however,  it  was
    acknowledged that at the date of the Respondent's decision  the  couple
    had lived together since at least  2014  (paragraph  79).  It  was  not
    disputed the Mr Woods was a British citizen living in the UK.



13.  In considering paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM the RFRL states:

         "84. It is noted that you have stated in  your  personal  statement
         dated 15/07/2014 that your partner Mr Woods could not  relocate  to
         Algeria. You claim he would have language  difficulties  and  could
         not secure employment. You state he is employed as builder  in  the
         UK and earns a good income. He also does not want to  be  separated
         from his family, he has some health issues and he is a Christian.

         85.  However, it is considered that Mr Woods is of working age  and
         by your own admission,  is  currently  employed  full-time.  It  is
         considered that it is not unreasonable for you and your partner  to
         continue your family life together outside the  UK.  There  are  no
         insurmountable obstacles or significant difficulties that would  be
         faced by you or Mr Woods in continuing your family life outside  of
         the UK, that could not  be  overcome  or  that  would  entail  very
         serious hardship to you or Mr Woods."



14.  For completeness I note that the RFRL also considered:

         (i)   Private  life  pursuant  to  paragraph   276ADE(1)   of   the
         Immigration  Rules  but  concluded  with  reference  to   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) that there would not be very significant obstacles to
         the Appellant's integration into the country of her nationality.

         (ii) That in the event that the Appellant's removal resulted in  an
         interference with her family and private  life,  such  interference
         would be proportionate  bearing  in  mind  the  legitimate  aim  of
         maintaining effective immigration control, and the  fact  that  the
         Appellant's private life had been established  or  developed  at  a
         time when her immigration status was precarious (paragraph 106);

         (iii)    That the Appellant had "failed to  maintain  contact  with
         Immigration Control for a significant period  of  almost  8  years,
         from November 2000 to 208 June  2010"  (paragraph  111).  (In  this
         context details of the Appellant's non-compliance with  immigration
         control was set out at paragraphs 112-119.)

         (iv) That the Respondent's  delay  of  3  years  and  7  months  in
         considering the Appellant's further  submissions  was  "not  deemed
         significant when weighed against the 11  years  total  period  when
         [the Appellant] failed to maintain contact and the delay in lodging
         [her] further submissions in July 2014 after  [her]  appeal  rights
         became exhausted in May 2003" (paragraph 122).



15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's consideration of Article 8 is  set  out
    at paragraphs 38-53 of the Decision. These paragraphs are a  matter  of
    record and accordingly not reproduced here in their  entirety:  I  make
    reference to them as is incidental for the purposes of considering  the
    Appellant's challenge.



16.  The substance of the challenge in respect of  the  Judge's  conclusions
    on Article 8, as summarised at paragraph 15 of the grounds  in  support
    of the  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  is  that  the  Judge
    "materially erred in finding that there are no insurmountable obstacles
    in the Appellant and Mr Wood relocating to Algeria". In contrast to the
    Judge's approach, findings and  conclusion,  it  was  argued  that  the
    appeal should have succeeded because  the  evidence  demonstrated  that
    Christians are subject to discrimination and harassment; that there was
    a significant risk  that  the  couple  would  be  subjected  to  social
    discrimination as a "mixed, unmarried couple"; and in any event "it  is
    unlikely that Mr  Woods  would  be  able  to  join  her  because  their
    relationship is not recognised under Algerian law  because  they  [are]
    not married and he is not Muslim".



17.  With some small element of repetition the substance  of  these  grounds
    are articulated at paragraph 1-11 of the  grounds  of  challenge;  they
    were further amplified before me by Mr Khan.



18.  The Appellant submits that the Judge  erred  in  consideration  of  the
    claim that Mr  Woods  would  face  discrimination  as  a  Christian  in
    Algeria. The  Judge's  consideration  of  this  issue  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 42 of the Decision in these terms:

         "The appellant said in her statement that the appellant [in context
         this is clearly an erroneous reference to Mr  Woods]  would  be  at
         risk in Algeria as he was a Christian. I was not provided with  any
         background evidence to support that assertion.  Mr  Woods  candidly
         said in his evidence that he did not practice his faith although he
         did identify himself as a Roman Catholic".



19.  I note  in  this  context  paragraph  10  of  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement dated 5 April 2018 - "...his life will be at risk in  Algeria
    as he is a Christian". Paragraph 4 of Mr Woods  statement  of  5  April
    2018 puts the matter slightly differently: "I am a Christian and  I  do
    not think going to live in a Muslim  country  as  an  unmarried  couple
    would be safe for me or my partner and is not  tenable".  This  passage
    does not assert a fear of being at risk as  a  Christian  per  se,  but
    rather a risk arising from being in an unmarried  relationship  with  a
    Muslim woman.



20.  I pause to note that the oral evidence of Mr Woods to the  effect  that
    he did not practice his Roman Catholic faith is perhaps  reinforced  by
    Mr Woods' statement at paragraph 4 of his witness statement of 5  April
    2018 "...I never believed in marriage, hence getting married  will  not
    be an option for me".



21.  Be that as it may, complaint is made that the Judge  was  in  error  in
    stating that she was not  provided  with  any  background  evidence  to
    support the assertion that Mr Woods would be at risk in Algeria because
    he was a Christian.



22.  In this context my attention  was  directed  to  'country  information'
    materials in the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, and
    various  passages  therein  providing  evidence  of  hostility  towards
    Christians. However, many of these passages did  not  seem  to  be  'on
    point':  for  example  the  passages  to  which  I  was  taken  in  the
    Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada  response  to  information
    requests (C60 of the Appellant's bundle) was in  relation  to  converts
    from Islam to Christianity; similarly the  reference  at  C69  to  "the
    pressure Algerian Christians experience" appeared to be in the  context
    of conversion because reference was immediately  made  to  "Intolerance
    from Muslim relatives...".   Nonetheless,  such  evidence  indicates  a
    general context of opposition to the Christian faith. That this is  not
    confined to converts appears to be evident from the  following  passage
    from  the  International  Religious  Freedom  Report  for  2016:  "Some
    Christian parents reported their children were  reprimanded  in  school
    for openness about their religion" (C84). However, it is  difficult  to
    see how this is pertinent to Mr Woods in circumstances  where  he  does
    not profess to practice or otherwise observe his  religion.  Similarly,
    those passages in the materials  that  seek  to  document  difficulties
    arising  from  proselytising   are   not   relatable   to   Mr   Woods'
    circumstances.



23.  Be that as it may, I acknowledge  that  the  reports  in  part  provide
    evidence of social hostility  e.g.  "social  hostility  also  makes  it
    difficult for Christians to rent homes, find jobs, and establish places
    of worship" (International Christian Concern, C86); and  that  to  some
    extent this appears to be sanctioned by the state - e.g. see report  of
    3 March 2018 detailing the closing of  churches  pursuant  to  what  is
    perceived  to  be  systematic  inspections  with  a  view  to  limiting
    activities.



24.  Whilst it seems to me that it may be a stretch to conclude that a  non-
    practising Christian  could  not  establish  himself  in  Algeria,  the
    evidence of  generalised  hostility  must  be  considered  relevant  in
    evaluating the circumstances of the Appellant and Mr  Woods  as  couple
    comprising a Muslim partner and a non-practising Christian partner.



25.  It is in this context that I turn  to  the  challenge  that  the  Judge
    failed adequately to address the issue of social discrimination.



26.  The Judge summarised the expert opinion of Dr Seddon in this regard  in
    the following terms:

         "He said that if they were to relocate  within  Algeria  they  were
         likely to face social discrimination at the very least as a  result
         of the fact that they were not married and do  not  intend  to  get
         married." (paragraph 43).



27.  I am unable to identify from the Decision what findings or  conclusions
    the Judge made in respect of this aspect of the evidence.  The  passage
    quoted above is immediately followed in the Decision by a reference  to
    potential immigration  difficulties  for  Mr  Woods  in  relocating  to
    Algeria, which are rejected by the Judge on the basis that she "was not
    provided with any evidence about immigration  law  in  Algeria"  -  see
    further below. However this does  not  address  the  issue  of  claimed
    social discrimination, and I am unable to find any further reference to
    it in the body of the Decision.



28.  In this context, and generally, my attention was also directed  to  two
    further passages in  the  country  information  before  the  first-tier
    Tribunal:

         (i)  An extract from the US State Department report for 2016 quoted
         at  paragraph  13.1.1  of  the  Respondent's  'Country  Policy  and
         Information Note, Algeria: Background information, including actors
         of protection and internal relocation' (Version 1.0, August  2017),
         under the heading 'Women' and subheading 'Discrimination:

             "Although the constitution provides for gender equality,  many
             aspects  of  the  law   and   traditional   social   practices
             discriminated against women. In addition, religious  extremist
             advocated  practices  that  led  to  restrictions  on  women's
             behaviour, including freedom of movement. ... The law contains
             traditional elements of Islamic law. It prohibits Muslim women
             from marrying non-Muslims, although authorities did not always
             enforce this provision. Muslim men may marry non-Muslim women.
             A woman may marry a foreigner  and  transmit  citizenship  and
             nationality to both her children and spouse." (C35)

         (ii) An extract from the US  Department  of  State's  International
         Religious Freedom Report for 2016:

             "The family code prohibits Muslim  women  from  marrying  non-
             Muslim men unless the man converts to Islam" (C76)



29.  In my judgement in circumstances where  the  law  prohibits  a  marital
    relationship akin  to  the  non-marital  relationship  enjoyed  by  the
    Appellant and Mr Woods, it is a ready and reasonable inference that any
    attempt to cohabit in Algeria would run  contrary  to  the  social  and
    cultural milieu reflected  in  the  laws  of  the  land.  Moreover,  in
    circumstances where the country information also suggests an element of
    hostility towards non-Muslims, the substance  of  Dr  Seddon's  opinion
    appears sound and well grounded.



30.  I find the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not dealt adequately with  the
    evidential materials before her in respect of the country situation, to
    an extent that she has disregarded or otherwise  marginalised  relevant
    evidence as to the difficulties that the Appellant and Mr  Woods  might
    face in attempting to continue family life in Algeria. This constitutes
    a material error of law and requires that the decision in the appeal be
    set aside.



31.  In the circumstances it is not strictly necessary  in  the  context  of
    the 'error of law' stage for me  also  to  give  consideration  to  the
    further point raised in the challenge that Mr Woods "would not be  able
    to join [the Appellant] in Algeria because he is a Christian  and  they
    are not married" (Grounds at paragraph 5, and see also paragraph  7  et
    seq.). Nonetheless, it would be constructive so to do.



32.  The relevant passage in Dr Seddon's report is this:

         "It would be difficult for  her  partner,  not  only  for  cultural
         reasons, but also because he is a British citizen, to  acquire  the
         residence and other legal status to enable him to find work and  be
         able to live a normal life with [the Appellant]" (paragraph 5.21).



33.  The Judge was not prepared to accept this opinion  on  the  basis  that
    there was no evidence presented about immigration law in Algeria.



34.  I remind myself that foreign law is a question of fact and requires  to
    be proved by evidence rather than any attempt by a judge or tribunal of
    this jurisdiction to interpret foreign legal  provisions.  Nonetheless,
    it is usual for such matters to be supported by the opinion evidence of
    a lawyer or lawyers (whether academic or  professional)  familiar  with
    the particular foreign jurisdiction, and with express reference to  the
    pertinent legislative materials. Dr Seddon does not offer such  matters
    in his opinion.



35.  Whilst there is no basis to doubt anything that Dr Seddon has  said  in
    respect of his expertise and experience (e.g. see paragraph 1.1  -  1.8
    of his report), I can see nothing in such qualifications  or  expertise
    that directly relates to knowledge of Algerian immigration law.



36.  Dr Seddon describes himself as a social scientist  with  qualifications
    in  social  anthropology,  and  research  experience  in  economic  and
    political change; he has extensive experience of teaching sociology and
    politics; he is  involved  in  a  consultancy  group  concentrating  on
    emerging global issues including human rights,  international  security
    and terrorism, and risk analysis; he has visited Algeria, but  this  in
    itself does not make him an expert in its immigration law, and  in  any
    event has not visited since 2012. Dr  Seddon  describes  himself  as  a
    social anthropologist familiar with the social  laws  and  customs  and
    traditions of contemporary Algeria, and states he has  followed  recent
    developments  regarding   the   political   and   security   situation;
    notwithstanding that he is not visited since  2012  he  has  continuing
    contact with Algerians and experts on the Maghreb.



37.  I note the source materials to which Dr Seddon  has  indicated  he  had
    regard in compiling his report - and which are cited in support of  the
    grounds of challenge - but  my  attention  has  not  been  directed  to
    anything  in  those  materials  that  is  'on  point'  in  respect   of
    immigration law and the possibility of Mr Woods being able to enter and
    establish himself as a lawful resident in Algeria.



38.  Whilst I accept that  the  passage  quoted  above  from  the  US  State
    Department report in respect of  the  prohibition  on  a  Muslim  woman
    marrying a non-Muslim man would  mean  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    transmit her citizenship to Mr Woods, and would also mean that he could
    not otherwise seek to enter as a spouse - and moreover I am prepared to
    infer for the reasons explored above that he would face difficulties in
    seeking to secure entry and/or leave to remain on the basis of being an
    unmarried partner - it does not follow that there are  not  alternative
    routes to entry and stay in Algeria.



39.  Dr Seddon's experience and expertise is such that  I  do  not  consider
    his opinion as to a matter that relates  to  a  particular  specialised
    aspect of law is to be disregarded  as  wholly  without  value.  I  can
    readily envisage that he might be 'on to  something'.  However,  in  my
    judgement something more is required than is to be found in his  report
    before such opinion can be accorded material weight. In this context it
    seems to me particularly significant that Dr Seddon has  not  made  any
    attempt to relate his opinion as to the ability of Mr Woods to  acquire
    residence  or  other  legal  status  to  any  specific  source  be   it
    documentary or one of his many contacts: the basis of  the  opinion  is
    not articulated or supported in any way.



40.  Accordingly, I would not have been minded to  find  material  error  of
    law on this particular point. Nor does it seem  that  in  remaking  the
    decision anything of material weight may be  accorded  to  Dr  Seddon's
    evidence in this specific regard.



41.  Nonetheless, for the reasons given,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside.



Remaking the decision in the appeal

42.  I turn then to a consideration of how best to remake  the  decision  in
the appeal.



43.  Both representatives considered that the appeal could be remade by  the
    Upper Tribunal and did not require a new hearing  with  all  issues  at
    large before the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Kandola favoured remaking  the
    decision on the available material and invited the Tribunal to  dismiss
    the  appeal.  Mr  Khan  suggested  that  there  should  be  a   further
    opportunity for the Appellant to  file  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    circumstances of an unmarried couple in Algeria, and also in respect of
    the immigration law, policy, and practice in Algeria.



44.  I have reached the conclusion that it is not necessary  to  afford  the
    Appellant the  opportunity  of  filing  any  further  evidence.  In  my
    judgement, irrespective of any issue  in  respect  of  the  immigration
    position for Mr Woods  in  Algeria,  the  evidence  explored  above  is
    sufficient to demonstrate that there would be insurmountable  obstacles
    - in the sense of significant difficulties that could not  be  overcome
    or would entail very serious  hardship  -  to  continuing  family  life
    together in Algeria. On that basis the substance of the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules are met, and it is an  easy  inference  that  the
    Appellant's removal would thereby be  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the family life established in the UK.



45.  I find that where the law prohibits a marital relationship akin to  the
    non-marital relationship enjoyed by the Appellant and Mr Woods,  it  is
    to be inferred that  any  attempt  to  cohabit  in  Algeria  would  run
    contrary to the social and cultural milieu reflected in the laws of the
    land. Moreover, the circumstances shown in the country  information  on
    file establish a significant element of hostility towards  non-Muslims.
    Whilst this may not be enough to establish an  insurmountable  obstacle
    to a single non-Muslim male in establishing himself in  Algeria,  I  am
    persuaded that it does constitute such an obstacle to a non-Muslim male
    establishing himself in a cohabiting non-marital  relationship  with  a
    female Algerian national of Muslim religious and cultural background.



46.  The appeal succeeds accordingly.



Notice of Decision

47.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.



48.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal  is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.



49.  No anonymity order is sought or made.


Signed:                                 Date: 28 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




To the Respondent
Fee Award (This is not part of the determination)

I have allowed the appeal and in all of the circumstances make  a  full  fee
award.

Signed:                                 Date: 28 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua Judge of the First Tier Tribunal)
