
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03357/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 16th August, 2017                |On 23rd August, 2017                    |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Counsel instructed by Morden Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on [ ]  1939.   The
    appellant has a lengthy immigration history.

2.   The appellant first applied for a visa to come to  the  United  Kingdom
    on 28th December 2011.  This application was  refused  on  8th  October
    2012 and the appellant then made a family  visit  visa  application  on
    25th June 2012. She claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    11th  July  2012.   On  30th  October  2012,  the  appellant  made   an
    application for recognition as  an  asylum  refugee.   The  appellant's
    asylum claim was refused by the respondent on 9th  February  2013,  and
    the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant appealed that refusal and her appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was dispensed on 29th May  2013.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  and  on
    15th August 2013, her application became appeal rights exhausted.

4.   Further submissions were made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  on  24th
    August 2013, and they were rejected on  24th  September  2013,  by  the
    respondent.  Further submissions were made on behalf of  the  appellant
    on 28th October 2013, and  those  submissions  were  rejected  and  her
    application refused on 8th March 2017, with a right of appeal.

5.   The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nightingale at Hatton Cross on 3rd May and 18th May,  2017.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's  asylum  claim,
    finding that there was no real risk  that  she  would  be  involved  in
    preaching, promoting,  proselytising  or  practising  her  religion  in
    public, or in any private capacity if she  were  returned  to  Pakistan
    now.

6.   She also found that she was not  persuaded  that  the  appellant  would
    have come to the attention of the Pakistani  authorities  or  that  any
    complaints or warrants for her arrest had been issued.  No evidence was
    submitted  to  the  judge  that   a   passport   application   or   any
    representations that the appellant may or may not have made to have her
    passport issued to her, described her as being a  "Muslim".   Were  the
    appellant to be returned now to Pakistan, the judge  found  that  there
    was no reason to suspect that she would not continue  to  practise  her
    faith as she does currently; that is to say attend meetings but, in the
    words of the witness who  appeared  before  the  judge,  "not  actively
    participate".

7.   The judge rejected the appellant's asylum claim.  The judge went on  to
    consider the appellant's Article 8 claim and found that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  She went  on
    to consider the appeal outside the Rules and found that she  could  not
    describe the appellant's circumstances as compelling, so as to  require
    the respondent to grant leave on the basis of the appellant's Article 8
    claim, outside the Rules.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shimmin.
     Two grounds of appeal were set out  in  the  application,  settled  by
    Counsel.

9.   The first ground suggested that the judge had  failed  to  address  the
    country guidance determination in MN  and  others  (Ahmadis  -  country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 389 (IAC) or  to  apply  the
    principles therein and the second challenge suggested  that  the  judge
    failed to give any consideration to the broader fact that the appellant
    belongs to what the Upper Tribunal in MN and others  found  to  be,  an
    opposed minority group as per paragraph 111.

10.  At the hearing before me today, Mr Khan handed  to  me  a  copy  of  FA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
    763 and told me that the first challenge to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision was that the judge had simply failed to apply MN.

11.  He referred me to what the judge  had  said  at  paragraph  67  of  the
    determination.  The judge said that she found nothing on  the  evidence
    before her to indicate that the appellant,  a  woman  nearly  80  in  a
    wheelchair and with a number of illnesses and  disabilities,  would  be
    arrested in Pakistan and ill-treated due to the fact that her  passport
    describes her as a "Muslim".  Mr Khan said that that  was  contrary  to
    what the Tribunal said in MN.  He submitted that the judge  had  failed
    to consider the effect on the appellant of the fact that on her  return
    her passport indicates that she describes herself as being a Muslim.

12.  So far as the second ground is concerned, he submitted that  the  judge
    has found that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk.   She  found  at
    paragraph 64 of her determination that the first witness told her  that
    since 2003, when the appellant began to suffer  strokes,  she  had  not
    been involved in any activities, other than attending meetings and that
    at the present time she attends meetings which are held  in  her  son's
    house.  The witness  told  the  judge  that  she  was  clear  that  the
    appellant just listened and had no involvement beyond her attendance.

13.  Mr Khan submitted that what the judge should  have  done  was  to  have
    looked at the appellant's intentions on her return and she should  have
    ignored  the  appellant's  disabilities.   He  reminded  me  that   the
    appellant had suffered strokes since 2002, but, he emphasised, there is
    no evidence that she will not necessarily recover on her  return,  when
    she then might proselytise.

14.  Ms Isherwood urged me to find that there was no error  of  law.   There
    had been no up-to-date medical  evidence  submitted  despite  the  fact
    that, as the judge pointed out the appeal was adjourned for  up-to-date
    medical evidence to be submitted.

15.  Ms Isherwood submitted that it was not a legal requirement that  judges
    should cite and quote from every relevant legal authority on the  point
    in issue.  This judge had clearly demonstrated that she  was  correctly
    applying the law, as enunciated in MN.  The judge heard  evidence  that
    when the appellant was well she had invited people  to  come  and  view
    Ahmadi television and talk about the faith.  Since 2003, the  appellant
    had been unable to go outside so they used to invite  people  in.   She
    would  participate  by  going  to  the  mosque  and  attending  women's
    meetings.  While she had been in the United Kingdom she would simply go
    and listen, since  she  has  a  disability.   She  could  not  actively
    participate.  The judge heard that the  appellant  struggled  to  speak
    properly.  The judge was entitled  to  conclude  as  she  did,  on  the
    evidence before her, the appellant is presently reasonably  likely  or,
    indeed, capable of doing anything other than attending women's meetings
    and attending at the  Ahmadi  mosque.   She  is  not  able  to  go  out
    unattended so the judge was entitled therefore to find that  she  would
    not be involved in preaching, promoting,  proselytising  or  practising
    her religion in public or in any proactive capacity were she to  return
    to Pakistan.  Similarly, the judge was entitled to find that there  was
    no evidence before her to show  that  a  passport  application  or  any
    representations that may or may not have been made by the appellant  in
    order to have a passport issued to her described her as being a Muslim.
     There was no reason therefore to believe that  the  authorities  would
    have any interest in the appellant.

16.  Ms Isherwood invited me to dismiss the appeal.

17.  In conclusion, Mr Khan suggested that the activities described  by  the
    judge in paragraph 64 were limited purely because  of  the  appellant's
    current incapacity, but  were she to recover from this incapacity, then
    the appellant would be at risk on her return to Pakistan.

18.  I reserved my determination.

19.  MN & others makes it clear that the first question the  decision  maker
    must ask is whether the appellant is a  genuine  Ahmadi.   It  suggests
    that with all the judicial fact-finding, the judge will need  to  reach
    conclusions on the evidence as a whole giving such weight to aspects of
    that evidence as appropriate and in accordance with Regulation 4 of the
    Qualification Directive.  This is likely to include an enquiry  whether
    the claimant was registered with an Ahmadi community  in  Pakistan  and
    worshipped and engaged there on a regular basis.  Post arrival activity
    will also  be  relevant.   Evidence  likely  to  be  relevant  includes
    confirmation from the UK Ahmadi headquarters regarding  the  activities
    relied on in Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in  the
    United Kingdom where the claimant is worshipping.   The  Tribunal  said
    that the next step involves an inquiry into the  claimant's  intentions
    or wishes as to his or her faith if returned to Pakistan.  This is said
    to be irrelevant because of the need to  establish  whether  it  is  of
    particular importance to the religious identity of the Ahmadi concerned
    to engage in openly practising their  faith.   The  burden  is  on  the
    appellant to demonstrate that any intention or  wish  to  practise  and
    manifest aspects of the faith openly that  are  not  permitted  by  the
    Pakistan Penal Code is genuinely held and of particular  importance  to
    the claimant to reserve his or her religious  identity.   The  decision
    maker needs to evaluate all the evidence and behaviour since arrival in
    the United Kingdom may also be relevant.  If  the  claimant  discharges
    this burden then he or she is likely to be in need of protection.

20.  Immigration Judge Nightingale did not refer to or  quote  from  MN  and
    others.  However, as Ms Isherwood quite properly pointed out, there  is
    no requirement on judges to cite or quote from any  legal  authorities;
    what is necessary is that they demonstrate that they properly apply the
    law.

21.  I am satisfied that in this appeal, this very  experienced  Immigration
    Judge has properly applied the law.

22.  The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  two  witnesses
    called in support.  At paragraph 62 of her determination she  noted  an
    inconsistency in the evidence between  the  two  witnesses  as  to  the
    appellant's circumstances.  These discrepancies  cause  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to  have  what  she  described  as  being  "considerable
    concerns as to the honesty of the applicant and the witnesses".

23.  However,  the  judge  set  these  concerns  aside.  What  she  said  at
    paragraphs 64 to 67 of her very careful and detailed  determination  is
    this:-

         "64. These concerns notwithstanding, I am far from  persuaded  that
             this appellant has ever done anything which would bring her to
             the attention  of  the  Pakistani  authorities  or  cause  her
             difficulties  in  practising  her  faith  in  Pakistan.    The
             evidence of the witnesses was that their  mother  had  been  a
             person with a practical  faith  who  had  sought  to  lead  by
             example by being kind and considerate to  others.   The  first
             witness said that since 2003,  when  the  appellant  began  to
             suffer strokes, she had not been involved  in  any  activities
             other than attending  meetings.   At  the  present  time,  she
             attends meetings which are held at her son's  house,  but  the
             witness  was  clear  that  she  just  listened  and   had   no
             involvement  beyond  attendance.   Indeed,  in  view  of   her
             advanced years,  disability  and  slurred  speech  I  find  it
             entirely credible that the practise of her faith is attendance
             at women's meetings, some of which are held  at  her  son  and
             daughter-in-law's house, and attendance at the Ahmadi  mosque.
             I do not find that  this  appellant  is  presently  reasonably
             likely or, indeed, capable of doing anything further.  She  is
             not able to go out unaided, needs  help  with  even  the  most
             basic of tasks such as bathing and cooking and her  speech  is
             slow and slurred.  I do not find that there is a real risk she
             would be involved in preaching,  promoting,  proselytising  or
             practising  her  religion  in  public  or  in  any  pro-active
             capacity if she was returned to Pakistan at the present time.


         65.  I accept that the appellant's son Ehsan may well have been  of
             interest to the authorities and, indeed,  the  recognition  of
             Ehsan as a refugee  indicates  that  he  is  at  risk  now  in
             Pakistan.  However, it does not follow that the  appellant  is
             therefore entitled to asylum.  The  appellant's  contact  with
             her husband, who I accept has been recognised  as  a  refugee,
             would appear to have been limited  and  there  is  nothing  to
             indicate that the marriage was still subsisting  at  the  time
             she left Pakistan.  Whatever the  reasons  for  the  grant  of
             asylum to the appellant's husband, it  does  not  follow  that
             this is relevant to the appellant's asylum claim.


         66.  I have had regard to the documents  submitted  in  support  of
             this  appellant's  claim,  reviewed  in  the  round  with  the
             totality of the  evidence.   Since  2003  this  appellant  has
             suffered a series of strokes and is a  wheelchair  user  whose
             communication must have been  hampered.   I  do  not  find  it
             remotely likely, even on the lower standard,  that  she  would
             have come to the attention of the Pakistani authorities.   Her
             evidence of events in Pakistan is vague, but  I  consider  her
             age and disabilities  in  this  regard.   Nonetheless,  it  is
             notable that Ehsan has never referred to his mother  suffering
             persecution  in  Pakistan   beyond   the   kind   of   general
             discrimination,  falling  short  of  persecution,  which  many
             Ahmadis suffer.  I am prepared to accept  that  the  appellant
             may have suffered some hostility  from  other  individuals  in
             Pakistan, but there is nothing in Ehsan's evidence to  suggest
             that any acts committed towards  this  appellant  crossed  the
             boundary into persecution.  The witness stated that since 2003
             his mother had been 'unable to go outside'.   In  the  UK  she
             could not actively participate.  Looking at  the  evidence  in
             the round, I am therefore not persuaded that  she  would  have
             come to the attention of the Pakistani authorities or that any
             complaints or warrants for her arrest  have  been  issued.   I
             have concerns that the appellant has not been entirely  honest
             with the Tribunal, and viewed in the round I do not  find  the
             documents submitted to be reliable.


         67.  It is said that the appellant has committed a criminal offence
             by describing herself as a 'Muslim' on her passport.   I  have
             no evidence before me of  that  passport  application  or  any
             representations she may or may  not  have  made  to  have  her
             passport issued to her.  I find nothing on the evidence before
             me to indicate that this appellant, a woman of nearly 80 in  a
             wheelchair and with a number of  illnesses  and  disabilities,
             would be arrested in Pakistan and ill-treated due to the  fact
             that her passport describes her as a 'Muslim'.  I reject  this
             on the lower  standard  applicable.   If  the  appellant  were
             returned to Pakistan then I find  no  reason  to  suspect  she
             would not continue to practise her faith as she does now; that
             is to say to attend meetings, but, in the words of  the  first
             witness, 'not actively participate'.  I do not find  that  the
             appellant has established that she has a well-founded fear  of
             persecution in Pakistan now."

24.  It is abundantly clear from what the judge said, that she has  properly
    applied the law.  She has very carefully examined the evidence and  was
    entitled to conclude as she did at paragraphs 64, 66 and 67.  I  reject
    the appellant's first challenge; the judge did not err and clearly  had
    MN in mind throughout her determination.

25.  Mr Khan did not address me on the second  challenge.   I  am  satisfied
    that the second ground of challenge  fails  to  identify  any  material
    error of law on the part of the judge either.  The judge quite properly
    considered all the evidence before her and concluded that there was  no
    real  risk  that  she  would  be  involved  in  preaching,   promoting,
    proselytising or practising her religion in public or in any pro-active
    capacity were she returned to Pakistan now.  She was entitled  to  find
    that it was not  remotely  likely  the  appellant  would  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities in Pakistan.

26.  What Mr Khan did submit was that the judge  should  in  some  way  have
    ignored the appellant's current physical disabilities and  look  simply
    at the appellant's intentions were she  to  be  returned  to  Pakistan.
    With very great respect, that is not what the judge was required to do.
     The judge expressed concern at the hearing that no up to date  medical
    evidence had  been  obtained  concerning  the  appellant's  care  needs
    recently.  She adjourned the hearing for an up-to-date medical  report.
    A letter was supplied to the judge from West Barnes  Surgery  detailing
    the appellant's medication and conditions.

27.  It is a tragically sad fact that this lady has suffered  strokes  since
    2003 and, as a result  suffers  disability  and  slurred  speech.   She
    cannot go outside by herself.  She is now wheelchair bound.  There  was
    no evidence before the judge to  suggest  that  it  was  even  remotely
    likely that the appellant could make a complete and full recovery  from
    her current disabilities, such as to enable her to engage in preaching,
    promoting, proselytising or practising her religion  in  public  or  in
    some pro-active capacity such  as  to  attract  the  attention  of  the
    authorities or those who may be opposed to Ahmadis  in  Pakistan.   The
    judge did not err in failing to ignore the appellant's disabilities and
    instead concentrate on her intentions or wishes  as  to  her  faith  if
    returned to Pakistan.

28.    For  all  these  reasons  I  have  concluded  that  in  reaching  her
    conclusions, I am satisfied that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nightingale
    did not materially err  in  law.   I  uphold  her  determination.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

21st August 2017.
