
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03981/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3 April 2017                       |On 22 May 2017                        |
|Prepared 3 April 2017                 |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Noor, Solicitor of Blackstones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of  Bangladesh,  date  of  birth  [  ]  1981,
    appealed against the Respondent's  decision,  dated  8  December  2015,
    whereby his claims for refugee status and humanitarian protection  were
    rejected.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fletcher-
    Hill (the judge), who heard the case on 16 June and 5 August 2016.   In
    a decision [D] promulgated on 14 November 2016 she dismissed the appeal
    on all grounds.  Permission to appeal that decision was given by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 19 January 2017.

2.   The core of the complaint is that the judge concentrated on  Section  8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004
    and failed to properly take into account two documents particularly,  a
    FIR(03/76), which had been found  to  be  genuine  as  a  result  of  a
    document verification report, and secondly a general complaint made  in
    General Diary No 243 which had been verified  as  genuine.  The  latter
    document  records  a  third  person's  complaint  about  violence   and
    threatening behaviour that took place at the Appellant's shop.

3.   It is to be noted that a charge sheet relating  to  the  FIR  had  been
    found  and  verified  as  non-genuine.  The  reliability  of   identity
    documents had been found to be inconclusive.

4.   The grounds therefore focus directly on the issue  of  the  reliability
    of the documents and the fact that the judge did (D 8.7) conclude  that
    she could not give either the FIR or the charge sheet any weight.   Her
    conclusion needs to be understood, even if infelicitously expressed, in
    the context that the judge had set out the Appellant's claim.  She had,
    so Mr Noor confirmed, correctly identified the material  in  section  5
    (5.1 to 5.24) of the evidence, further set out in  section  6  was  the
    particular evidence relied upon.   The  judge  correctly  set  out  and
    included the submissions at least in a fairly lengthy  summary  of  the
    remarks made for and against the Appellant's case.

5.   It is clear [D 8.4] that the judge had taken into account  the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter.  It is  not  said  that  it  was  inappropriate  or
    unlawful for  her  to  take  into  account  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assessment; at paragraphs 18 to 23 of the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter.
    In other words, the judge had not slavishly followed  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  There was other evidence which qualified the basis  on
    which that refusal letter had been written.  Further, the judge set out
    [D 8.5] her conclusions formed in relation to paragraphs 30  to  32  of
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter, with which she agreed.

6.    On  the  face  of  it  therefore  the  judge's   assessment   of   the
    documentation was part of an assessment of the whole evidence.  I  bear
    in mind what the Secretary of State had said about  the  evidence  that
    had been provided.

7.   It therefore seems to me that the judge not only addressed the case  of
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 but evidently took into  account  that
    the decision maker looks at this matter on the basis that the  document
    read as part of the whole evidence. It is  plain  that  the  judge  had
    taken into account the issue of the Appellant's knowledge of  the  BNP,
    of the risks claimed to be faced from the Awami  League.   Reading  the
    documentation as a whole, Mr Noor's submissions succinctly  and  fairly
    really represent the fact that he and indeed his  client  significantly
    differ with the judge on the findings she made.   The  question  really
    posed is: does the FIR establish  a  real  risk  to  the  Appellant  on
    return?

8.    It  seems  to  me  taking  the  FIR  at  its  highest,  when  all  the
    documentation and the evidence is taken into  account,  the  judge  was
    entitled to form the view that there was no real risk  from  the  Awami
    League or from the imposition of the criminal  proceedings  that  might
    arise as a result of any investigation raised by the First  Information
    Report.  An FIR is of course, as a fact a long  way  from  there  being
    criminal proceedings after  the  investigation.  It  may  be  that  the
    Appellant, as the judge found, is of low interest in the BNP; such that
    it is unlikely that he is at risk on  return  from  the  Awami  League.
    Those were findings the judge  was  entitled  to  make.   I  would  not
    necessarily have made the same findings but that is not  the  basis  on
    which I examine the decision.  I am satisfied that in the light of  the
    material before the judge she reached a decision which she was entitled
    to reach.  It does not disclose an error of  law,  notwithstanding  the
    fact that she had discounted the FIR and gave it no weight  because  it
    is only a part of the evidence and part of the assessment  of  risk  on
    return.

9.   For these reasons therefore, notwithstanding Mr Noor's skilful  efforts
    to present this matter, I find no material error of law and on the face
    of it any other Tribunal looking at the evidence would be  likely  have
    come to the same conclusion overall on the evidence.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

An anonymity order had been made and I continue that in this decision.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 12 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
