
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03859/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2019                           |On 10 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    C B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Rushforth, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Harvey instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.   Neither  party
    invited me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to  rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant was born in Mauritania on 15 July 1978.  He claims to  be
    a citizen of Mauritania.

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 5 December
    2005.  He initially made an asylum claim on 2 December 2008 having been
    served with notice of removal as an illegal  entrant.   His  claim  was
    refused on 16 March 2009 and his subsequent appeal was unsuccessful, as
    was a challenge in the High Court  resulting  in  him  becoming  appeal
    rights exhausted on 21 October 2009.

 5.  Thereafter,  in  2011  the  appellant  unsuccessfully   made   further
    submissions which were rejected under para 353 of the Immigration Rules
    (HC 395 as amended).

 6. On 26 October 2016, the  appellant  was  convicted  on  two  counts  of
    possessing/control of an identity document with intent at the Sheffield
    Crown Court for which he was sentenced to fourteen months  and  sixteen
    months respectively, those sentences to run concurrently.

 7. On 17 November 2016, the appellant was served with a decision to deport
    him based upon those convictions.  A deportation order was subsequently
    signed on 9 March 2017.

 8. On 17 October 2017, the appellant again claimed asylum.

 9. On 1 December 2017, a  referral  was  made  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism on the basis that the appellant was  a  potential  victim  of
    trafficking  and  modern  slavery.   Following  a  positive  Reasonable
    Grounds decision on 14 December 2017, on 6 February 2018  a  Conclusive
    Grounds decision was made that he was a victim of trafficking.

10. The appellant was interviewed in relation to his  asylum  claim  on  22
    October 2018 and during 2018 and 2019 further written submissions  were
    made to the Home Office.

11. On 3 April 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on  human  rights  grounds,  in
    particular Art 8 of the ECHR.

12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 25 July 2019, Judge Page allowed the appellant's appeal.

13. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 19 August  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  J  K
    Swaney) granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

14. On 23 September 2019, the appellant filed a rule 24 response seeking to
    uphold Judge Page's decision.

15. At the hearing before me, the Secretary of State was represented by  Ms
    Sian Rushforth and the appellant was represented by Ms Alison Harvey.

The Appellant's Claim

16. Before Judge Page, the appellant put his asylum claim on two bases.

17. First, he claimed that he was at risk on return to Mauritania from  his
    former slave master from whom he has escaped (going to Senegal) when he
    was 12 years old.  He claimed to fear reprisals  from  that  individual
    because he stole a camel when he escaped to Senegal and  had  left  his
    slave master's animals unattended.

18. Second, the appellant claimed that he is stateless, in that  Mauritania
    would not recognise that he was a citizen of Mauritania.  Relying  upon
    expert evidence (from Dr Manby) the appellant claimed that, as a  black
    African, the  Mauritanian  authorities  discriminated  against  him  by
    pursuing  the  Arabisation  of  the  country  and,  in   amending   the
    nationality laws of Mauritania in 2010, had required him  to  establish
    his nationality through his father's status which discriminated against
    black  African  Mauritanians  in  their  ability  to  establish   their
    nationality.

The Judge's Decision

19. Judge Page rejected the first basis of the  appellant's  appeal.   This
    basis had been rejected also in the appellant's earlier appeal in 2009.
     At [21] of his determination, Judge Page concluded that it was:

         "fanciful in the extreme to suggest that the appellant, who  was  a
         twelve-year old child when he abandoned some animals and  rode  off
         on a camel  that  was  no[t]  returned,  would  be  remembered,  or
         identified, now he is a 41 year old man who has not returned  there
         since."

20. The appellant did not challenge that finding by seeking  permission  to
    appeal nor was it challenged in his rule  24  response  drafted  by  Ms
    Harvey and she did not seek to challenge it in her oral submissions.  I
    need, therefore, say no more about Judge Page's adverse finding on this
    aspect of the appellant's claim which stands.

21. As regards the second basis of his claim relating to  his  citizenship,
    Judge Page set out the issue before him at paras [13]-[14] as follows:

         "13. The essential issue in this appeal is  whether  the  appellant
             would be recognised as a Mauritanian.  If he he would  not  be
             recognised as such and granted any documents to confirm  that,
             he is stateless.  The Court of Appeal held in EB (Ethiopia)  v
             Secretary of State of State for  the  Home  Department  [2007]
             EWCA Civ 809 that the discriminatory removal of  ID  documents
             itself can constitute persecution within the  meaning  of  the
             Refugee Convention if done by the state  with  the  motive  of
             making it difficult for a person  in  future  to  prove  their
             nationality.  The Court of Appeal held  that  the  ability  to
             "freely to leave and freely to re-enter one's  country"  is  a
             basic right and the inability "freely to leave and  freely  to
             re-enter one's country" on discriminatory grounds  amounts  to
             persecution.  It follows that persons without nationality  are
             entitled to be recognised as refugees if they  can  show  that
             they have been arbitrarily deprived of their nationality for a
             discriminatory motive, linked to a Convention reason.

         14.  It is this appellant's case that  he  would  be  discriminated
             against as a black African by the Mauritanian authorities  who
             are pursuing the Arabisation of that country, excluding  black
             Africans where possible.  This appellant is a black African."

22. In support of his claim that he had, in effect, been  deprived  of  his
    nationality for a discriminatory motive, the appellant relied upon  the
    expert evidence of Dr Bronwen Manby who  is  a  Senior  Fellow  at  the
    Centre for the Study of Human Rights at the LSE in London.  In addition
    to her report dated 11 April 2018, Dr Manby gave oral  evidence  before
    the judge.  Judge Page summarised her evidence at  paras  [16]-[17]  as
    follows:

         "16. Her  premise  was  that  the  appellant  has  never  held  any
             Mauritanian identity document, including a birth  certificate.
             The appellant has had two  interviews  during  2017  with  the
             Mauritanian Embassy in London with a view to establishing  his
             Mauritanian nationality and providing him  with  an  emergency
             travel document.  It has not been disputed by  the  respondent
             that the appellant has given the  Mauritanian  Embassy  proper
             answers to all of  the  questions  that  he  has  been  asked.
             However, the Mauritanian Embassy has not been able to  confirm
             his nationality based on the information  that  the  appellant
             has willingly provided.  This raised the issue as  to  whether
             the appellant would ever be granted any documents  to  confirm
             his identity and nationality.  In 2010, in advance of the  new
             identification process which had been suspended from  December
             2010 when the Mauritanian government decided that the issue of
             all national identity documents will be put  on  hold  as  the
             national population register was replaced with a new biometric
             version, the government amended the nationality law.

         17.  The 2010 amendment produced (though  did  not  remove)  gender
             discrimination in nationality by descent, but at the same time
             removed all rights based on birth  in  Mauritania.   The  only
             exceptions that are now purely descent based was the  existing
             protection for children of unknown parents.  Dr  Manby  opined
             that the appellant would have to demonstrate that  his  father
             was a Mauritanian national.  In the absence of proof of  birth
             in the country, his father's status would be determinative  in
             order for the appellant to obtain recognition  of  nationality
             himself.  Given that the appellant has no  detailed  knowledge
             of his parents' status and unable to contact with them that he
             belongs  to  a  minority  ethnic  group  and  does  not  speak
             Mauritanian Arabic, Dr Manby  opines  that  it  is  "extremely
             unlikely" that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  establish
             recognition of nationality in Mauritania through the issue  of
             a national identity card even if an emergency travel  document
             were issued by the embassy.  As the facts stand at the present
             time the Mauritanian authorities have not confirmed that  they
             will issue such a document.  Consequently, to take Dr  Manby's
             report and conclusion shortly, it is her expert  opinion  that
             the appellant is a stateless person under the definition given
             in Art 1(1) of the 1954 Convention relating to the  status  of
             stateless persons, to which the UK is a party."

23. Judge Page reached his conclusions at [22]-[24] as follows:

         "22. As I have indicated above much has changed since; particularly
             the changes to the Mauritanian laws obtaining  to  nationality
             and recognition  of  nationality  in  2010  as  Dr  Manby  has
             detailed in her expert report.  As I have said  above  on  the
             authority of EB if the appellant has been made stateless as  a
             result of discrimination against him as  a  black  African  in
             pursuance  of  the  Arabisation   of   Mauritania,   that   is
             discrimination amounting to persecution and  it  would  follow
             that if the appellant has shown this to the  low  standard  of
             proof then he is a refugee.  I am satisfied  that  Dr  Manby's
             report and the evidence she gave before me is  sufficient  for
             the appellant to succeed in this appeal on that sole issue.  I
             should say that Dr Manby added to  her  report  in  answer  to
             questions from me at the  end  of  the  hearing  to  say  that
             Mauritanian authorities had  elections  only  last  month  and
             black Mauritanians were not allowed to vote in them.  Dr Manby
             is a leading authority on Mauritania and  is  also  a  lawyer,
             though she no longer practises as a solicitor.  I find  myself
             in agreement with her opinion  that  the  appellant  would  be
             unlikely to be granted any documents to show  that  he  was  a
             Mauritanian national  as  he  is  a  black  African  that  the
             Mauritanian authorities are discriminating against and seeking
             to exclude from their country under the policy of Arabisation.

         23.  I agree with the submission made on behalf of the Home  Office
             by Ms Lewis that the appellant's claimed fear  of  his  former
             slave master in Mauritania is more fanciful than real.   I  do
             not accept that the appellant would be identified upon  return
             by anyone who would remember him as  someone  who  fled  on  a
             camel leaving animals unattended when he was  a  child  there.
             If he could be  returned  to  Mauritania  and  admitted  as  a
             national of that country  he  would  have  no  answer  to  the
             respondent's statutory duty  to  deport  the  appellant  as  a
             foreign  criminal  sentenced  to  more  than  twelve   months'
             imprisonment under section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007.
             The respondent has that statutory duty  unless  the  appellant
             can show that he falls within one of the exceptions set out in
             section 33 of the Act.

         24.  The exception that the appellant contends for in  this  appeal
             is that he is a de facto refugee by reason of being stateless.
              I find on the balance of the  evidence  before  me  that  the
             appellant has established that exception to the lower standard
             of proof.  Upon that finding the appellant's  appeal  must  be
             allowed.  ...."

The Secretary of State's Grounds

24. The Secretary of State appealed on, essentially, two grounds.

25. First, in paras 2-3 of the grounds, the Secretary  of  State  contended
    that the judge had based his finding that the appellant  was  de  facto
    stateless on a mistake of fact:

         "2.  It is respectfully submitted  that  the  FTTJ  has  materially
             erred in law in coming to this conclusion and has  erroneously
             assumed that the appellant has been twice interviewed  by  the
             Mauritanian embassy in 2017 [16], that has infected  the  rest
             of the determination.

         3.   Throughout 2017 the appellant was  detained  pending  removal,
             there is no record of the appellant having had any  interviews
             with the embassy only with immigration officials that includes
             bio data interviews."

26. Second, in paras 4 and 5 of the grounds, the judge had  been  wrong  to
    find  in  the  appellant's  favour  on  the  central   issue   of   his
    statelessness in the absence of reasonable efforts made  the  appellant
    to the Mauritanian embassy to recognise his citizenship:

         "4.  It is also of note that the appellant applied  for  asylum  on
             17/10/17 and as a consequence no further representations  were
             made to the embassy from that date.  Therefore the embassy has
             never refused to issue an emergency travel document (ETD)  for
             the appellant and the ETD application of August 2017 is  still
             outstanding,  and  given  the  passage  of  time  will  almost
             certainly have to be resubmitted.

         5.   It is therefore submitted that until confirmation is  received
             from the embassy that  it  is  unable  to  issue  an  ETD  the
             appellant is not  a  de  facto  refugee  by  reason  of  being
             stateless [24]."

27.  Whilst  granting  permission  generally,  Judge  Swaney   specifically
    concluded that the first ground was arguable.

Discussion

28. Turning first to that ground, on behalf  of  the  appellant  Ms  Harvey
    accepted, both in her rule 24 response and oral submissions, that Judge
    Page had been mistaken when he stated in [16] that  the  appellant  had
    attended two interviews at the Mauritanian Embassy in London  in  2017.
    At that time, she accepted that he had been in detention and  that  the
    two interviews were with the Home Office  in  relation  to  seeking  an
    Emergency Travel Document (ETD)  from  the  Mauritanian  Embassy.   She
    indicated that the likely source of this error was in Dr Manby's report
    where she had wrongly stated in para 5(e) that he had been  interviewed
    twice at the Mauritanian Embassy in 2017.  I agree  that  that  is  the
    likely source of the mistake, perhaps  understandably  made,  by  Judge
    Page in setting out the background facts in [16] of his determination.

29. Ms Havey submitted that, nevertheless, this error was not  material  to
    Judge Page's conclusion.  She submitted that  he  had  relied  upon  Dr
    Manby's report which he had accepted  in  its  entirety  including  her
    conclusion that  the  appellant  was  "extremely  unlikely"  under  the
    amendments to the nationality law in effect from 2010  to  be  able  to
    establish his nationality was Mauritanian even if an  emergency  travel
    document were issued to him.  She submitted that Judge  Page  had  been
    entitled to find, on the basis of  that  evidence  at  [22],  that  the
    appellant was, in effect, stateless and  that  that  was  an  arbitrary
    deprivation of his nationality  amounting  to  persecution  and  for  a
    Convention reason.

30. I accept Ms Harvey's submission.  It is plain from reading  Dr  Manby's
    report that her conclusion, that  the  appellant  would  be  "extremely
    unlikely" to be recognised as a national of Mauritania because he would
    not have the relevant knowledge and documentation to establish it,  was
    a conclusion reached by Dr  Manby  based  upon  her  expertise  in  the
    citizenship law of Mauritania and its application.  It did not, in  any
    way, turn upon the fact that, albeit mistakenly, she believed  that  he
    had been interviewed on two occasions by the  Mauritanian  Embassy  and
    that the embassy had been unable to confirm  his  nationality.   It  is
    clear to me that Judge Page based  his  conclusion,  in  particular  in
    [22], on Dr Manby's evidence to that effect.

31. In those circumstances, I reject the Secretary of State's first  ground
    of appeal that the mistake transferred from Dr Manby's report  to  [16]
    of Judge Page's determination was  a  material  error  which  made  his
    finding in the appellant's favour unsustainable.

32. In relation to the second ground, Ms Rushforth relied upon paras 4  and
    5 of the grounds and that, in the absence of reasonable efforts to have
    the  Mauritanian  Embassy  recognise  (or  not)  his  citizenship,  the
    appellant could not establish that he was de facto stateless.

33.  During  the  course  of  submissions,  I  raised  with  the   parties'
    representatives the Court of Appeal's decision in MA (Ethiopia) v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 289. That decision was not relied  upon  either  before
    Judge Page (so far as I can tell) nor by the Secretary of State in  the
    grounds of appeal.  It does, however, have some resonance in the points
    made in paras 4 and 5 of the grounds.  It raises the issue  of  whether
    an individual is able to establish that they are a de  facto  stateless
    unless the embassy has refused to recognise the individual as a citizen
    or issue them with an ETD. The essence of this point, perhaps finding a
    base in MA, is that in order for an appellant  to  establish  that  his
    claimed country of nationality will not recognise his citizenship  (and
    thereby making him, in effect,  stateless)  he  must  do  all  that  is
    reasonable to  establish  his  citizenship,  in  particular  by  making
    approaches to the Embassy in the UK.

34. In MA, the Court of Appeal was concerned with an  asylum  claim  by  an
    Ethiopian of Eritrean origin.  She claimed to be at risk  if  she  were
    returned to Ethiopia.  As part of that claim, the  claimant  said  that
    the Ethiopian authorities would not allow her to return to Ethiopia, in
    particular they would not recognise her Ethiopian citizenship.  She had
    unsuccessfully approached the Ethiopian Embassy in the UK but,  as  the
    Court of Appeal pointed out, that no doubt was because she  claimed  to
    be Eritrean.  However, in the course of their judgments both  Elias  LJ
    and Stanley Burnton LJ referred to  the  importance  of  an  individual
    making a reasonable attempt to establish their  nationality,  including
    by approaching the relevant Embassy in the UK.  At [49]-[53], Elias  LJ
    said this:

         "49. ... There is no reason why the appellant  should  not  herself
             make a formal application to the embassy to seek to obtain the
             relevant documents.  If she  were  refused,  or  she  came  up
             against a brick wall and there was a failure to respond to the
             request within a reasonable period such that a  refusal  could
             properly be inferred, the issue would arise why she  had  been
             refused.  Again, reasons  might  be  given  for  the  refusal.
             Speculation by the AIT about the  embassy's  likely  response,
             and reliance on expert evidence designed  to  assist  them  to
             speculate in a more informed manner about that question, would
             not be necessary.

         50.  In my judgment, where the essential issue before  the  AIT  is
             whether someone will or will not  be  returned,  the  Tribunal
             should in the normal case require the applicant  to  act  bona
             fide and take all reasonably  practicable  steps  to  seek  to
             obtain the requisite documents to enable her to return.  There
             may be cases where it would be unreasonable to  require  this,
             such as if disclosure of identity might put the  applicant  at
             risk, or perhaps third  parties,  such  as  relatives  of  the
             applicant who may be at risk in the home state if it is  known
             that the applicant has claimed asylum.  That is not this case,
             however.  There is no reason  why  the  appellant  should  not
             herself visit the embassy  to  seek  to  obtain  the  relevant
             papers.  Indeed, as I have said, she did so but  wrongly  told
             the staff there that she was Eritrean.

         51.  I am satisfied that there is no injustice to the appellant  in
             this approach: it does not put her at  risk.   The  real  risk
             test is adopted in asylum cases because of the  difficulty  of
             predicting what will happen in the future in another  country,
             and because the consequences of reaching  the  wrong  decision
             will often be so serious for the applicant.  That is  not  the
             case here.  As Ms Giovannetti pointed out, there is no risk of
             ill treatment if an application to the embassy  is  made  from
             the United Kingdom, even if it is refused.

         52.  Furthermore, this approach to the issue of return is  entirely
             consistent with the well-established principle that, before an
             applicant for asylum can claim the protection of  a  surrogate
             state,  he  or  she  must  first  take  all  steps  to  secure
             protection from the home state.  That was the approach adopted
             in Bradshaw, to which I have made reference.  It can  be  seen
             as an aspect of the duty placed on an applicant to  co-operate
             in the asylum process.  Paragraph 205 of  the  UNHCR  handbook
             expressly  states  that  an  applicant  for  asylum  must,  if
             necessary, make an effort to procure  additional  evidence  to
             assist the decision maker.  Bradshaw is an example of  such  a
             case.  The issue was  whether  the  applicant  was  stateless.
             Lord MacLean held that before a person could  be  regarded  as
             stateless, she should make an application for  citizenship  of
             the countries with which she was most closely connected.

         53.  Any other approach leads, in my view, to absurd  results.   To
             vary an example given by my Lord, Lord Justice Stanley Burnton
             in argument: the expert evidence might show that three out  of
             ten in the appellant's position were not  allowed  to  return.
             If that evidence were accepted it would plainly be  enough  to
             constitute a  real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
             successful in seeking authorisation to return.  But  it  would
             be strange if by the appellant's  wilful  inaction  she  could
             prevent the Tribunal from having the best evidence there is of
             the state's attitude to her return.  She could refuse  to  put
             to the test whether she might be one of the seven who would be
             successful.  It would in my view be little short of absurd  if
             she could succeed in her  claim  by  requiring  the  court  to
             speculate on a question which she was in a  position  actually
             to have resolved."

35. Then, at [54] referring to the approach that a Tribunal  should  adopt,
    Elias LJ added this:

         "54. They ought not to have engaged on this inquiry  without  first
             establishing that  the  appellant  had  taken  all  reasonably
             practical steps to obtain authorisation to return."

36. At [55], Elias LJ concluded that the evidence did not establish in that
    case that reasonable practical steps had been taken:

         "55. ... She said in her witness statement that she had gone to the
             embassy and asked for a passport, but having  told  the  staff
             there that she was Eritrean.  That could not constitute a bona
             fide attempt to obtain the necessary  authorisation.   In  the
             light of this evidence, which is the totality of the  evidence
             on this matter, I can see no basis on which it would  be  open
             to the AIT to find that she had acted in good faith and  taken
             all reasonably practicable steps to obtain a passport."

37. In his judgment, Stanley Burnton LJ also touched upon this  issue.   At
    [77], dealing with the facts of the claimant's claim  in  MA,  he  said
    this:

         "77. Turning to the present case, it is again necessary to focus on
             precisely what facts have been found.  There  is  no  evidence
             that  the  Appellant  has  been  deprived  of  her   Ethiopian
             nationality.  She left Ethiopia on an  Ethiopian  passport  in
             her name, and surrendered it to her agent voluntarily.  It was
             conceded that if she returns, she does not face ill  treatment
             on account of her ethnicity or otherwise.  Having  given  away
             her passport, she needs a travel document in order to  return.
             There is no evidence that she has been unable to  obtain  one,
             let alone evidence that she is unable to do so for  Convention
             reasons.  She did go to the Embassy, but not surprisingly  did
             not get beyond the receptionist because, on her own account in
             her witness statement, she said she was Eritrean.  The lack of
             response  to  the   correspondence   with   the   Embassy   is
             understandable given the terms of the  letters  written.   The
             Tribunal were entitled to  find  that  other  Ethiopians  have
             successfully obtain travel documents from the embassy here.  I
             see no reason why the Appellant should not be required to take
             reasonable steps to do so."

38. At [79], Stanley Burnton LJ added:

         "79.     ... To require a person here to take reasonable  steps  to
             apply for a passport or travel document, or to  establish  her
             nationality, involves no risk of harm at  all.   I  take  into
             account that there may be cases in which  the  application  to
             the foreign embassy may put relatives or friends  who  are  in
             the country of origin at risk of harm.  If  there  is  a  real
             risk that they will  suffer  harm  as  a  result  of  such  an
             application,  it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  the  person
             claiming asylum to have to make it.  The present is not such a
             case."

39. Then, at [83] he concluded:

         "83. ... A person cannot  be  entitled  to  refugee  status  solely
             because he or she  refuses  to  make  an  application  to  her
             embassy, or refuses or  fails  to  take  reasonable  steps  to
             obtain recognition and evidence of her nationality."

40. As I have said, MA  was  not  directly  relied  upon  as  part  of  the
    Secretary of State's challenge  to  Judge  Page's  decision.   It  may,
    however, be seen as the source of the points raised in paras 4 and 5 of
    the grounds.

41. It does not seem to me that the Court of Appeal was laying down a 'hard
    and fast' rule that in order for a person to establish  that  they  are
    either not a citizen of a particular country or that their  citizenship
    will not be recognised by that country, it is essential in  every  case
    to seek to assert the nationality claimed by approaching that country's
    authorities, in particular their embassy in the UK.  Of course, it does
    provide a useful 'rule of thumb' as it will often  be  the  reasonable,
    practical and obvious way to establish (or not) the core issue  of  the
    individual's claim.  It would avoid the need  for  speculation  on  the
    authorities' response to the individual's claim to be a citizen.

42. Here, unlike in MA, there were a number  of  factors  which  the  judge
    (through the evidence of Dr Manby) was  fully  entitled  to  take  into
    account as establishing that the  appellant  would,  in  practice,  not
    obtain recognition of his Mauritanian citizenship.

43. First, there was the expert opinion of Dr Manby which  was  based  upon
    first, the requirements of Mauritanian nationality law since  2010  and
    secondly, the uncontested fact that the appellant  lacks  the  relevant
    knowledge  and  documentation  to  establish  his   claimed   Mauritian
    citizenship.  Dr Manby is quite clear about that in her report at  para
    14 which the judge accepted.  Dr Manby was not engaged  in  unwarranted
    speculation.   Second,  it  was  accepted  before  the  judge  by   the
    respondent that the appellant had provided to the Home Office, as  part
    of the ETD documentation process, all the material he could reasonably,
    or otherwise, be expected to provide.  He had  fully  co-operated  with
    the Home Office.  He had, in my judgment,  clearly  done  all  that  he
    reasonably could to establish his citizenship.  That contrasts strongly
    with the  position  in  MA  where  the  appellant  had  approached  the
    Ethiopian Embassy but had asserted that she was Eritrean.  The Court of
    Appeal was plainly antithetical to an individual succeeding who had not
    co-operated or who was not acting bona  fide.   Thirdly,  and  this  is
    connected to the second reason,  the  ETD  process  involved  the  Home
    Office (as it was explained to  me  at  the  hearing)  passing  on  the
    information to the Mauritanian Embassy.  The application was first made
    in 2011 and the most recent application had been outstanding  since  31
    January 2017.  The appellant's two interviews with the Home Office took
    place in 2017, the second in September 2017.  Although, and again I was
    told, the Home Office did not follow up  the  application  for  an  ETD
    after October 2017 when the appellant claimed asylum,  the  Mauritanian
    Embassy had not replied by that time and, even if not chased  up,  they
    could have replied subsequently.

44. There is further evidence which Ms Rushforth sought to admit under rule
    15(2A) if the decision was to be remade in respect of the  ETD  process
    and its outcome.  However, that evidence, which she did  not  rely  on,
    nor could she do so at the error of law stage,  was  not  before  Judge
    Page.

45. Fourthly,  it  is,  no  doubt,  a  matter  of  common  sense  that  the
    appellant's  history  is  likely  to  place  him   at   a   significant
    disadvantage in producing documentation.  It is accepted that he was  a
    child slave from the age of 8, when he lost contact  with  his  family,
    until he escaped to Senegal.  He  has  no  knowledge  of  his  parents'
    whereabouts or means of establishing their nationality,  in  particular
    his father's nationality.

46. It is no answer to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  has  behaved
    reasonably in seeking to establish his nationality, for  the  Secretary
    of State to rely upon the fact that he was released from  detention  in
    January 2018 and has therefore had eighteen months in  which  he  could
    have approached the embassy.  He obviously could not  do  so  prior  to
    that when he was in prison or detention.  The fact  of  the  matter  is
    that here, unlike in MA the appellant has  co-operated  with  the  Home
    Office and provided them with all  the  information  and  documentation
    that he reasonably could and that has not resulted in  the  Mauritanian
    Embassy issuing him with an ETD by the time that Judge Page reached his
    decision in July 2019.

47. Consequently, to the extent that the MA issue is encompassed in paras 4
    and 5 of the Secretary of State's grounds, I  do  not  accept  that  an
    error of law is established.  The judge was entitled to  rely  upon  Dr
    Manby's report and the appellant's circumstances to  conclude  that  he
    had  established  that  he  was  stateless,  in  the  sense  that   the
    Mauritanian authorities would not recognise his citizenship.

48. The Secretary of  State  has  not  sought  to  challenge  Judge  Page's
    decision to allow the appeal if that finding is  sustainable.   It  has
    not been suggested that he was  not  entitled  to  find  that,  if  the
    appellant's  citizenship  was  not  recognised,   the   appellant   had
    established that the consequence was that he would  suffer  persecution
    as a result of a Convention reason.  Judge Page made findings in favour
    of the appellant on those matters by reference to  the  expert  report,
    and oral evidence, of Dr Manby which included  the  background  to  the
    amendment to the nationality law and its  impact  upon  black  Africans
    such as the appellant (see, in particular [22] of the determination).

49. For all these reasons, therefore, Judge Page did not materially err  in
    law in allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

Decision

50. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    on asylum grounds did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  and
    that decision stands.

51. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             6, January 2020

