
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03195/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2019                   |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    T.M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati of Counsel instructed by S. Satha & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Black dismissing the appeal against a decision dated 21  February  2018
    refusing protection in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka currently  36  years  of  age.
    His personal details are a matter of record on file but are not set out
    herein in keeping with the anonymity direction that  I  make  in  these
    proceedings.

3.   I am grateful for the helpful discussion it was possible to  have  with
    both representatives in respect of the issues raised in  the  challenge
    to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In the event Mr Kotas  did
    not seek to resist the Appellant's challenge, and in due course it  was
    common ground between the parties that  the  decision  of  Judge  Black
    should be set aside and that the  decision  in  the  appeal  be  remade
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a  different  Judge.   In   such
    circumstances I do not propose to go into fine detail as to the history
    and circumstances of the Appellant's case.

4.   For present purposes it will suffice to set out the  following  by  way
    of the factual background.

         (i)  The Appellant's claim for asylum was based on  having  been  a
         member  of  the  LTTE  from  2004.   He  claimed  that  during  his
         membership he had engaged in activities that included the  delivery
         of goods and  parcels  to  LTTE  controlled  areas  and  some  non-
         combative frontline  duty.   He  also  claimed  that  he  had  been
         involved in intelligence work for the  LTTE.   The  Appellant  says
         that following the end of the conflict between  the  LTTE  and  the
         government he was detained, in October 2011, and held for a  period
         of three years during which he was physically and sexually  abused.
         He states that he was able to secure his release in  December  2014
         after payment of a bribe.  Thereafter arrangements  were  made  for
         him to come to the United Kingdom, arriving on  14  May  2015.   An
         application for asylum followed.

         (ii) The Appellant has asserted that enquiries have been made about
         his whereabouts in Sri Lanka  since  he  has  been  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  He referred to this at his  asylum  interview,  and  also
         produced supporting documents in this context in his  appeal.   The
         documents comprised statements or letters from his mother  and  his
         wife to the effect that the authorities had visited them, they  had
         moved as a result, and that notwithstanding  visits  had  continued
         with enquiries being made about the Appellant.  This  material  was
         further supported by way of a letter from an MP  in  which  it  was
         stated that the Appellant's mother had visited him with  complaints
         as to the enquiries being made about the Appellant, and that  he  -
         that it to say the MP - had contacted the officer in charge at  the
         police station who had stated that the Appellant was an escapee and
         was wanted.

         (iii)     The  Appellant  also  claimed  to  have  taken  part   in
         activities in support of separatism whilst in the United Kingdom.

         (iv) It was also pleaded in his appeal that he was a  suicide  risk
         to an extent that the UK's obligations under Article 3 of the  ECHR
         were engaged.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  accepted  significant  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's account, subject to certain qualifications - which at least
    in some regards appear to have been unreasoned.

6.   The Judge states the following at paragraph 8 of the Decision:

         "I am satisfied that his account is broadly consistent  internally.
         I  accept  the  appellant's  explanation   as   to   the   apparent
         inconsistency as to his activities on the front line.  I found that
         he was not involved in combat but in helping the injured and moving
         supplies for the LTTE.  I found that the appellant was arrested and
         detained in the past and ill treated while he was in detention.   I
         placed  weight  on  the  expert  medical  evidence  which   largely
         corroborated his claim and which was also broadly  consistent  with
         the background material at the  time.   I  accept  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal in GJ acknowledged that it was  possible  to  escape  from
         detention after payment of a bribe.  I do not, however, accept that
         he was involved  in  LTTE  intelligence  rather  I  found  that  he
         provided transport/delivery services  from  November  2004  -  2009
         during the course of his work as a delivery driver  for  Pepsi  and
         latterly provided some assistance at the front but was not involved
         in combat.  I have some  reservations  as  to  the  length  of  the
         claimed detention and the frequency of the torture, which  I  found
         exaggerated in light of the extent of the scarring.  There  was  no
         medical corroboration of any sexual abuse."

7.    Notwithstanding  the  acceptance  of  significant  elements   of   the
    Appellant's core account  the  Judge  went  on  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had not demonstrated to the requisite standard that there was
    a current risk in the event of his return to Sri Lanka.   As  indicated
    above, it is common ground before me that in reaching  that  conclusive
    evaluation the Judge fell into material error of law.

8.   I note in particular the following matters which are not  contested  by
    the Respondent as amounting to error.

         (i)  It may be seen from the quotation of paragraph  8  above  that
         the Judge did not accept that the Appellant was  involved  in  LTTE
         intelligence.  However there is nothing apparent in paragraph 8  or
         elsewhere in the Decision by way of reasons for such a conclusion.

         (ii) At paragraph 9 the Judge refers to the  Appellant's  departure
         from Sri Lanka in these terms:

             "The Appellant also left Sri  Lanka  using  his  own  passport
             which suggested that he was not of significant interest to the
             authorities at that time."

         It is common ground between the parties before me that the  ability
         to leave Sri Lanka on your own passport is  essentially  a  neutral
         factor in evaluating whether or not there is  an  interest  on  the
         part of  the  authorities:  this  is  pursuant  to  the  levels  of
         corruption at the airport as acknowledged in the  country  guidance
         case of GJ.

         (iii)    In respect of the application of GJ to  the  circumstances
         of the Appellant's case and the  evaluation  of  future  risk,  the
         Judge stated:

             "However, even finding his account to be credible as  to  some
             past low level involvement in LTTE activities,  detention  and
             ill treatment, I have considered the facts in the light of  GJ
             and conclude that at present he faces no real risk  on  return
             to Sri Lanka.  The arrest and detention  occurred  at  a  time
             when the government's stance was entirely different  from  the
             current position as held in GJ.  The appellant has  failed  to
             discharge the burden to show that he  faces  a  real  risk  on
             return." (Paragraph 9)

         It is accepted by Mr Kotas that the Judge  was  in  error  in  this
         regard.  GJ dealt necessarily with the post-conflict  situation  in
         Sri Lanka.  However it was exactly in  that  post-conflict  context
         that the Appellant was arrested and detained - he was detained  and
         held during a period when the focus of the authorities in Sri Lanka
         was perceived to be on those seeking to destabilise  the  integrity
         of the country.  The Judge was in error in seeking  to  distinguish
         the Appellant's case from the scope of GJ on  the  basis  that  his
         accepted arrest and detention had taken  place  in  a  circumstance
         that was "entirely different from the current position".

9.   Criticisms have also been  raised  in  the  challenge  to  the  Judge's
    evaluation of the Appellant's diaspora activities. It seems to me  that
    on the facts of this particular case an evaluation of such  activities,
    and any risk that might arise from them,  must  encompass  an  'in  the
    round' consideration of the circumstances in which  the  Appellant  was
    detained in Sri Lanka, and whether such circumstances  lend  weight  to
    the notion that the Appellant was previously perceived as a person  who
    might threaten or work  towards  destabilising  the  integrity  of  the
    country. The Judge's analysis is lacking in this regard.

10.  In my judgement the errors of the First-tier  Tribunal  mean  that  the
    consequent scope of the  matters  to  be  considered  in  remaking  the
    decision in the appeal do not permit of the preservation of any of  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge - favourable to the Appellant
    or otherwise. In this context I note  that  it  seems  to  me  that  in
    addition to the matters outlined above  a  more  detailed  and  careful
    consideration than  hitherto  will  be  required  in  respect  of:  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's claimed release from  detention  being
    irregular such that he might be perceived  as  a  person  who  was  not
    released following completion of enquiries; and the evidence that there
    was a continuing interest in the Appellant (which in my  judgement  was
    not adequately addressed in the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal).

11.  It will be for  the  next  judicial  decision  maker  to  revisit  such
    matters anew. Nonetheless it may be  that  Respondent's  representative
    will wish  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  nature  and  quality  of  the
    Appellant's evidence in respect of his arrest and detention was such as
    to persuade  Judge  Black  to  accept  the  broad  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account, and therefore to focus on the issue of  consequent
    continuing risk in the event of return. However, that is  a  matter  in
    the first instance for the Respondent, and ultimately a matter for  the
    next Judge.

Notice of Decision

12.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

13.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Black  with
    all issues at large.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  Date: 11 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
