
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03274/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2019                             |On 20 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                E D (Albania)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr James Collins, Counsel instructed by Marsh and
Partners,
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  Pursuant  to  Rule  14  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I continue  that  order.
Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or  indirectly.   This  order  applies,  amongst
others, to all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her challenge to the respondent's decision  to
    refuse  her  asylum  under   the   Refugee   Convention,   humanitarian
    protection, or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the First-tier Judge
    took a new negative point against the appellant regarding the route the
    appellant  took  from  Sweden  to  Albania,  without  giving   her   an
    opportunity to deal with it  which  was  arguably  a  procedural  error
    depriving the appellant of a fair hearing.

 3. That ground is made out and is more than sufficient  to  indicate  that
    the appellant did not have a fair hearing, and to taint the findings of
    fact and credibility overall.

 4. I am satisfied that there is  no  alternative  but  to  set  aside  the
    decision and re-make it.

 5. This appeal is allowed.  The decision will be re-made in the First-tier
    Tribunal with no findings of fact or credibility preserved.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The decision in this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  a
date to be fixed.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     15 November 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



