
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03903/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2017                   |On 23 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     A P
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding of Counsel, instructed by Marsh &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Maxwell promulgated on 6 June 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Albania  born  on  [  ]  1996.   He  left
    Albania, he says, on the third attempt on 23 May  2013,  travelling  in
    the first instance to Italy.  He  then  made  his  way  to  the  United
    Kingdom, arriving on 28 May 2013 - at which time he would have been  16
    years old, approaching his 17th birthday.  He made an  application  for
    asylum.  The application was refused for reasons set out in a  'reasons
    for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  22  July  2013.   However,  the
    Appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied
    child asylum seeker until 9 June 2014.


3.   On 4 June 2014 the Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain.
    Whilst the application was pending the  Respondent  solicited  evidence
    via the British Embassy in Tirana, which was received  by  way  of  two
    letters, dated 15 June  2016  and  12  August  2016  (Annex  F  of  the
    Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal).


4.   The Appellant's application for further leave  to  remain  was  refused
    for reasons set out in a RFRL dated 3 April 2017.  In substantial  part
    that letter repeated the contents of the previous RFRL, but also placed
    additional reliance upon the evidence obtained via the British Embassy.


5.   The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim and his narrative account  of
    events that led to him fleeing Albania are set out at paragraphs  11-21
    of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  No particular criticism or
    challenge has been made to the summary of events as set out therein.  I
    do not propose to rehearse again those matters, but simply to emphasise
    and mention certain aspects of the account.


6.   The Appellant described in his applications the  circumstances  of  his
    childhood and the character of his father, who was variously  described
    as an alcoholic,  a  drug  addict,  and  a  gambler.   The  Appellant's
    father's gambling habit, it was  said,  had  caused  him  to  get  into
    substantial debt with an individual to whom I shall refer as K.  K  was
    said to be part of a large criminal family  involved  both  in  running
    gambling shops and in making loans at extortionate rates. The Appellant
    also related how his childhood had been marred by the behaviour of  his
    father, including that he had been put to work in an attempt to finance
    his father's gambling habit.  The Appellant related that  his  father's
    debts reached such a level that K decided  to  seek  repayment  by  the
    method of kidnapping the Appellant and holding him for ransom.   It  is
    said that the Appellant's father was unable to pay the ransom -  indeed
    it is suggested that he expressed a degree of disinterest in  the  fate
    that his son might therefore face.  Be that as it  may,  the  Appellant
    secured the assistance of his uncle, who was prepared to  pay  a  small
    portion of the debt in order to secure the Appellant's release.


7.   Shortly after the episode of the  Appellant's  claimed  kidnap,  K  was
    shot dead.  A number of people were arrested and questioned in  respect
    of this, it is said, including the Appellant's father - although he was
    released without any charges being brought.  The Appellant says that in
    consequence of the killing K's family wished to declare a blood feud on
    the Appellant's family.  It is in those circumstances, he says, that he
    feared that he would become a victim of that blood feud.


8.   In this latter context I note in particular what is  said  at  question
    81 of the asylum interview that was conducted on 8 July 2013: "...it is
    not the money they are after now.  It is a blood feud".   I  take  that
    answer to indicate that  although  the  Appellant's  narrative  account
    related the attempt to secure repayment from his  father  and  his  own
    victimisation as a consequence, the core of his asylum claim was not so
    much his father's gambling debts and the threats that have been visited
    upon the Appellant in consequence, but that  the  tension  between  the
    Appellant's family and K's family had descended into  one  of  a  blood
    feud.


9.   The Appellant lodged an appeal against the decision  of  3  April  2017
    with the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.  The appeal was dismissed  for
    reasons set out in the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell.


10.  The Appellant sought permission to appeal,  which  was  granted  on  20
    September 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin.


11.  Mr Harding's grounds of appeal manage at  the  same  time  to  be  both
    lengthy and succinct: lengthy in the sense that there are many of them;
    and  succinct  in  the  sense  that  each  is  expressed  with  helpful
    concision.  Indeed, I am  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  the
    helpful and precise submissions that have been made in  exploration  of
    the issues before me.


12.  I reject significant aspects of the challenge that has been brought  on
    behalf of the Appellant.


13.  In my judgment, there is nothing untoward in the observations  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 27 and 28 in respect of the
    filing of original documents with the Tribunal.  The  Judge  identifies
    this circumstance at paragraph 27, and  observes  that  such  documents
    should not have been filed with the Tribunal - and indeed would  better
    have been served on the Respondent, which would then have afforded  the
    Respondent the opportunity of seeking to verify any such  documents  if
    she so wished.  Be that as it may, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  dealt
    with the matter by allowing the  Respondent's  representative  to  have
    sight of the original documents  whereupon  it  was  indicated  by  the
    Presenting Officer that no particular issues arose with regard  to  the
    originals and the Respondent was content to proceed with the appeal.


14.  It seems to me that the  Judge  was  simply  expressing  some  concerns
    about procedural matters. I am not persuaded that  there  was  anything
    beyond the expression of such concern; in particular I am not persuaded
    that it involved the Appellant's supporting documentary evidence  being
    considered from an initial position of any adversity or cynicism.


15.  Nor am I  persuaded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred,  as
    pleaded, in failing to have regard to country information.


16.  The Judge directed himself to  the  country  guidance  decision  of  EH
    (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC), and  indeed  set  out
    the guidance summarised in the headnote: see Decision at paragraph 23.


17.  Nothing has been identified in the course of  the  Appellant's  grounds
    to this Tribunal, or the submissions before me, by way of  any  country
    information that had been filed before the First-tier Tribunal that put
    any different complexion on the country situation than that related  in
    the case of EH.  It seems to me that the Judge had sufficient regard to
    the country situation  by  having  regard  to  the  most  relevant  and
    pertinent 'country guidance' case.


18.  Nor am I persuaded that the  Judge  failed  to  follow  the  structured
    framework for decision-making set  out  in  EH.   In  particular,  with
    reference to paragraph 41 of the Decision, it seems to  me  clear  that
    the Judge was turning his mind expressly to some of  the  matters  that
    feature in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the headnote in EH.


19.  Yet further, I  am  not  persuaded  that  there  is  substance  to  the
    challenge brought in respect of paragraphs 30-32 of the Decision.


20.  In those paragraphs the Judge refers to the Appellant's answers at  the
    screening interview (also referred to as the Lille Loophole Interview),
    and identifies that the stated reasons for claiming asylum appeared  to
    be limited to concerns about his father's gambling problem and the fact
    that his father owed money to others; the Appellant  also  referred  to
    his own experience of having been kidnapped.  However, what  the  Judge
    identified and considered discrediting was that the Appellant  did  not
    mention anything concerning the subsequent shooting of K, and  did  not
    otherwise make any reference to the existence of a blood feud.


21.  I acknowledge, as Mr Harding has urged upon  me,  that  notwithstanding
    that the screening interview took place on 28 May 2013 it was  as  soon
    as 18 June 2013 that the Appellant provided  a  more  detailed  witness
    statement in respect of his claim in which he did raise  those  matters
    that are now at the  core  of  his  claim  (as  adverted  to  above  by
    reference to the answer at question 81 of the interview).  It seems  to
    me, however, that in directing my attention to the witness statement Mr
    Harding is in substance re-arguing the case as it was before the First-
    tier  Tribunal  by  way  of  seeking  to  marginalise  the  nature   or
    significance of the answers given at interview.


22.  It may be that a different judge would have taken a different  approach
    to the contents of the screening interview and would have accepted that
    the relatively quick amplification of the basis of claim diminished the
    notion that the Appellant had not been  forthcoming  as  to  his  claim
    initially to an extent  that  it  damaged  his  credibility.   However,
    equally, it seems to me entirely  sustainable  for  the  Judge  in  the
    instant case to consider that this was an adverse feature of the  case.
    In my judgment, the challenge is really one of disagreement rather than
    identification of error of law.


23.  I am, however, persuaded that  there  is  substance  to  the  challenge
    brought in  respect  of  paragraph  29  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.


24.  Paragraph 29 is in these terms:

         "It is common ground that the appellant made  a  lawful  exit  from
         Albania using his own passport.  The details of  his  passport  are
         set out at F2 in the respondent's bundle and it is notable that his
         passport was issued on 28 July 2011.  There was no  explanation  as
         to why the appellant, whose father it is said forced him  to  leave
         school and made him undertake menial work to support his  addiction
         would  have  arranged  for  a  passport  to  be  obtained  for  the
         appellant.  There was no apparent reason for  this  other  than  an
         intention to travel outside of Albania and the inference is that in
         leaving Albania, travelling to  Italy  and  thence  to  the  United
         Kingdom was that intended journey."


25.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe acknowledges  that  no  issue  in  respect  of  the
    passport or its date of issue was raised by the Respondent in the RFRL.
    Nor is it apparent upon perusal of the Record of Proceedings  that  the
    Respondent's representative at the hearing put  any  questions  to  the
    Appellant in this  context,  or  otherwise  made  submissions  in  this
    regard.  I am satisfied that this matter was  a  matter  that  was  not
    explored with the Appellant at the hearing, and in the circumstances he
    was afforded no opportunity of dealing with it.


26.  In context it seems to me that what is to be implied from paragraph  29
    is that the  Judge  considered  that  the  father's  obtaining  of  the
    Appellant's passport undermined the narrative account of the  Appellant
    in respect of the treatment that he had received from his father.  Also
    implicit in this analysis is that there had all along been an intention
    to leave Albania for a better life in the United Kingdom, and  to  that
    extent it seems that the Judge must inevitably have placed reliance  on
    his analysis as undermining the Appellant's account of the events  that
    he claimed precipitated his departure.


27.  In such circumstances I conclude that there was  procedural  unfairness
    in embarking upon this analysis: the Judge did not hear, and  therefore
    did not consider, what the Appellant had to say about the point because
    the point quite simply was not put to him.


28.  I am also persuaded  that  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  documentary
    evidence at paragraph 36 of the Decision is unsatisfactory.  Indeed, it
    seems to me that this aspect  of  the  case  is  of  more  significance
    perhaps  than  the  procedural  unfairness  identified  in  respect  of
    paragraph 29 of the First-tier Tribunal's Decision.


29.  Paragraph  36  appears  in  the  Decision  shortly  after  the  Judge's
    consideration of the Appellant's failure to refer to the blood feud  in
    the course of his screening interview.   In  addition  to  the  adverse
    analysis in respect of the screening interview (which I have  concluded
    above was sustainable), the Judge also identified as  adverse  features
    of the Appellant's testimony: the issuing of the passport in July  2011
    (at paragraph 29, and to which I have referred above, finding there  to
    have been procedural unfairness); and an inconsistency  in  respect  of
    which family (K's or  the  Appellant's)  was  reluctant  to  engage  in
    reconciliation meetings, as between one of the supporting documents and
    the Appellant's own account (paragraph 33).  The  Judge  says  this  at
    paragraph 36:

         "I find that, when I apply the principles as  set  out  in  Tanveer
         Ahmed and take proper account  of  those  matters  I  have  already
         referred to, the documents relied on by  the  Appellant  cannot  be
         said to be accurate or reliable evidence as to the existence  of  a
         blood feud between his family and the [K] family.  Bearing in  mind
         the standard of proof required present instance, I have come to the
         conclusion that the Appellant has failed to discharge his burden of
         proving the existence of a blood feud between his  family  and  the
         [K] family."


30.  The Judge then concludes that "the credibility of  both  the  appellant
    his account" are significantly undermined because  of  the  failure  to
    mention a blood feud and a murder allegation against his father in  his
    initial interview (paragraph 37).


31.  The Appellant provided a number of items  of  documentary  evidence  in
    support of his claim.  The Judge lists these at paragraph 22, with some
    brief comment on the contents of each of the documents.   I  note  that
    two of those documents were by way of affidavit evidence, one from  the
    Appellant's maternal uncle,  and  one  from  a  former  school  friend.
    However,  four  of  the  documents  purportedly  emanated  from   state
    institutions within Albania: two originated from the Mayor's Office  of
    Gruemire (the Appellant's local area), one was  from  the  Ministry  of
    Internal Affairs, and one was from the Head of the Village Omaraj.


32.  Beyond the  short  statement  at  paragraph  36  in  respect  of  these
    documents, and the observation  of  an  inconsistency  as  between  one
    document  and  the  Appellant's  account  as  to   which   family   was
    uncooperative in respect of reconciliation meetings, the Judge does not
    descend to any other analysis of their contents  by  reference  to  the
    Appellant's account, or  any  analysis  of  the  documents  in  and  of
    themselves as to their nature  and  their  potential  reliability.   It
    seems to me  that  these  documents  have  in  effect  been  completely
    marginalised  in  the  Judge's  consideration  on  the  basis  of   the
    credibility assessment without more.


33.  I am not satisfied that the Judge has demonstrated in his reasons  that
    the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed was duly applied. Indeed it seems  to  me
    that the Judge's approach runs contrary to the guidance, and  otherwise
    constitutes a failure to consider all issues 'in the round'.  The Judge
    has in effect determined  that  the  documents  are  not  "accurate  or
    reliable evidence" because he has rejected the Appellant's credibility,
    rather than determining the Appellant's credibility and the credibility
    of the documents by reference to all matters in the round.


34.  I also accept that there are no clear or reasoned findings of  fact  on
    any of the aspects of the Appellant's narrative  account.   Whilst  the
    Judge's overall conclusion that there  was  no  blood  feud  is  stated
    clearly enough, there is nothing else by way of findings as to  any  of
    the precedent matters that the Appellant says  precipitated  the  feud.
    It seems to me that that constitutes a deficiency in  the  fact-finding
    of the First-tier Tribunal.


35.  I have had regard to  the  Judge's  alternative  consideration  of  the
    internal flight alternative.  However,  given  my  concerns  about  the
    evaluation of the case as a whole, I am not persuaded that the decision
    can, as it were, be 'saved' by reference to this  alternative  finding.
    In this regard, it seems to me that it  cannot  realistically  be  said
    that the Judge took the Appellant's case at its highest because  if  he
    had done so he would have had to have accepted the Appellant's evidence
    as set out at paragraph 7 of his witness statement of 10 May 2017  that
    K's family's influence  extended  beyond  the  local  area.  The  Judge
    premises his consideration of internal flight on the basis that  "there
    is no evidence before me as to the extent to which the [K]  family  has
    influence outside of the local area".  Whilst it may well be that there
    was no evidence beyond the Appellant's  own  evidence,  as  I  say,  it
    cannot be said that the Judge took the Appellant's case at its  highest
    if he rejected the Appellant's evidence in this regard.  In any  event,
    it seems to me that the Appellant is entitled to  a  proper  evaluation
    and findings on the core  elements  of  his  claim  and  that  has  not
    happened on the facts here.


36.  For completeness, I add that I am  not  persuaded  in  respect  of  the
    ground of challenge alleging a misapplication of the standard of proof,
    although I acknowledge that the significance of the Judge's  recitation
    of paragraph 339L of the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraph  38)  and  the
    following comment (paragraph 39) is unclear to the point of obscurity.


37.  In my judgement  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  adequately  directed
    himself on the standard of proof at paragraph 7: "The burden  of  proof
    is on the appellant to show that as at the date of this decision  there
    are substantial grounds for believing...".  He  also  referred  to  the
    appropriate standard:  during  the  course  of  his  decision-making  -
    "...the  lower  standard  required..."  (paragraph  40);  and  in   his
    conclusions - "...a reasonable degree of likelihood..." (paragraph 42).


38.  Paragraph 339L offers guidance on  the  evaluation  of  an  applicant's
    statements when "not supported by documentary or  other  evidence":  if
    certain specified conditions are met the unsupported aspects "will  not
    need confirmation". This  was  not  a  case  where  the  Appellant  had
    provided no supporting documentary  evidence,  and  accordingly  it  is
    difficult to see what role paragraph 339L might have  been  thought  to
    have. Be that  as  it  may,  in  circumstances  where  the  Judge  made
    reference to the  appropriate  standard  of  proof  in  the  paragraphs
    identified above, I am not persuaded that the Judge's observation  that
    the Appellant could not rely on the provisions of  paragraph  339L  "so
    that he might be given the benefit of the doubt"  is  indicative  of  a
    misapplication of the standard of proof.


39.  Notwithstanding the apparent  identification  and  application  of  the
    appropriate standard of proof, I  am  for  all  the  reasons  indicated
    persuaded that the Judge's analysis and consideration of  the  evidence
    was deficient to an extent that there were errors of law  that  require
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.  It is  common
    ground between the representatives today that  in  those  circumstances
    the appeal requires to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to remake
    the decision  with all issues at large.


40.  Before leaving this case  I  should  make  some  brief  observation  in
    respect of the evidence that was obtained via the  British  Embassy  in
    Tirana (Annex F of the Respondent's bundle).


41.  The Embassy wrote to the Respondent by way  of  letter  dated  15  June
    2016, and then again by way of further letter  dated  12  August  2016.
    Both letters are a matter of record on file, and I do not propose to go
    into any further recitation from them, save to identify one passage  in
    the letter of 12 August  2016.   The  relevant  passage  is  quoting  a
    translated version of  information  obtained  through  checks  via  the
    Albanian authorities and is in these terms - bearing in mind, as I say,
    that it is a translation:

         "Following verifications  it  is  found  that  the  above-mentioned
         nationals are not confined due to any conflicts, revenge  or  blood
         feuds with the [K] family and such a fact does not exist."


42.  For my own part, on first reading I took the  final  words  -  "such  a
    fact does not exist" - to be a reference to a  blood  feud.   In  other
    words, I understood this sentence to mean that not only were members of
    the Appellant's family not confined to their homes,  but  also  that  a
    blood feud did not exist between them and the family of  K.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Maxwell,  however,  seems  to  have  taken  a  different
    approach to this passage -  and  indeed  one  that  in  the  event  was
    favourable to the Appellant. Judge Maxwell  appears  to  interpret  the
    words "such a fact does not exist"  as  referring  to  the  concept  of
    confinement of the family, expressing the view that the  passage  "does
    not directly address the existence of a blood feud": see paragraphs  34
    and 35. Bearing in mind that my view differs from Judge  Maxwell's,  it
    would suggest that the translated passage is  ambiguous.  Whether  that
    ambiguity resides only in the translation, or whether it  also  resides
    in the Albanian language source document, is  not  a  matter  that  the
    Tribunal can resolve at this distance.


43.  In the circumstances it seems to me that if the  Respondent  wishes  to
    continue to place  reliance  upon  the  information  obtained  via  the
    British Embassy in Tirana in this regard, it would be  helpful  to  the
    Tribunal if some clarification could be sought  -  whether  by  way  of
    checking the translation (and necessarily  also  therefore  the  source
    document), or by way of checking the source if the ambiguity is  indeed
    to be found in the Albanian language  document.   Of  course,  if  upon
    checking it is to be said that the ambiguity arises simply by reason of
    an unclear translation, then it would only be right and fair  that  the
    Appellant's representatives have an opportunity of seeing the  original
    language document so that they can consider this issue for themselves.


44.  However, what happens next in this regard is essentially a  matter  for
    the election of the Respondent, and  I  leave  it  without  making  any
    specific Direction.  Of course, if the Respondent leaves the  issue  as
    it is without further clarification it  is  to  be  expected  that  the
    Appellant's representatives on the next occasion will simply invite the
    Tribunal  to  consider  that  the  document  is  indeed  ambiguous  and
    therefore not to be relied upon as detrimental to the Appellant's case.


45.  I also see no particular reason to  issue  any  directions  other  than
    standard directions in the appeal.



Notice of Decision

46.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


47.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maxwell,
    with all issues at large.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 21 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

