
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03459/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 September 2016                       |On 14 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                    M K M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth of Counsel, instructed by Loshana &
Co Limited
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 23 February  1991.   He
    arrived in this country with a student visit visa on  6  January  2011.
    On 27 June 2012 he was granted further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    Student until 28 February 2014.  This leave was extended until 10 April
    2015.  However a decision to curtail his leave was made on 26 June 2014
    and he returned to Sri Lanka on 2 April 2015.  However at  the  airport
    the appellant was identified by an individual called  K  and  two  days
    later K arrived at his home with four officers and  the  appellant  was
    accused of selling boat parts (the appellant having  previously  worked
    at a shop which sold boat engines) to  the  LTTE.   The  appellant  was
    sexually assaulted and  tortured  and  detained  for  a  fortnight  and
    questioned.  He was released from detention on payment of a bribe.   An
    agent procured him false documents and he left Sri  Lanka  for  Morocco
    before returning to the UK on 26 April 2015.  He applied for asylum  on
    20 July 2015.

2.   The application was refused and the appellant appealed and  his  appeal
    came before a First-tier Judge on 12 May 2016 when  the  appellant  was
    represented by Miss S Jegarajah, of Counsel.

3.   The respondent's decision had placed  the  appellant's  credibility  in
    issue but the judge's findings set out at paragraphs 37 to  44  of  the
    determination were broadly positive and they are as follows:

         "37.  The  respondent  accepts  the  appellant's  nationality   and
             identity.  She also accepts that the appellant's asylum  claim
             engages a Convention reason,  namely  his  actual  or  imputed
             political opinion.


         38.  I accept to the lower standard that the appellant worked in  a
             shop selling boat parts.  I accept that he was involved  in  a
             motor vehicle accident and that as a result of this he came to
             know K.  I accept to the lower standard that  K  was  involved
             with the LTTE and on learning where the appellant worked,  saw
             that cultivating a relationship with him would be  useful.   I
             find that the appellant sold boat parts to K as claimed.


         39.  The appellant's claim to have been  identified  by  K  at  the
             airport is in my view credible.  The appellant's  evidence  is
             that K was [a] member of the LTTE.  I accept it  is  plausible
             that the Sri Lankan authorities may seek to use former members
             of the LTTE as informers.  I do not accept however that it  is
             plausible that a former  member  of  the  LTTE  would  now  be
             working for the Sri Lankan authorities in what appears to be a
             law  enforcement  or  security  role.   I  consider  that  the
             appellant has embellished his [sic] aspect of  his  claim  but
             find that the core of his claim is plausible.


         40.  I have  considered  the  medical  evidence  submitted  by  the
             appellant.  I place no weight on Dr Lingham's  assertion  that
             the appellant has learning difficulties.  Dr Lingham  did  not
             assess the appellant's cognitive functioning, did  not  assert
             any  specific  expertise  in  learning  disabilities  and  his
             opinion is not consistent with the appellant  having  achieved
             ten O Levels at school or having met the entry requirements to
             study an HND qualification in the United Kingdom.  I note that
             Dr Lingham recorded that the appellant told  him  he  did  not
             pass his HND studies and that  he  could  not  cope  with  the
             course.  This is  not  consistent  with  his  evidence  to  Dr
             Lawrence which was that  he  could  not  complete  the  course
             because his college closed or his evidence that  he  attempted
             to continue his studies at three further colleges.


         41.  I have considered Dr Lingham's evidence about the scars on the
             appellant's  body.   Dr  Lingham   states   that   he   'would
             confidently on clinical grounds say  the  instrument  here  is
             heated metal rod.'  He also states that the appellant was 'NOT
             aware that he was burnt' (original emphasis).  I am unsure  of
             the significance of  this  statement  particularly  given  his
             earlier statement that the 'appellant  states  it  was  heated
             iron rods and he felt  the  hotness  each  time  burning  were
             inflicted.'  He goes on to state that the scars are clinically
             diagnostic of burns under the Istanbul Protocol.   Dr  Lingham
             considers whether or not there are  any  possible  alternative
             causes of the appellant's scars.  He rules out the possibility
             that they were self-inflicted on the basis that they  are  not
             in an area where the appellant could easily have  caused  them
             himself.  Dr Lingham acknowledges that he cannot differentiate
             between deliberately inflicted  wounds  and  wounds  inflicted
             from trauma.  He cannot rule out therefore that  the  injuries
             were caused by a proxy acting on the appellant's instructions.
              Dr Lingham considered that no medical condition  or  surgical
             procedure could have caused the scars.   Significantly  in  my
             view Dr Lingham does not address  whether  or  not  the  scars
             could have been as a result of injuries the appellant suffered
             in the accident in Sri Lanka.   Dr  Lingham  stated  that  the
             appellant  denied  any  wounds  or  injuries  other  than  the
             injuries caused by the beating.  This is inconsistent with the
             appellant's evidence that he was hit by a motorbike and  spent
             two months in hospital as  a  result  of  his  injuries.   The
             possibility that  the  appellant's  injuries  were  caused  by
             contact with the hot motorbike exhaust  in  the  accident  for
             example has not been considered.


         42.  Dr Lingham considered the scars the  appellant  attributed  to
             being burnt with cigarettes.   He  states  that  the  circular
             appearance of the scars is diagnostic of cigarette burns.   Dr
             Lingham states that he  is  'sure'  that  the  scars  are  not
             attributable to chicken pox or bites from mosquitoes or  other
             insects and that he cannot think of any other medical or  non-
             medical explanation for the  scars.   He  considers  that  the
             scars are typical of cigarette burns and that they are  highly
             consistent with the appellant's account.  Dr Lingham rules out
             the possibility that the scars could have been  self-inflicted
             because of their location on the appellant's body.   In  light
             with his statement in relation to the other scars, it is clear
             that he cannot distinguish between scars that  were  inflicted
             by proxy from those that are inflicted during torture.


         43.  I have considered the psychiatric report of  Dr  Lawrence.   I
             have summarised Dr Lawrence's main findings at paragraphs 9 to
             11 above.  I accept that the appellant suffers from PTSD and a
             Major Depressive Episode.  I note in particular Dr  Lawrence's
             observations of the appellant's physiological  responses  when
             describing  his  sexual  abuse  and  his  opinion  that   such
             responses are very hard to simulate.  I also note the presence
             of other symptoms which are highly significant as support  for
             the diagnoses.


         44.  As I have outlined, I have some concerns about the conclusions
             reached by Dr Lingham; however I accept to the lower  standard
             that the  appellant  has  scars  which  are  at  least  highly
             consistent with the  manner  in  which  he  claims  they  were
             caused.  When taken together with Dr  Lawrence's  evidence  of
             the  appellant's  psychological  state  I  accept   that   the
             appellant was detained as claimed and that he was  ill-treated
             and sexually abused during his detention.  I  have  considered
             the appellant's failure to claim asylum either immediately  on
             his return to the United Kingdom in April 2015 or when he  was
             apprehended in June 2015 and the  impact  on  his  credibility
             pursuant to section 8 of the 2004 Act.  I have considered  the
             appellant's credibility in the round and while his failure  to
             claim immediately is capable of damaging  his  credibility,  I
             find that it does not.  In making this finding  I  have  taken
             into account the appellant's mental health and  my  acceptance
             that he was ill-treated in Sri Lanka  and  is  afraid  of  the
             authorities (Dr Lawrence's report)."


4.   The judge then set out the head note to the country  guidance  case  of
    GJ and Others (Post-Civil War; Returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC).  The judge's conclusions in respect of the risk on  return
    applying the country guidance are set out as follows:

         "46. The appellant states that he was released  from  detention  on
             payment of a bribe.  I  accept  that  there  is  a  degree  of
             corruption in Sri Lanka and that this is  plausible.   I  find
             however that if  there  was  any  belief  that  following  his
             interrogation the appellant in fact had a significant role  in
             post-conflict separatist activities or that he was a threat to
             the unity of Sri Lanka he would not have been released in this
             manner.  He has not adduced evidence that he has been involved
             in any separatist activities in the United  Kingdom.   I  find
             there is not a real  risk  that  the  appellant  comes  within
             paragraph 7(a) of the guidance set out above.   The  appellant
             does not claim to be a journalist or human rights activist and
             does not claim to have given evidence to the  Lessons  Learned
             and Reconciliation Commission.  Accordingly he does  not  fall
             within paragraph 7(b) or (c) of the guidance.


         47.  There is no evidence appellant is on a stop list.  It  appears
             that the appellant was identified at the airport by K  because
             he knew him and not because the authorities were  looking  for
             him specifically.  The  appellant  was  not  arrested  at  the
             airport which is consistent with objective evidence that  only
             those on a stop list are arrested at the airport.  I find that
             the appellant does not  come  within  paragraph  7(d)  of  the
             guidance.


         48.  The appellant has no past history of personal involvement with
             the LTTE.  Although he sold boat parts to a member of the LTTE
             there is no reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  this  is
             likely to lead the Sri Lankan authorities to perceive  him  as
             posing a present risk to the present unity of the  Sri  Lankan
             state.  The appellant does not fall within paragraph 8 of  the
             guidance.


         49.  At the highest, the appellant might be someone  who  would  be
             monitored on return.  The appellant  has  consistently  denied
             that he was a member of the LTTE, that he was involved in  any
             way in LTTE activities or that his family  was  involved  with
             the LTTE.  As already  stated  the  appellant  has  not  given
             evidence that he has been involved in any  activities  in  the
             United Kingdom and I find that monitoring of the appellant  is
             likely to lead the authorities to the conclusion that he  does
             not pose  a  risk  to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state.   The
             appellant does not fall within paragraph 9 of  the  guidance."




5.   Miss Jegarajah did not rely on either Article 3 or  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR in relation to the appellant's medical  condition  but  the  judge
    considered the appellant's position both under Article  8  and  outside
    the Rules and found that the respondent's  decision  was  proportionate
    and dismissed the appeal both on asylum and human rights grounds.

6.   There was an application for permission to appeal and the grounds  were
    considered by  a  First-tier  Judge  on  22  August  2016.   The  judge
    described the grounds  as  lengthy  and  inarticulate.   It  was  noted
    however that having accepted that the appellant had been  detained  and
    ill-treated in Sri Lanka that there was a tension and arguable lack  of
    reasoning for concluding that the appellant had failed to bring himself
    within the categories of risk on return to Sri Lanka  set  out  in  the
    country guidance in GJ.

7.   In the respondent's response dated 7 September 2016  it  was  submitted
    that the  judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant did  not  fall  within  any  of  the  risk  categories.   His
    assessment  had  provided  sufficient  explanation  as   to   why   the
    appellant's previous detention and ill-treatment was not indicative  of
    an ongoing risk.

8.   Mr Butterworth relied on a skeleton argument given  that  it  had  been
    found that the grounds were not the clearest.  I observe that  it  does
    not appear  that  the  grounds  would  have  been  settled  by  Counsel
    previously instructed who is of course very experienced in these cases.
     He submitted that the risk identified in the country guidance was  not
    confined to those who were a threat to the unitary  Sri  Lankan  state.
    They would be at risk if they were perceived to pose a threat.

9.   The background was that the appellant had sold boat parts to K whom  he
    had come to know following a motor vehicle accident.   K  was  involved
    with the LTTE.  He had identified the appellant at  the  airport.   The
    judge had accepted that the LTTE might seek to use  former  members  of
    the LTTE as informers.  The judge accepted that the  appellant's  claim
    was plausible and that he suffered  from  PTSD  and  had  had  a  major
    depressive episode.  He had scars which were highly consistent with the
    manner in which he claimed they were caused.   The  judge  had  further
    accepted the appellant had been detained and ill-treated and  that  the
    failure to claim asylum on his return in April 2015 was not damaging to
    his credibility.  The judge had also accepted that the appellant  might
    be someone who would be monitored on return.

10.  Counsel placed emphasis  on  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    accepted to have been detained and tortured.  Past persecution  was  an
    excellent indicator of  future  persecution  and  Counsel  referred  to
    Demirkaya v Secretary of State [1999] EWCA Civ 1654.  In  paragraph  20
    of Demirkaya it was submitted by Counsel

         "That the treatment which the  appellant  received  in  the  months
         before he  escaped  from  Turkey  was  life-threatening  and  of  a
         particularly  horrifying  kind.   This  is  very  relevant  to  the
         question  whether  the  appellant  has  a  well-founded   fear   of
         persecution on his return, yet the Tribunal do not advert  to  this
         aspect of the case at all."


    Counsel referred to MacDonald's Immigration Law and Practice as well as
    "the law of refugee status" by Professor Hathaway.  While it was  clear
    from Adan v Secretary of State [1999] 1AC 293 that an applicant had  to
    show a current well-founded fear historic fear might  provide  evidence
    to establish present fear.  The judgment continues

         "21.     This seems to be no more than common sense.   Because  the
             Tribunal do not refer  in  terms  to  his  experiences  before
             leaving Turkey, it is difficult to know how  they  would  deal
             with the matter.  There does not appear to be any evidence  of
             a significant change in Turkey.  Indeed  the  Amnesty  Reports
             and Mr Oberdiek's report suggest the contrary in the  case  of
             persons suspected rightly or wrongly of having links with  the
             PKK or with a history of detention in recent years ...


         22.  In my judgment if it is the opinion of the Tribunal that there
             has been such a significant change that the  appellant  is  no
             longer at risk, it is incumbent upon them to explain why  this
             is so.  In the absence of such explanation and  reasoning,  it
             seems to me there may be a real risk that someone who, because
             of his suspected association with the PKK,  was  subjected  to
             such appalling treatment before  he  fled  the  country,  will
             suffer more than transient ill-treatment  on  arrival  at  the
             airport and in the day or so thereafter that he  is  detained.
             Accordingly, I have come to the conclusion that the Tribunal's
             conclusion cannot be sustained."


    The appellant had been detained and tortured only  a  year  previously,
    some six years after the civil war had ended.  There was no evidence of
    a significant change since the case of GJ.  The appellant had  returned
    in the GJ era and indeed three years after  the  date  of  the  country
    guidance.  There  was  no  evidence  in  the  previous  year  that  the
    situation in Sri Lanka  had  got  better  or  that  there  had  been  a
    significant change.  He had been tortured in 2015 and how could  it  be
    said, Counsel asked rhetorically, that he would not be tortured  again.
    There was a reasonable likelihood of this happening.

11.  Counsel referred to additional  submissions  based  on  the  background
    evidence in the light of what Counsel previously  instructed  had  told
    him she had put forward before the First-tier Judge.  Reliance had been
    placed on the respondent's  Country  Information  and  Guidance  Report
    dated 28 August 2014.  Reference was also made to  paragraphs  275  and
    394 of GJ.

12.  Miss Isherwood submitted there was  no  material  error  of  law.   The
    appellant's family had had no problems and he had not been charged.  It
    was not said that the authorities had been looking for him and  Counsel
    had said in her submissions that arrest at the  airport  did  not  take
    place unless a person was on a stop list and a warrant was required.

13.  The appellant had only been involved with K  and  the  family  had  not
    been involved with the LTTE.  The individual facts of a case should  be
    looked at as established by GJ.  The Presenting  Officer's  submissions
    had been set out at paragraphs 24 to 25 of the determination.

14.  The appellant had been identified by K because he knew him.  The  judge
    had found in paragraph 48 that the appellant had had no past history of
    personal involvement with the LTTE.  He had simply sold boat parts.  It
    was never his case that he had had any membership  of  the  LTTE.   Any
    monitoring would not show that the appellant posed a risk.  The grounds
    simply express disagreement with the findings.  Miss Isherwood referred
    to MP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829.  She also referred to  paragraph
    311 of GJ.  The majority of the examples  of  ill-treatment  on  return
    were of persons who had "significant  LTTE  links  (whether  direct  or
    familial)."  The government's concern now was not "with past membership
    or sympathy, but with whether a person is  a  destabilising  threat  in
    post-conflict Sri Lanka."  There was a sophisticated monitoring  system
    in place and it was apparent from  paragraph  325  that  previous  LTTE
    connections or sympathies were not sufficient.  The Tribunal had stated
    "the extent to which past links predict future  adverse  interest  will
    always be fact specific." Miss Isherwood drew a distinction between the
    profile of the appellants in GJ with  the  appellant  before  me.   The
    judge had correctly applied the guidance.

15.  Miss Isherwood responded to the additional  arguments  put  forward  by
    Counsel in relation to the objective evidence.  In reply Mr Butterworth
    made it clear he was principally relying on the Demirkaya point and the
    fact that there had not been shown to be any significant  change  since
    2015.  Paragraph 6 of the head note in GJ made it clear that  any  risk
    for those in whom the authorities were  or  became  interested  was  on
    arrival in the home area rather than at  the  airport.   The  Court  of
    Appeal in MP had not found the country guidance to  be  incorrect.   In
    relation to the background evidence it was  submitted  that  there  had
    been no significant change since the appellant had been tortured.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions it was agreed that if  I  were  to
    identify a material error of law it would not be necessary to reconvene
    the hearing and  both  sides  had  had  the  opportunity  to  make  the
    submissions that they  wished  on  the  material  that  had  been  made
    available.

17.  I reserved my decision.  I am guided by what is set out in the  country
    guidance case of GJ and in particular the  head  note  which  reads  as
    follows:

         "(1)     This determination replaces all existing country  guidance
             on Sri Lanka.


         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.


         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.


         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.


         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.


         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.


         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:


             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.




             (b)      Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                  human  rights  activists,  who,  in  either   case,   have
                  criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its
                  human  rights  record,  or   who   are   associated   with
                  publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.


             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses.


             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.


         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.


         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is
             not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport  but  will
             be monitored by the security services after his or her return.
             If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person  is  a
             Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan
             state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in
             question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained
             by the security forces.  That will be a question  of  fact  in
             each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by
             such an individual.


         (10)     Consideration must always be  given  to  whether,  in  the
             light  of  an  individual's  activities  and  responsibilities
             during the  civil  war,  the  exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
             (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the
             Qualification  Directive).   Regard  should  be  had  to   the
             categories  for  exclusion  set  out   in   the   "Eligibility
             Guidelines For Assessing the International Protection Needs of
             Asylum-Seekers from Sri  Lanka",  published  by  UNHCR  on  21
             December 2012."


18. In this case the judge accepted that the appellant  had  been  detained
    and ill-treated in a serious fashion and had been released  on  payment
    of a bribe.  This had not occurred at a distant period in the past  but
    in the previous year.  Counsel's submission is very simple  and  in  my
    view unanswerable.  He relies on what is said in Demirkaya.  There  was
    not any evidence of any significant change  in  the  situation  in  Sri
    Lanka since his detention.  The country guidance had not changed.

19. In my view it was a material error of law for the  judge  not  to  make
    express reference to the principles set  out  in  Demirkaya  which  are
    reflected in paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules:

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."


20. In paragraph 44 of the decision  the  judge  makes  it  clear  that  he
    accepted that the appellant had been ill-treated in Sri Lanka  and  was
    afraid of the authorities.  It is clear that he has a  fear  of  return
    but it is also clear (in the light of Sivakumaran v Secretary of  State
    [1987] UKHL; [1988] AC 958) that he must demonstrate that that fear  is
    well-founded. In this case  I  accept  Counsel's  submission  that  the
    appellant's  case  is  similar  to  the  circumstances  identified   in
    Demirkaya.  The appellant had suffered serious ill-treatment in  prison
    and his treatment was relevant to the issue  of  whether  his  fear  of
    persecution on return was well-founded

21. The country guidance prevailing at the time of the ill-treatment is the
    country guidance which  I  am  now  considering.   There  has  been  no
    significant  change  in  the  objective  evidence  since  that  country
    guidance.  It is a question of perception that  is  important.   It  is
    clear that the appellant himself has no interest in the LTTE  but  that
    did not protect him previously and on the Demirkaya principle it is not
    established that his innocence will protect  him  again.   There  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that he will be perceived as  a  threat
    and have further experience  of  the  ill-treatment  that  he  recently
    suffered. The circumstances  of  each  case  will  always  need  to  be
    considered on their own particular facts as was said in  paragraph  325
    of GJ "the extent to which past links predict future  adverse  interest
    will always be fact specific."

22. For the reasons I have given I find that the decision of the First-tier
    Judge was materially flawed in law.  I re-make the decision.





Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum and protection grounds.  The appeal was  not
pursued before me in relation to Article 8.

I consider that it is appropriate to make an  anonymity  direction  in  this
case.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the event that a fee was paid or payable that fee should be  returned  to
the appellant.


Signed                                  Date 12 October 2016

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
