
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03780/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2018                          |On 22 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AP
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
                    Hartigan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (SSHD) against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Gribble (the judge), promulgated on 23 August 2018,  allowing  AP's
        appeal (hereafter claimant) against the SSHD's decision,  dated  26
        February 2018 refusing the claimant's protection and  human  rights
        claim.


   Background


     2. This appeal has a somewhat complex history. The  issue  for  me  to
        determine is however narrow. Did  the  judge  err  in  law  in  her
        assessment of the internal relocation alternative available to  the
        claimant?


     3. The SSHD has not challenged any of the  judge's  factual  findings.
        The essential, and now unchallenged factual matrix is  as  follows.
        The claimant is a national of Jamaica born in 1966. In 1992,  while
        living in Jamaica, she was attacked with acid whilst  pregnant  and
        blinded in one eye. She informed the police of the identity of  her
        attacker, but his associates visited her and threatened  her.  They
        were members of the "Rat Bat" gang. She again reported the  threats
        to the police and then  moved  away  with  her  5  children...  The
        claimant's cousin visited her a few months later but was shot  dead
        in an act of reprisal. The claimant again informed the police.

     4. The claimant attained  some  protection  from  the  gang  when  she
        entered  a  relationship  with  DH  in  1993,  who  had   his   own
        'connections'. They separated however in  2000  and,  in  the  same
        year, the claimant was then  shot  in  the  leg  by  Rat  bat  gang
        members. She began moving between friends' homes to stay  ahead  of
        the gang and eventually fled to the UK in 2002 leaving her children
        in the care of her sisters and other relatives. She sought leave to
        enter as a visitor  but  was  refused  and  absconded  after  being
        granted Temporary Admission. She came to light in 2005 and made  an
        asylum claim based on her fear of the Rat Bat gang. The application
        was refused and an appeal dismissed in September 2005. The claimant
        was found to be incredible by the AIT judge.

     5. The claimant's niece and nephew were shot dead in Jamaica in August
        and October 2005 respectively, and another nephew died after  being
        shot in the chest. Interviews carried out by the BBC outlined  that
        the claimant's  name  and  face  had  been  broadcast  on  Jamaican
        television in early December 2005 with a report that she was  being
        deported to Jamaica. Newspaper cuttings provided from the same time
        supporting this. Then in April 2008 the claimant's partner was shot
        and killed in Jamaica. The claimant was granted Indefinite Leave to
        Remain (ILR) under the legacy policy in June 2010.


     6. In May 2012 the claimant was convicted after trial of an offence of
        wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm and sentenced to
        12 years in prison. In 2015 the  Bat  Gang  killed  another  family
        member, a  nephew.  She  was  informed  that  she  was  liable  for
        deportation in 2016. A deportation order was made  on  23  February
        2018 and on 26 February 2018 the SSHD refused  her  protection  and
        human rights claim, leading to the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. The SSHD issued a s.72  certificate  in  respect  of  the
        asylum aspect of the claim to the  effect  that  the  claimant  was
        presumed to have been convicted of a particularly serious crime and
        to constitute a danger to the community in the UK.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     7. The judge had a large bundle of  documents  before  her  including,
        inter alia, the AIT decision  from  2005,  the  sentencing  judge's
        remarks, the Reasons for Refusal Letter,  medical  reports  on  the
        claimant's physical and mental health, a Country Expert report, and
        a bundle of background material including the most  recent  Country
        Policy  and  Information  Note  'Jamaica,  background   information
        including actors of protection and internal relocation' from  March
        2018. The judge noted that the conclusions of the  various  medical
        reports were not challenged. The judge heard oral evidence from the
        claimant and from JC, who formerly employed her as a  cleaner,  and
        summarised that evidence in clear terms.


     8. The judge summarised the  expert  report  from  Prof  Shirley  Tate
        (which concluded that there would be no sufficiency  of  protection
        for  the  claimant  due  to  police  underfunding,  corruption  and
        involvement in criminal gangs, that internal  relocation  would  be
        ineffective due to the size of the island and  the  fact  that  the
        claimant's name and face were known because of the  BBC  interview,
        and that in addition, her need  for  health  care  would  mean  her
        whereabouts would become known,  and  the  claimant  would  not  be
        protected by the witness protection programme because she  had  not
        been a witness in a major crime), and the psychological  assessment
        filed by Dr Mohammed Abou-Saleh.  The  medical  evidence  indicated
        that the claimant had diabetes and pancreatitis, that she had  pain
        in her leg and needed to walk with a stick, that  she  had  angina,
        thyroid disease and a  gynaecological  problem.  In  terms  of  her
        mental health, the claimant was prescribed antipsychotic medication
        and an antidepressant. Her psychological symptoms  were  consistent
        with the diagnosis of PTSD. Dr Mohammed  Abou-Saleh  diagnosed  the
        claimant as  suffering  from  complex  PTSD  with  excess  anxiety,
        depressive and psychotic symptoms (hallucination) in the context of
        her PTSD. He concluded that, if returned,  she  would  most  likely
        experience constant and intense fear and her psychiatric  condition
        would worsen further with increased  risk  for  self-harm.  It  was
        noted that the claimant said she would take her own life if removal
        was imminent. Dr Abou-Saleh said that the claimant's perception  of
        the reality of the threat to her life was such that there  were  no
        reasonable  mechanisms  to   minimalize   the   risk   of   further
        deterioration in her mental health condition and the risk of  self-
        harm and suicide.


     9. The judge accurately directed himself in respect of the legal  test
        under article 3 and the appropriate burden and standard of proof.

    10. In the section headed "Consideration of the Evidence and  Findings"
        the judge indicated that she  had  read  the  medical  reports  and
        considered the evidence with anxious scrutiny. The judge upheld the
        section 72 certificate. The judge then  considered  the  claimant's
        credibility since the  decision  of  the  AIT  and,  based  on  the
        significant volume of evidence not available to the AIT, found that
        the claimant's account was likely to be true. The judge found  that
        the claimant wholeheartedly believed she would be at risk from  the
        criminal gang in Jamaica, and that her fear from the Rat  Bat  gang
        was well founded. The judge then found that the claimant  would  be
        unable to access the witness protection programme because  she  was
        not a current witness, which was consistent with  the  Home  Office
        Guidance. The judge concluded that there would be no sufficiency of
        protection if the claimant returned to her  home  area.  There  has
        been no challenge to any of these findings.

    11. The judge then considered the issue  of  internal  relocation,  and
        properly directed herself as to the "unduly harsh"  test.  At  [85]
        the judge noted that, as a deportee, the claimant would be entitled
        to some money from the Facilitated Returns Scheme, but that Jamaica
        was a small island when news travelled fast, that there had been  a
        spike in the murder  rate  of  returnees,  albeit  that  they  were
        British citizens, and that  there  were  also  reports  of  baggage
        handlers and taxi drivers at the airport tipping  off  gangs  about
        returnees, leading to a risk that wherever she was the claimant may
        be found.

    12. Then at [86] the judge took into account the claimant's  age,  lack
        of education and her  physical  and  mental  health  problems,  and
        concluded, by reference to AH (Sudan)  [2007]  UKHL  49,  that  she
        would not be able to live a relatively normal life in another  part
        of Jamaica as she had no family she could rely on,  had  been  away
        for over 13 years, was to all intents  and  purposes  unemployable,
        and that any funds available to her  to  rent  accommodation  would
        soon run out, leading her to poverty and a  likely  return  to  the
        "garrison" areas of Jamaica which were  all  she  knew.  The  judge
        consequently  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of   the
        protection claim under Article 3.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of permission and the parties' submissions

    13. The Grounds contend, that the judge failed  to  apply  the  country
        guidance  case   of   AB   (Protection   -criminal   gangs-internal
        relocation) Jamaica  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00018  in  respect  of  the
        availability  of  internal  relocation.  Reference  was   made   to
        paragraph 164 of AB where it was found that, except in high-profile
        cases, persons in the appellant's position would not  face  a  real
        risk of being detected by criminal gangs based in inner-city  urban
        areas. Given that it was not suggested that there  was  no  medical
        treatment available for the claimant, and the acknowledgement  that
        assistance was available from the FRS, it was  submitted  that  the
        judge failed to give clear  reasons  why  this  claimant  would  be
        considered  a  high-profile  case  and   therefore   incapable   of
        internally relocating in Jamaica. In granting permission the First-
        tier Tribunal held the grounds to be arguable and  noted  that  the
        judge's conclusions appeared to lack of rigour.


    14. Mr Avery submitted that the judge failed to adequately consider  AB
        (Jamaica), that welfare provisions were available in  Jamaica,  and
        that the appellant  in  AB  (Jamaica)  was  also  in  a  vulnerable
        psychological state (although it was  accepted  that  AB  did  have
        family support whereas the appellant, on the  unchallenged  factual
        finding, had no family support). Mr  Sellwood  submitted  that  the
        narrow grounds of appeal related to whether the judge was  entitled
        to find that the claimant would be targeted by  the  criminal  gang
        outside her home, area and not to  the  judge's  findings  that  it
        would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for other reasons for her  to
        relocate. It was open to the SSHD to amend his grounds but  he  did
        not do so. In any event, the judge found that the  claimant  was  a
        high profile risk given the severity of the attacks on her and  her
        extended family, and the media  interest  in  her  return.  It  was
        submitted that the judge clearly had AB (Jamaica) in mind and  that
        the judge gave adequate reasons for concluding  that  it  would  be
        unduly harsh to expect this particular claimant with her particular
        characteristics to relocate.

    15. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

    16. I am satisfied, for the following reasons, that the  decision  does
        not disclose a material error on a point of law.


    17. I appreciate that the judges' direct assessment of the availability
        of internal relocation is relatively  brief,  but  this  assessment
        cannot  be  considered  in  isolation.  In  a  detailed  and  well-
        structured decision, the judge carefully set out  her  findings  of
        fact which included a large  number  of  very  serious  and  deadly
        attacks on the claimant and her family over a prolonged  period  of
        time. The judge found that the claimant's estranged  children  were
        effectively in hiding outside of the 'garrison' areas and that they
        continued to receive threats and face harassment. There has been no
        challenge to these findings. The judge found  that  the  claimant's
        name and face had been broadcast on Jamaican television in December
        2005 and that there had been newspaper articles  published  at  the
        time concerning her possible return to Jamaica. This indicates that
        the claimant's case is high profile, as understood in AB (Jamaica).
        It is clear from the decision, read as a whole, that the judge  was
        acutely aware of the Country Guidance case and that she  must  have
        considered the  claimant  to  be  a  high-profile  target  of  this
        particular criminal gang. At [85] the judge  noted  that  news  was
        likely to travel fast given the small  size  of  Jamaica  and  that
        there were reports of baggage handlers  and  taxi  drivers  at  the
        airport tipping  off  gangs  about  returnees.  Given  the  judge's
        previous findings that the claimant had been  long  sought  by  the
        criminal gang, that members of her family had  been  shot  dead  in
        retaliation over a period of years, that her remaining family where
        still living in fear under constant threats,  and  the  significant
        media interest in her, it is necessarily and irresistibly  implicit
        in the judge's findings that she considered the claimant  to  be  a
        high profile case and that there was a real risk she would be found
        where ever she went. I therefore  find  no  error  in  the  judge's
        analysis of the internal relocation alternative so far as risk from
        the criminal gang is concerned. This is sufficient  to  dispose  of
        the SSHD's appeal.


    18. I am nevertheless satisfied, in the alternative, that even  if  the
        judge was not entitled to find that the claimant would still be  at
        risk in other parts of Jamaica, that her assessment as  to  whether
        it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect this  particular
        claimant to relocate does not disclose any legal error.  The  judge
        properly asked herself whether it would be unduly harsh  to  expect
        the claimant to relocate  to  another  part  of  Jamaica,  properly
        referred to the applicable authority  on  internal  relocation  (AH
        (Sudan)), and properly took into account the claimant's  particular
        characteristics. These included the judge's  unchallenged  findings
        that the claimant was, to all intents and  purposes,  unemployable,
        the absence of any network of family or other informal support  for
        the claimant, and the claimant's significant  physical  and  mental
        health problems,  as  outlined  in  paragraph  8  of  my  decision,
        indicating that she  would  most  likely  experience  constant  and
        intense fear wherever she went given her perception of the  reality
        of the threat to her life. While  the  judge  did  not  delve  into
        detail in her assessment at  [86],  she  referred  to  all  factors
        relevant for an internal relocation assessment and her findings  in
        respect of internal relocation have to be read  junction  with  her
        earlier factual  findings.  I  consequently  find  that  the  judge
        entitled to her  conclusion  in  respect  of  the  availability  of
        internal relocation for the reasons she gave.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the making  of  an  error
on a point of law. The SSHD's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                                15 November 2018

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
