
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/03792/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 15 February 2018                    |           On 25 April 2018         |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     D T
                        (ANONYMITY HAS BEEN DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bayati, Counsel for A & P Solicitors, Middlesex
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  9  October  1996.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  5  April  2017,
    refusing to  grant  him  asylum  and  also  refusing  him  humanitarian
    protection and refusing his claim on human rights  grounds  within  the
    Rules and outside the Rules.  His appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Abebrese  on  19  October  2017.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Alis on 24  December  2017.
    The permission states that the grounds argue that the  Judge  erred  in
    his approach to the medical evidence that  had  been  served  and  made
    errors of fact, failed to have regard to material evidence and attached
    insufficient  weight  to  the  appellant's  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The permission states that all the grounds are  arguable  and
    that the medical report, although it was referred to, was given limited
    consideration when the  Judge  assessed  the  appellant's  claim.   The
    permission also states that the Judge  may  have  overlooked  documents
    contained in the bundle and may not have considered how the appellant's
    activities in the UK may be viewed by the authorities in Sri Lanka.


 3. There is a Rule 24 response which states that the Judge has  considered
    all the evidence in the round and was entitled to reach his  conclusion
    dismissing the appeal.  The Judge  accepted  the  Presenting  Officer's
    submission about the weight  which  should  be  given  to  the  medical
    report, given that the scars are more than  six  months  old  and  with
    regard to the submission re Colonel Jayam, although the  grounds  argue
    that more weight should be given to the witness's evidence they do  not
    address the reasoning given by the judge at paragraphs 41 to 43 of  the
    decision which is sustainable.


The Hearing


 4. Counsel first of all dealt with the grounds relating to the  errors  of
    fact made by the  Judge  and  the  Judge's  failure  to  take  material
    evidence into account.

 5. I was referred to paragraph 8 of the grounds which deals with paragraph
    43 of the Judge's decision.  At paragraph  43  the  Judge  states  that
    there is no documentary proof of the wedding but there was  a  marriage
    certificate before him in the appellant's  bundle.   Counsel  submitted
    that at paragraph 42 the Judge  states  that  the  appellant  does  not
    appear to know the name of the man who claims  to  be  Colonel  Jayam's
    brother.  She submitted that there was a photograph of him  before  the
    Judge, Colonel Jayam's  brother  gave  written  evidence  and  actually
    attended the hearing and gave oral evidence before the Judge so clearly
    the Judge did not look  properly  at  the  evidence.   The  appellant's
    brother-in-law was the groom at the wedding so this  explains  why  the
    appellant attended the wedding.  Counsel submitted that there was clear
    evidence before the Judge of the links between Colonel Jayam's  brother
    and the appellant and I was asked to consider the asylum interview. The
    appellant was detained in Sri Lanka because he  was  in  a  photo  with
    Colonel Jayam's brother.  She submitted that for the Judge to say  that
    there was no credible evidence before him on these matters must  be  an
    error of law and she pointed out that the Judge made no  mention  of  a
    lot of the evidence before him.  She submitted  that  this  must  be  a
    material error of law as it goes to the appellant's credibility.


 6. Counsel then referred to paragraph 40 of  the  decision  in  which  the
    Judge states that it is not credible that the  appellant  was  friendly
    with three boys he played cricket with who had been members of the LTTE
    and who had been rehabilitated as it is not credible that "the boys did
    not tell the appellant they had been members  of  the  LTTE".   Counsel
    submitted that the appellant knew they had been in the LTTE.   This  is
    obvious from the appellant's statement and  his  interview  and  I  was
    asked to  consider  the  Judge's  decision  at  paragraph  6.   Counsel
    submitted that again the Judge did not properly consider  the  evidence
    before him.  I was referred to paragraph 12 of the grounds in which  it
    is stated that the  Judge  erred  in  fact  when  he  stated  that  the
    appellant's claim that his two brother-in-laws'  involvement  with  the
    LTTE is vague and based purely on what he overheard his  mother  saying
    and is not further substantiated by credible evidence.  His brother-in-
    law M S gave evidence before the Judge and showed his interview  record
    to the Judge along with evidence that he is a  refugee  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Counsel submitted that the claims made by the appellant  were
    fully substantiated by documentary evidence and oral evidence which the
    Judge did  not  reject.   Counsel  also  referred  to  the  appellant's
    father's statement, submitting that the Judge made no findings on this.
     She submitted that when all these errors are taken together they  must
    form a material error of law and the Judge's  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

 7. Counsel then referred to the medical evidence by Dr Martin.  The  Judge
    refers to this and at paragraph 45 states  "I  considered  the  medical
    evidence as part of my holistic assessment and analysis of the evidence
    in this appeal."  He goes on to say  that  the  appellant's  scars  are
    dated more than six months ago.  The Judge did not find the core of the
    claim to be credible and then finds that the medical evidence does  not
    indicate that the appellant was arrested, detained and  tortured.   The
    role of the medical expert is not  to  challenge  the  account  of  the
    events presented to him by the appellant and Counsel submitted that the
    Judge has  not  looked  at  the  medical  evidence  holistically.   She
    submitted that this is a misdirection of law as the Judge  had  reached
    his conclusion on credibility before considering the medical  evidence.
    She submitted that to say that the scars are over six months  old  does
    not mean that they were not caused in the way in  which  the  appellant
    states they were caused.  The doctor states that the scars are  typical
    of torture.  The appellant was burnt by a hot implement.   The  medical
    evidence should have been looked at along with all the evidence  before
    the Judge, and again  Counsel  submitted  that  the  Judge  misdirected
    himself in law.

 8. Counsel then referred to the appellant's  diaspora  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Before his interview he had attended one demonstration
    for the TGTE.  His evidence was that he was a volunteer member  of  the
    TGTE which is a proscribed organisation.  Membership cards were  before
    the Judge.  At  paragraph  44  the  Judge  states  that  the  appellant
    admitted that he was inactive politically in his own country  but  that
    since his arrival in the UK he  has  become  active  and  has  gone  to
    several meetings and demonstrations.  The Judge takes the view that the
    appellant did this to bolster his claim and he refers  to  the  Country
    Guidance case of GJ & Others [2013] UKUT00319.  Counsel submitted  that
    even if the appellant had no political profile in Sri Lanka  this  does
    not mean that becoming a member of the TGTE in the United Kingdom  does
    not put him at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  She submitted that if  the
    Sri Lankan authorities are aware of this he will be at risk and will be
    perceived  by  the  authorities  to  be  a  member  of   a   proscribed
    organisation.  She submitted that the organisation was  not  proscribed
    until after the said case of GJ was promulgated.  She submitted that it
    is still proscribed and he is a volunteer member and this has not  been
    properly considered by the Judge.  He has  made  his  findings  in  one
    sentence and I was asked to find that all the grounds  have  merit  and
    the case should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal.


 9. The Presenting Officer made his submissions, submitting that this is  a
    Mubanga case and it has to be considered whether  the  Judge  took  the
    medical evidence into account together with the rest  of  the  evidence
    before making his findings.  He submitted that there is case law  which
    states that it is not wrong to  consider  the  medical  evidence  after
    considering the rest of the evidence.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge
    states that he has considered the  medical  evidence  as  part  of  his
    holistic assessment.


10. The Presenting Officer referred to the doctor accepting the appellant's
    account at face value and stating that the scars  are  typical  of  the
    type of trauma described by the appellant but there are other  possible
    causes.  Because of these other possible  causes  the  Judge  gave  the
    medical  report  little  weight  when  considering   credibility.    He
    submitted that the Judge did not rule out the doctor's  report  totally
    but the doctor did comment that  the  scars  could  be  by  proxy.   He
    submitted that this is not a material error on the Judge's part.


11. With regard to the appellant's voluntary  membership  of  a  proscribed
    organisation, he submitted that this will not bring the appellant under
    suspicion of the authorities in Sri Lanka.  The  Judge  has  considered
    the said case of GJ relating to sur place activities at paragraphs 335,
    336 and 351.  This states that only high profile members are  at  risk.
    The Presenting Officer then referred me  to  the  case  of  Gheisari  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1854.
    Paragraph 14  states that when  a  Judge  states  that  an  appellant's
    evidence lacks the ring of truth this should be  accepted.   The  Judge
    had all the evidence before him but still did not find the  appellant's
    evidence had the ring of truth.


12. The Presenting Officer submitted that there are some factual errors but
    the Judge has considered everything in the round and it is  clear  that
    he believed nothing the appellant said.  I was referred to paragraph 39
    onwards in the  decision.   The  Judge  finds  the  appellant  to  lack
    credibility. He makes negative findings.  He submitted that  the  Judge
    was entitled to reach the conclusion he  did  and  I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 40 of the decision which refers to vagueness and  a  lack  of
    credibility; paragraph 41 which refers to a lack  of  credibility  (the
    time gap between the arrest and the appellant's sister's wedding  being
    11 months); and paragraph 42 relating to the photographs.  He submitted
    that the factual error at paragraph 43 is not material.  (This was  the
    issue of the marriage certificate of the sister).  At paragraph 44  the
    Judge refers to there being no ring of truth and the Presenting Officer
    submitted that the Judge was entitled to rely on his findings and there
    is no material error of law.


13. I asked Counsel if she believes that  the  fact  the  appellant  was  a
    volunteer member of the TGTE would mean he  would  be  found  to  be  a
    separatist on return and she submitted that that is the case.  He could
    be detained on return, but the Judge has not considered that  issue  or
    assessed risk properly.  She submitted that the authorities know of the
    appellant's involvement in the  TGTE  and  asked  me  to  consider  his
    activities in the United Kingdom.  She submitted that even  if  he  has
    been trying to bolster his claim, these activities are relevant to risk
    on return.


14. Counsel then referred to the medical report at  6.3  where  mention  is
    made of the scarring being possibly by proxy.  Counsel  submitted  that
    the medical evidence found that this was  only  a  remote  possibility.
    She submitted that the alternative should be looked at and it is highly
    material that the appellant has evidence of torture and this should  be
    given weight.


15. Counsel submitted that the Judge made no findings about  the  witnesses
    before him, their relationships or the photographs  from  the  wedding.
    She submitted that all of these go to credibility.  She submitted  that
    at paragraph 9 the appellant is found to be vague  but  he  made  clear
    that his brother-in-laws were in  the  LTTE  and  there  was  also  the
    evidence about Colonel Jayam.  Counsel submitted  that  the  Judge  was
    wrong to reject the claim.  All of these matters should have been taken
    into account when his credibility findings were made.


16. She submitted that  the  Judge  should  have  taken  into  account  the
    photographic evidence and considered this along with  the  evidence  of
    the witnesses, but did not.


17. She submitted that the said case of Gheisari does  not  take  this  any
    further.  In that case there was only one witness and  the  Judge  made
    his finding based on credibility but that is not  the  case  here.   In
    this case the Judge has made his assessment without taking into account
    all the evidence before him, and I was asked to  find  that  there  are
    material errors of law throughout this decision.

Decision and Reasons

18. The Judge has made a number of errors of fact and does not seem to have
    properly considered all the evidence before him.  If he did he has  not
    referred to it  and  his  decision  indicates  that  he  may  not  have
    understood what was before  him,  e.g.   the  significance  of  Colonel
    Jayam's brother giving evidence at the hearing.   The  Judge  indicates
    that he was unaware of the relationship of the  appellant  and  Colonel
    Jayam's family but the  evidence  could  not  have  been  clearer,  the
    photograph, the written evidence and the oral evidence.

19. There are credibility issues in the evidence but the evidence  has  not
    been properly considered and some of the evidence, e.g. the appellant's
    father's statement is not referred to at all in the decision. The Judge
    does not have to mention all the evidence before him  in  his  decision
    but the omissions in this case are likely to have infected the  Judge's
    final decision.


20.  The  Judge  dismisses  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities as being purely to bolster his claim but even if that is the
    case these activities should have been  taken  into  account  when  the
    Judge considered  risk  on  return.   The  TGTE  is  now  a  proscribed
    organisation although it was not proscribed when the said  case  of  GJ
    and others was decided.


21. I accept that this is a Mubanga case and that the Judge may  well  have
    reached his decision on  credibility  before  considering  the  medical
    evidence, in spite of stating  that  he  considered  this  holistically
    along with the rest of the evidence.   He  has  not  made  satisfactory
    findings on the medical evidence which is supportive in the main of the
    appellant's claim to have been tortured. Instead he has taken only  the
    negative points in the medical report into account


22. I find that when  all  these  matters  are  taken  together  there  are
    material errors of law in the Judge's decision.

Notice of Decision


I direct that the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   None
of its findings are to stand other than as a record  of  what  was  said  on
that occasion.  It is appropriate in terms of  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to  the  First-Tier
Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the claim are  not
to include Judge Abebrese.

Anonymity has been directed.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
