
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/03583/2019 (V)
                                                           PA/03515/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC by Skype for business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On the 18 November 2020                    |On the 01 December 2020         |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                  JV and KH
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Katani, Solicitor advocate instructed on
                    behalf of the appellants
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellants are citizens of El-Salvador.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify them. This direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. Their appeals against the decision of the respondent refusing their
         protection claims were  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Buckwell) (hereinafter referred to as the  "FtTJ")  in  a  decision
         promulgated on the 24 September 2019.

      4. The FtTJ accepted that gangs operated throughout  El  Salvador  and
         that extortion also took place,  and when reaching a conclusion  on
         the appellant's claim, he accepted  the  incident  that  had  taken
         place in 2010 involving the bus being set alight and that the  gang
         that had been involved. However, the FtTJ did not accept  that  the
         appellants would be of interest to the  gangs  if  returned  to  El
         Salvador given the length of time that had elapsed of eight  years.
         In  the  alternative,  he  found  that  there  was  sufficiency  of
         protection and  that  it  was  reasonable  for  the  appellants  to
         relocate to a different area in El  Salvador.  The  FtTJ  therefore
         dismissed their appeals.

      5. Permission to appeal his decision was issued on the 7 October  2019
         and permission was refused however on renewal to the Upper Tribunal
         UTJ Judge Finch  on  22  May  2020  granted  permission  to  appeal
         stating:-

             "Having accepted in paragraph 125 of  his  decision  that  the
             objective  evidence  mirrors  the   account   given   by   the
             appellants; First Tribunal  Judge  Blackwell  then  failed  to
             exercise the anxious  scrutiny  needed  when  considering  the
             appellants' accounts in the context of this evidence.

             The appellants were applying for asylum from  a  country  from
             which few people apply for protection in the  United  Kingdom.
             Therefore, detailed, and anxious  scrutiny  should  have  been
             given to the very detailed expert report  provided  by  Joseph
             Wiltberger.

             Mr Wiltberger was clearly  very  well  qualified  to  give  an
             opinion on the risk that the appellants would face if  removed
             El Salvador and the first-tier Tribunal judge gave  no  cogent
             reason for doubting the expert's opinion. In his  report,  the
             expert clearly explained that gang members continue to pose  a
             threat to those they had targeted many years after an  initial
             incident  which  may  have  brought  the  individual  to   the
             attention of the gang.

             As a consequence, there were material errors  of  law  in  the
             first-tier tribunal  Judge  Blackwell's  decision  and  it  is
             appropriate to grant permission to appeal."

      6. In a decision promulgated on the 16 October  2020,  I  set  out  my
         reasons for reaching the conclusion that the decision of  the  FtTJ
         involved the making of an error on a point of law. That decision is
         attached and marked ( "Annex 1").

      7. Following that decision, the appeal was listed to be remade  before
         the Upper Tribunal. Neither party sought a face- to-  face  hearing
         or to call any oral evidence and advised the  Upper  Tribunal  that
         the decision could be remade on the evidence  before  the  Tribunal
         alongside the submissions of the parties.

      8. The hearing took place on 18 November 2020, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable and both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         the appellants. There  were  no  issues  regarding  sound,  or  any
         technical issues and I am satisfied both  advocates  were  able  to
         make their respective cases by the chosen means.

      9. In relation to the evidence relied upon by the appellants,  I  have
         the  bundles  of  documentation  that  was  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. The first bundle (pages 1-100) and second bundle  (1-33).
         The two bundles of documentation comprised of articles and  reports
         relating to El Salvador, to the operation of gangs in  the  country
         and to the government and police operations. In the second  bundle,
         there was a second police report dated 4/2/19 with the translation,
         other documentary evidence of actions taken by or on behalf of  the
         first appellant, an appeal statement of  the  first  appellant  and
         copy of family photographs. In addition, the appellant relied  upon
         an  expert  report  by   Joseph   Wiltberger   concerning   country
         conditions, an  email  from  the  appellant's  representatives  and
         clinical summary together with a certified translation  certificate
         confirming her death  on  31/1  2019.  In  respect  of  the  second
         appellant, the first bundle mirrored that of the  first  appellant.
         Second appellant also provided a witness statement.

     10. In addition, Mr Katani submitted a skeleton argument  in  which  he
         set out his written submissions on risk on return and the issues of
         sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

     11. There were  no  written  submissions  provided  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent.

     12. Mr Diwnycz also relied upon the  previous  bundle  which  contained
         copies of their respective asylum interviews,  witness  statements,
         articles relating to gangs and information concerning El  Salvador,
         and the decision letters.

     13. I also heard oral submissions from the advocates, and I am grateful
         to Mr Katani and Mr  Diwnycz  for  their  clear  oral  and  written
         submissions.

The factual basis of their claims:

     14. The appellants are uncle and niece and  are  both  citizens  of  El
         Salvador. Their claims that they are in fear of a  gang,  gangs  or
         gang members operating in their country of nationality and in  that
         respect both claimed to be members of a  particular  social  group,
         namely those fearing gangs.

     15. In respect of the  first  appellant,  he  had  assisted  passengers
         escaping from a bus which had been  set  alight  by  a  gang  named
         "Barrio 18" and this had taken place on the 20 June 2010. The first
         appellant stated that he had seen the gang kill the driver and then
         pour fuel into the bus. He had broken  a  window  on  the  bus  and
         helped three individuals to safety. It is said that  the  gang  had
         observed the first  appellant  and  two  others  who  had  assisted
         passengers. The first appellant said that he been shot  at  from  a
         distance and fled. On reaching his home he packed clothes and  left
         the area.

     16. Four days after the incident and taken place, the  first  appellant
         stated that gang members had come to his home and had spoken to his
         wife. They informed her that he would be  killed  as  a  result  of
         having helped people to survive the bus attack.  Subsequently  gang
         members came twice each week and death threats were repeated. After
         a period of  time  the  visits  became  less  frequent.  The  first
         appellant made reference having spoken out of the house  window  to
         gang members on one occasion when they threatened him directly that
         he would be killed. It was the appellant's case that he stayed  out
         of the home; when he did visit he would arrive in the early morning
         and would leave early so that he would not be  seen.  Sometimes  he
         would stay at home several weeks about leaving. The  appellant  was
         not able to work during that time and this behaviour continued  for
         a period of eight years.

     17. The first  appellant  stated  that  from  June  2016  gang  members
         demanded funds. The first appellant initially refused  to  pay  and
         contacted police. They had returned and the first appellant's  wife
         had paid them thousand dollars on one occasion. Thereafter the gang
         demanded $5000 each month. On one occasion gang members entered the
         home and took money themselves. The first appellant  complained  to
         the authorities.

     18. The first appellant stated that the harassment continued and that a
         threatening note was received in August 2018. The  first  appellant
         went into hiding. He stated  that  his  daughters  and  niece  were
         threatened and were followed in the streets.  The  first  appellant
         was seen by gang members at his home during October 2018 and  again
         was threatened with death. They  tried  but  failed  to  enter  the
         property.

     19. The first appellant stated that he and his family were taken to the
         home of his mother-in-law in a part of  xxx.  the  first  appellant
         remained there for between 18 - 20 days until questions were  asked
         by another gang called "xx" which had control in the  locality.  It
         was decided by the family to leave El Salvador.

     20. The basis of the first appellant's claim is that  he  would  be  at
         risk of serious  harm/persecution  in  El  Salvador  for  assisting
         members of the public to escape the incident in 2010 and  also  for
         failing to pay extortion money as demanded by the gang.

     21. The claim of  the  second  appellant,  who  lived  with  the  first
         appellant and his direct family members, referred to  gang  members
         extorting funds from the  wife  of  the  first  appellant  who  did
         business selling food from the garage  and  the  family  home.  The
         second appellant was unsure how many occasions, if more than  once,
         money had been handed over.  She  stated  that  gang  members  came
         approximately six times to the property in 2016.  She  referred  to
         the first appellant having reported matters twice in  2016  to  the
         authorities, but no police action was taken.

     22. Although the second appellant was not threatened personally between
         2010 and 2017, the gang threatened the first  appellant  that  they
         would take his daughters and that they  and  the  second  appellant
         would be forced into prostitution. On  a  Sunday  during  September
         2018 the second appellant was with the eldest daughter of the first
         appellant. A group of men shouted at both of them in the street and
         referred to the threat  that  they  would  be  forced  to  work  as
         prostitutes. The second appellant believed that they  were  members
         of the same gang which attacked the  first  appellant.  The  second
         appellant did not report the matter to the police. She  decided  to
         leave her employment and gave notice to her work of termination  in
         the middle of October.

     23. The second appellant confirmed the family left the family  home  on
         31 October 2018 and went to the home of the  mother-in-law  of  the
         first appellant for between 18 -  20  days.  The  second  appellant
         stated that her father and siblings had received threats from  gang
         members searching for the first  appellant.  Those  family  members
         sought  to  leave  El  Salvador  but  were  returned  by  Colombian
         immigration authorities.

     24. The second appellant's claim that if returned El Salvador she  will
         be further persecuted by the gang, believing that they  would  kill
         her or rape or force her into prostitution. Her fear stems from the
         assistance given by the first appellant in aiding members of public
         to escape for a bus attack by the gang in 2010 and  his  subsequent
         refusal to pay sums demanded by the gang by way of extortion.

     25. The appellants left El Salvador on 28  November  2018  and  took  a
         flight to Spain with an onward flight to the United Kingdom.

     26. On 29 November 2018, the  appellant's  claimed  asylum.  They  were
         interviewed by way of screening at the airport on the  29  November
         2018 and preliminary information forms and witness statements  were
         subsequently  submitted   by   the   appellant's   representatives.
         Substantive asylum interviews were conducted with  each  appellants
         on  11  March  2019.  With  reference  to  the  substantive  asylum
         interview of the first appellant, amendments were submitted by  the
         representatives dated 13 March 2019. Copies of articles of  certain
         reports are also submitted as an aspect of the claims.

The decisions made by the respondent:

     27. In a decision taken on  28  March  2019  the  application  by  both
         appellants were refused on all grounds.

     28. In considering the protection claim to the reference to the  asylum
         grounds, the respondent accepted, in relation to  both  appellants,
         that they were members of a particular social group. With reference
         to the first appellant that was considered to be victims  of  gangs
         and with respect to the second appellant, a relative  of  a  family
         member owning a small business in El  Salvador.  Additionally,  the
         nationalities of both appellants were accepted by the respondent.

     29. In respect of the first appellant's claim, the respondent  accepted
         that there was evidence that the  bus  incident  had  taken  place.
         However, there was no evidence that individuals had assisted people
         escaping from the bus or that shots  had  been  fired  additionally
         during the incident. Furthermore, the  respondent  did  not  accept
         that  the  first  appellant  could  have  avoided  the   threatened
         intentions of the gang over a period of some eight years. Returning
         the incident, the respondent took the view that it  seemed  unusual
         that those who attempted to shoot at the first appellant  had  been
         far away, whereas other gang members had been close to the bus  had
         not done so. The first appellant  had  stated  that  they  had  put
         barbed wire around the family home, but it was not considered  that
         a vicious gang will be prevented from gaining access to his home as
         a consequence of barbed wire.

     30. With reference  reports  the  first  appellant  had  been  targeted
         because he'd owned a water treatment plant, it  appeared  that  the
         original incident whereby the first  appellant  claimed  that  he'd
         help people of the bus to which the gang are set alight,  was  then
         not mentioned with reference to the extortion  threats.  The  first
         appellant also stated that he had refused police protection because
         he feared that the police had been infiltrated by  gangs  that  the
         gang would in that way have more easily  been  able  to  kill  him.
         However, the respondent referred to specific action  taken  against
         gang crime in El Salvador.

     31. In respect of the second appellant's claim, the respondent did  not
         accept that she had specifically been able to identify gang members
         would threaten the first appellant.

     32. The respondent took into account his claim that he had been able to
         avoid the gang over a period of eight years because others,  unlike
         himself, had not been prepared to run and hide. The respondent took
         the view that if they had wished to  enact  any  threat,  the  gang
         would have been able to do so. It was also not  accepted  that  the
         gang would not have been able to track the first appellant to other
         locations when he had stayed away from the family home.

     33. The respondent accepted that the first appellant had  been  subject
         to extortion and there was evidence to confirm  that.  However,  it
         was not accepted that the first appellant remained under threat  as
         a consequence of having assisted individuals to escape from a  gang
         having set light to a public bus in 2010.

     34. The respondent considered the credibility of  the  account  of  the
         first appellant was damaged by the  appellant's  failure  to  claim
         asylum in Spain (Section  8  (4)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

     35. The respondent considered the stated fear of  the  first  appellant
         and it was not accepted that if genuinely so  threatened  by  gangs
         since 2010 he would not have accepted help  from  the  authorities.
         Thus, he had not established a failure of state  protection  in  El
         Salvador and  that  protection  was  available.  Additionally,  the
         respondent considered that the first appellant could reasonably  be
         expected to return to his home area, or he could move elsewhere  in
         the country and gain employment (internal relocation).

     36. The respondent therefore refused his protection claim.

     37. In relation to the second appellant, it was noted that she was  not
         referred to in any police reports  and  that  there  were  internal
         inconsistencies in the account given by her as compared to that  of
         uncle. It was stated that information provided by her was stated to
         have been "vague" and "implausible" and that based on  the  actions
         and circumstances claimed with respect  the  first  appellant,  the
         second appellant's fear of the stated gang was not accepted. It was
         considered the second appellant could return to her home area or to
         another town or  city  in  El  Salvador  and  that  relocation  was
         reasonable.

The submissions of the parties:

     38. Mr Katani on behalf of both appellants  relied  upon  his  skeleton
         argument.

     39. In his oral submissions, he submitted that the first appellant  had
         a profile which arose as he had witnessed the bus attack  and  also
         as a victim of extortion from the  gangs.  The  second  appellant's
         claim is dependent upon his as it is formed from part of  the  same
         factual matrix.

     40. He submitted that the appellant would not be able to return to  his
         home area given that his presence will be such that the gang  would
         reasonably retaliate in the light of the bus incident  as  well  as
         having failed to pay the "taxes" by way of extortion.

     41. Mr Katani made reference to the skeleton argument  and  the  expert
         report which made reference to the "long term memory" of the  gangs
         and that there is no defined time period as to when  a  risk  would
         end or that gang members would give up after a particular  extended
         period of time (see paragraph 45 and paragraph 63).

     42. As to protection in his  home  area,  he  pointed  to  the  country
         materials both in the respondent's  CPIN  and  in  the  appellant's
         bundle which he submitted demonstrated that in El  Salvador  whilst
         there was a functioning  police  service,  it  was  an  ineffective
         system which was unable to protect its citizens from reprisals  and
         gang members. He further submitted that even  if  the  police  were
         able to protect the appellants, the background  material  suggested
         it could only be  for  a  short  period  of  time.  The  gangs  are
         sophisticated and have intelligence (see CPIN 12.12.1) and that the
         witness  protection  schemes  would  not  provide  the   protection
         necessary. He highlighted the reasons given by the appellant as  to
         why he would not enter witness  programs  or  seek  further  police
         protection which is through the fear of reprisals  and  because  of
         the position of the police themselves many of who were  members  of
         gangs themselves (this is reflected in the  country  materials  (in
         the Refugee Board of Canada report at para 5.3 )and also the expert
         report). Thus, having made a complaint against gang  members  would
         also pose an additional risk factor for the  appellants.  The  same
         applies the judiciary and the background evidence shows  widespread
         corruption in the judiciary and low conviction rates of prosecuting
         gang members (see Refugee Board of Canada para 5.2 para; page 81.

     43. As to the question of  internal  relocation,  he  relied  upon  the
         skeleton argument. He submitted that this  was  a  case  where  the
         appellants have been able to avoid gang members for  a  significant
         period of time. However, he submitted it is important  to  remember
         the circumstances and the type of behaviour adopted to  avoid  gang
         members. The appellants were aided  by  friends  and  family,  they
         change their patterns of  behaviour  and  life  seeing  family  and
         friends irregularly stop thus living in such circumstances would be
         unduly harsh even if  the  appellants  were  able  to  relocate  to
         another area of El Salvador. As the  expert  stated  this  was  not
         sustainable long-term.

     44. In any event, the country materials when taken together demonstrate
         that as the gangs operate throughout the country, and  that  moving
         from one area to another would raise suspicions and would thus lead
         to checks being made, it was reasonably likely that their  presence
         would be ascertained by the gangs. Any new person to the area would
         likely to be treated with suspicion and give rise to a risk.  Thus,
         he submitted  the  appellants  would  not  be  able  to  internally
         relocate and that was also noted by the respondent in the  CPIN  at
         paragraph 7.3.1.

     45. Mr Katani therefore invited me to allow the appeals. As set out  in
         the decision letter, there  was  no  dispute  that  their  risk  of
         persecution or serious harm would be as a result  of  a  Convention
         reason namely as  members  of  a  "Particular  Social  Group"  (see
         paragraphs 28 - 33 of the  decision  letter  and  is  reflected  at
         paragraph 19 in the FtTJ's decision).

     46. In his oral submissions, Mr Diwnycz made reference  to  the  expert
         report in relation to sufficiency of protection and made  reference
         to objective material in the CPIN February  2020  which  he  fairly
         stated did give support for the expert report  at  section  2.5.13.
         and the submissions made on behalf of the appellants. He also  made
         reference to a recent reported decision of the Tribunal reported on
         Bailii (although not on the Tribunal website) which,  although  not
         dealing with entirely the same factual matrix, did  make  reference
         to the latest CPIN and the issue of gangs in El  Salvador.  He  did
         not seek to address any of the other issues raised.

     47. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision which I
         now give.

The decision re-made:

     48. I begin with the factual findings made by the judge which  are  set
         out at paragraphs [125] - [128] and which were preserved findings.

     49. The appellants advanced two aspects of their claim to be at risk of
         harm on return to El Salvador. The first related to a risk  arising
         from the incident relating to  the  bus  in  2010  and  the  second
         relating to the risk of extortion.

     50. The FtTJ set out his general assessment at [125]  where  he  stated
         "in general terms the  country  without  doubt  suffers  from  gang
         activity, most particularly from members and supporters of the  two
         largest gangs in the country, known as MS 13 and Barrio 18. Indeed,
         the government of El Salvador considers  both  gangs  as  terrorist
         organisations. In varying degree, it appears that all parts  of  El
         Salvador are affected by the activity of criminal gangs and leaders
         and members  may  exhibit  considerable  influence,  pressure,  and
         criminal extortion  against  those  whom  the  gang's  target.  The
         statistics in relation to unlawful killings at the  hands  of  gang
         members places El Salvador in the unfortunate position  of  heading
         the statistics of victims of gang murders in Central America. It is
         clear that, perhaps to a  varying  degree,  the  activity  of  gang
         members is  able  to  create  a  general  climate  of  fear  across
         particular areas or in specific localities."

     51. At paragraphs [127]-[128] the FtTJ set out his factual findings  in
         relation to the incident which occurred in 2010.

     52. The FtTJ observed that in relation to that incident there had  been
         evidence from the public domain which demonstrated that  the  event
         had in fact occurred. The first appellant had claimed that  he  was
         one of the few rescuers who had come forward to help victims inside
         the bus. Whilst the judge recorded that  the  respondent  made  the
         point that there was no reference in the press or other media which
         had named the appellant, the judge  stated  that  he  accepted  the
         evidence on behalf of the appellant that where circumstances  arose
         from a gang attack, the press would not name individuals or victims
         in order to preserve anonymity.  At [128] the FtTJ found  that  the
         appellant did come forward as a volunteer to help  those  who  face
         being burned alive in the wreck of the ignited bus  and  that  this
         was a "very brave act and enormously to his credit". The FtTJ  also
         accepted that members of the gang who were present at the  side  of
         the bus and were on the other side of the vehicle did not have  the
         opportunity to fire at the appellant. He  also  accepted  the  gang
         members who are at a greater distance attempted to do  so  but  did
         not hit the appellant and to then run away from the scene.

     53. Part of the appellant's factual  claim  is  recorded  in  his  oral
         evidence before the FtT was that 19 passengers had been killed, and
         21 had suffered severe burns. The appellant was asked why the  gang
         had targeted the bus and the appellant stated at [70] that the  day
         before the incident a member of Barrio 18 had been killed by people
         in locality and that the incident with the bus was their revenge.

     54. It is also the factual position that following the  incident,  gang
         members came to the house and informed family members that he would
         be killed as a result of his actions. They also demanded money  and
         in June 2016 the wife  of  the  first  appellant  gave  them  $1000
         thereafter they demanded monthly  payments.  The  second  appellant
         lived with  the  first  appellant  and  his  family.  Her  evidence
         confirmed that of the first appellant that  he  had  helped  rescue
         people from the bus. She also confirmed that her aunt had  owned  a
         business from the house garage selling food from 2016 and that  she
         had been the victim of extortion. In her  case,  gang  members  had
         threatened to remove her and her  cousins  and  to  put  them  into
         prostitution. The threats were so bad  that  the  second  appellant
         gave up her employment.

     55. The appellant's account is that for the period before  he  left  El
         Salvador (a period of approximately eight years) that  he  had  not
         lived at the family home as a result of interest in him  from  gang
         members and that throughout that period he had gone home for a  few
         days and left again and it stayed at a house  of  a  friend  for  a
         month  and  are  then  transferred  to  another  address.  It  also
         considered his daughter's house but would return to his own home to
         make visits. He would check with friends to see that the  situation
         was clear but would not go outside the family home in  daytime  (at
         [58]).

     56. As to the second limb which related to being a victim of extortion,
         the FtTJ set out at [128] that  "extortion  in  El  Salvador  is  a
         familiar practice, particularly against those who are obviously  in
         trade or business." That is  supported  by  the  expert  report  at
         paragraphs 35 onwards where it is recorded that one of the  primary
         ways that the gangs exercise their power is  through  extortion  or
         the levying of "taxes" or "rents" against residents and  businesses
         locating or operating within their territory. These rents  are  one
         mechanism through  which  the  gangs  exercise  their  control  and
         governance over populations. At [36] the expert makes reference  to
         extended period of time a pass when an individual  family  received
         no threats/demands or series of threats/demands, only to find  that
         later on they re-emerge. At [37] it is recorded that  gang  demands
         for rent and  taxes  affect  all  corners  of  El  Salvador.  Small
         businesses, including shopkeepers and  family  businesses  are  the
         most common targets of extortion in local neighbourhoods and towns.
         This country evidence is consistent with the factual claim made  on
         behalf of both of the appellants.

     57. As to the second head of claim which related to extortion, the FtTJ
         recorded at [128] that extortion in  El  Salvador  was  a  familiar
         practice particularly against those who are obviously in  trade  or
         business.

     58. There is evidence in the expert report  that  related  directly  to
         this issue at paragraphs 35 - 39. The appellant's account was  that
         he had been the target of extortion. Thus, the  appellants  account
         that he had been subjected to threats of  extortion  is  consistent
         with the  background  evidence  as  to  how  gangs  operate  in  El
         Salvador.

     59. Against that background I am required to address the issue of  risk
         of harm to the appellants and do  so  by  considering  the  factual
         claim in the light of the country materials and the country  expert
         report.

     60. The appellant relies  upon  an  expert  report.  It  has  not  been
         suggested on behalf of the respondent that the author of the report
         is not qualified or lacks the expertise in his chosen area.  Having
         had the opportunity to consider the report, I am satisfied that  he
         does have relevant experience. At paragraph 13 the expert sets  out
         the basis of his expertise setting out his  knowledge  gained  from
         having undertaken field research based on interviews with  migrants
         from El Salvador, with government officials and members  of   NGO's
         and his participation observation over the  course  of  many  years
         alongside his assessment of written documentary evidence.

     61. Furthermore, when considering the weight  to  be  attached  to  the
         report, I observe that the factual  information  contained  in  the
         report is consistent with the other objective and country materials
         both in the appellants' bundle and the respondent's CPIN.

     62. The expert considered the evidence  given  by  the  appellants  was
         "consistent" with his assessment of the objective material and  the
         background evidence that related to El Salvador.

     63. At paragraphs 14 - 19 of his  report,  the  expert  summarises  the
         position of gangs in El Salvador. He  identified  the  two  largest
         gangs as "MS 13" and "Barrio  18"  and  that  according  to  police
         records, estimates of the total membership  of  the  gangs  exceeds
         60,000 in a country with the total population of 6.4 million.  Each
         gang has local branches that operate with  the  permission  of  the
         head  gang  leaders  and  that  El   Salvador   has   the   highest
         concentration of gang members per capita in  central  America.  The
         gangs have continued to grow membership and proliferate  throughout
         the northern Triangle and into Mexico since the  1990s,  when  gang
         members began to be deported in larger numbers initially  from  Los
         Angeles where the gangs were born.  Over  the  last  decade,  these
         gangs have evolved into large-scale criminal organisations who  are
         "highly  organised  and   internationally   networked,   remarkably
         prosperous and resource by stockpiles of firearms, including  high-
         calibre weapons used in war". In 2015 they  extorted  an  estimated
         $650 million from  residents  in  the  northern  Triangle.  The  US
         Department of Treasury  classified  MS  -  13  as  a  transnational
         criminal organisation and the El Salvadoran  government  classifies
         both MS - 13 and Barrio 18 as terrorists. It is  also  recorded  at
         paragraph 16 that largely as a product of the wide proliferation of
         gang-related violence, El Salvador's homicide  rate  is  among  the
         highest of any country in the world. Gang  related  homicides,  and
         the  climate  of  fear  and  terror  that  accompany  them,  affect
         Salvadorans throughout the entire country in both urban  and  rural
         areas.

     64. At paragraph 19, the expert refers to  the  government  legislation
         and law enforcement having been  "almost  entirely  ineffective  in
         reducing the  spread  of  gang  activity,  membership  and  related
         violence in El Salvador". Prisons have become overcrowded and  have
         become sites where gang members continue to  recruit  new  members,
         organise themselves and unite. From within  prisons,  gang  leaders
         are able to continue their criminal  activities  and  target  their
         opponents. To date, responses to gang-related  violence  have  been
         ineffective.

     65. The material set out in the respondent's  CPIN  version  1.0  dated
         February 2020 entitled El Salvador: gangs, is consistent  with  the
         contents of the expert report. At 7.16 it is reported  that  up  to
         500,000 people are affiliated with gangs in El  Salvador  and  that
         "anyone living in gang territory has a choice but to cooperate with
         them" (at 7.1.6). In terms of active gang members, it is  estimated
         that there are 60,000 gang members in El Salvador compared to  just
         52,000 police and military (7.3.1). The section at 5  of  the  CPIN
         provides further details.

     66. The material in the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  report
         make reference to the gangs being able to  "exert  their  influence
         all over the country. Authorities have lost control over  territory
         gangs, as  the  latter  decide  who  enters  and  who  leaves  from
         neighbourhoods.  Gangs  are  very  vigilant  in  controlling  their
         territories and they question whoever enters those territories."

     67. The CPIN also provides that those who refused to  join  a  gang  or
         refuse to comply with the gangs demands are vulnerable  to  violent
         reprisals (2.4.6) and that those who are at risk from gang violence
         are those  who  have  collaborated  with  security  forces  or  are
         perceived to have collaborated with  them  such  as  informants  or
         witnesses (see 2.4.10). The CPIN makes  it  plain  that  whether  a
         person is at risk from a  gang  will  depend  on  his  profile  and
         actions, the area the person resided in, the reasons for the gang's
         interests and size reach and capability of the gang  involved  (see
         2.4.9).

     68. The expert set out at paragraphs 54 - 61 of his report a number  of
         factors which he considered place the appellants at risk of harm on
         return. Firstly, he was the witness to a gang perpetrated crime and
         witnesses to gang perpetrated crimes are a group  in  society  that
         are particularly likely to  be  marked  by  gangs  as  targets  for
         torture and murder in El Salvador. Secondly, he rescued victims  of
         crime and reported the gang who threatened him for  doing  so.  The
         act of rescuing the victims would be generally understood to be  an
         active opposition against Barrio 18 and those who take actions  are
         oppositional to  a  gang  or  otherwise  challenge  gangs  with  an
         authority generally become the targets of retaliation by the  gang.
         The appellant's family members have been  threatened  and  that  is
         common. Families are at the core of the central American lives  and
         this is tactic is used to effectively  terrorise  and  control  not
         only those being direct friend, but to maintain power  control  and
         authority over society as a whole by perpetuating a  general  state
         of fear.

     69. In relation to the threats made against  the  appellant's  daughter
         and the second appellant, the expert at [58] considered  that  that
         was characteristic of gang threats against women and  girls.  Gangs
         are known threatened to take the daughter of a family member  of  a
         target individual as  a  "gang  girlfriend"  (into  a  full  sexual
         relationship). Girls and young women to be forced into prostitution
         and forced sexual relationship gang members. Gender-based  violence
         against women occurs.

     70. As to the reports made by the first appellant to the police, having
         reported threats against him and his family to the authorities, the
         decision to report such  threats  would  put  him  and  his  family
         members in danger.  Corrupt  law  enforcement  officers  and  share
         information with gangs and Barrio 18 could learn of his  report  to
         the authorities.

     71. In reaching my assessment, the question is whether  the  appellants
         are at risk of serious harm due to what  occurred  in  El  Salvador
         based on the factual findings made by the FtTJ. The  FtTJ  accepted
         the factual account that the first appellant had come  forward  and
         rescued those in the burning bus. The appellant's account which was
         accepted by the FtTJ was that the gang members were  aware  of  his
         actions and had attempted to shoot him at the time of the incident.
         Thereafter there followed threats against  him.  Both  he  and  the
         second appellant have been the subject of extortion and threats  by
         gang members of the  type  that  is  consistent  with  the  country
         materials, both in the type of threats to made in  the  context  in
         which the extortion takes place.

     72. The expert  evidence  at  [61]  sets  out  his  assessment  of  the
         objective  evidence.  In  that  paragraph  the   expert   expressly
         addressed the factual account given by the appellant and his  claim
         that he had been in hiding to avoid further harm. In particular the
         expert noted his claim that he had given up his routine  activities
         to attempt to temporarily avoid harm whilst he remained  in  hiding
         for several years. At paragraph [61] the expert identified from the
         material that the  appellant's  account  of  giving  up  his  daily
         routine to avoid harm was plausible as  "gangs  are  best  able  to
         target individuals and their families by identifying their  routine
         activities, such as when they leave their home, take the bus,  pick
         up the children from school, go to work and so forth, when they are
         vulnerable  to  threats  and  assaults.  If  extremely  careful  by
         remaining indoors for extended periods limit home only  the  advice
         of trusted others who remain on the lookout  for  gang  members  to
         make sure he would  not  be  seen,  and  by  periodically  changing
         location, (the appellant) may have been able to  temporarily  (even
         if over several years) keep in view from gang members." The  expert
         went on to state that it was not viable in the long term.

     73. Therefore, the expert provided an explanation as to why he was able
         to avoid the gangs over the period of time that he asserted. Whilst
         that is a lengthy period of time, I do  not  consider  that  it  is
         implausible when seen in the context of the objective material.

     74. Having considered the account of both appellants  (principally  the
         first appellant) and in the context of the country materials relied
         upon by both parties which are consistent  in  my  judgement,  that
         material is supportive of the appellant's account to be at risk  of
         harm upon return to El Salvador. As set out earlier,  the  CPIN  at
         2.4.9 and 2.4.10 makes reference to those who would be at  risk  of
         harm and identifies those who have a profile as  a  result  of  any
         actions which could be viewed or perceived of having acted  against
         the gang or as an informant or witness. In the factual  account  of
         the  appellant,  the  incident  with  the  bus  falls   into   both
         categories; he was involved in an act which could have been  viewed
         as acting against the gangs by rescuing people from the burning bus
         and also from having made a complaint to the police. In respect  of
         the extortion, having refused to continue to  pay  sums  of  money,
         that would also fall within the risk category. The  gang  who  were
         identified are one  of  the  two  largest  gangs  who  dominate  El
         Salvador. The position of the second appellant  is  dependent  upon
         the first appellant as set out in the earlier decision of the  FtTJ
         (at paragraph 6).

     75. The respondent in the decision letter had submitted that the length
         of time that had elapsed since the incident in 2010 and  the  later
         incidents in 2016 in 2018 would mean that the appellants would  not
         be at risk of harm on return now. I have  considered  that  in  the
         light of the evidence and in the light of the country materials and
         based on how gangs operate in El Salvador. At paragraph 45  of  the
         expert report, it is recorded  that  gangs  "maintain  a  long-term
         memory about those whom they have threatened in the past, and  they
         regularly follow through on these threats against  those  who  have
         defied, or are suspected of having defied,  the  authority  of  the
         gang, even when years have  passed  since  the  victim's  perceived
         defiance."  Furthermore,  at  paragraph  36  it  is  recorded  that
         "extended period of time a pass when an individual family  received
         no threats/demand or series of threats/demands, only to  find  that
         later on they re-emerge."

     76. It is therefore argued on behalf of the appellant that the material
         demonstrates that there is no defined time period of when the  risk
         ends, or that gang or gang members simply give up after an extended
         period of time.

     77. In my view, whilst there has been  a  significant  period  of  time
         which has elapsed, the material before  the  Tribunal  demonstrates
         that there is no period of time when a risk  can  effectively  end.
         What I consider to be more relevant is the  country  materials  set
         out in both the CPIN and the appellants material which demonstrates
         the way in which gangs control territory  across  the  country  and
         that the nature of the community in El Salvador is very close knit.
         Given that gangs monitor movement in the  areas  they  control  and
         they check those moving from one gang controlled area  to  another,
         if the appellants were to return  to  their  home  area  their  re-
         emergence and presence would become known to the  gangs  which  was
         reasonably likely to give rise to interest again in them.

     78. I am therefore satisfied that the appellants have  demonstrated  to
         the lower standard that they would be at risk of serious harm  from
         gang members if they were to return to their home area.

     79. As to the assessment of sufficiency of protection,  Mr  Diwnycz  on
         behalf of the respondent does not  seek  to  argue  that  there  is
         sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  appellants  on  return.  The
         material in the CPIN is consistent with that in the expert  report.
         At page 68 of the appellant's  bundle,  there  is  a  copy  of  the
         Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, El  Salvador:  Information
         gathering mission report-part one: gangs in  El  Salvador  and  the
         situation of witnesses of crime and corruption dated  1/9/2016.  At
         page 79 the position of  the  police  was  summarised  as  was  the
         justice system at page 80. There was evidence  given  that  sources
         that indicated the justice system was inefficient, with high levels
         of impunity (page 81) and that sources indicated that people prefer
         not to file complaints with authorities due to the either  fear  of
         reprisals or retaliation or due to the lack of confidence in public
         institutions receiving complaints. It also recorded that "the  IGSP
         indicated that they have been isolated cases of  collusion  between
         members of the PNC with gangs. Other sources stated that if someone
         files a complaint against a gang member,  the  person  will  likely
         face reprisals as gangs of  infiltrated  many  state  institutions,
         including the PNC. At p82 there was a section at 5.3  dealing  with
         the witness protection programme which was said  to  not  guarantee
         the lives of witnesses. The expert report set out  relevant  issues
         at paragraphs 15, 19,21 and 22.

     80. The CPIN also makes reference to the lack of effectiveness  of  the
         witness protection schemes and at 2.5.9 record that the  PNC  lacks
         resources, officers are poorly paid, there is collusion with  gangs
         and impunity. At 2.5.10 whilst there is a function judiciary it  is
         not effective and is undermined  by  inefficiency  and  corruption.
         Finally, at 2.5.13, the CPIN and makes  reference  it  is  unlikely
         that there would be effective protection.

     81.  In his evidence the appellant had given an explanation as  to  why
         he did not  seek  state  protection  (beyond  making  a  complaint)
         because of the issue of infiltration of the  gang  members  in  the
         state apparatus and that he would not be safe. In the light of  the
         country materials both that relied upon by the appellant and by the
         respondent, that explanation is entirely plausible and has weight.

     82. I therefore conclude that in light of the  country  materials  when
         set against the appellant's account, there would not be sufficiency
         of protection for either appellant.

     83. I now turn to the issue of internal relocation. The  respondent  in
         the decision letter stated that relocation in El Salvador is deemed
         reasonable as its citizens have freedom of movement throughout  the
         country (at [81-82]). However, the material  cited  later  at  [82]
         states that the  government  respected  those  rights  of  movement
         "although in many areas the government could not provide freedom of
         movement due to  the  strength  of  gang  activity."  The  argument
         advanced on behalf the appellants is that gang culture  meant  that
         anyone moving home would attract the  attention  of  the  prevalent
         gang in the new area of residence.

     84. The appellant's argument has been supported  by  reference  to  the
         objective country materials and the expert  report.  The  FtTJ  had
         accepted  that  gangs  operated  throughout  El  Salvador  in   his
         assessment  at  paragraph  [125]  and  this  is  supported  in  the
         material. The objective evidence on this issue is set  out  in  the
         Refugee Board of Canada report (page 73) and also at section 4.1.1.
         The expert report also addressed this issue at paragraphs 51 - 53.

     85.  The  respondent's  CPIN  at  13.2  makes  reference  to   internal
         relocation being difficult due to  the  close-knit  nature  of  its
         communities.  El   Salvador   is   a   relatively   small   country
         (approximately the same size as  Wales)  with  a  population  of  6
         million and that the communities are very close knit. Gangs control
         territory across the country and are able to exert  influence  over
         the whole country with some  groups  reportedly  able  to  track  a
         person throughout the country. The gangs are  recorded  to  monitor
         movements in areas they control and are able to check people moving
         from one gang -controlled area to another (see CPIN at  2.6.2).  At
         2.6.3 the CPIN records that  "in  general  internal  relocation  is
         unlikely to be reasonable", however each case must be considered on
         its own facts.

     86. Having considered the country  materials  as  set  out  above,  the
         reports are consistent with each other as to  the  ability  of  the
         gangs to control their territory and for the other gang to  monitor
         movements in areas that they control. As Mr Katani submits,  it  is
         reflective of the territorial control that gang members have in  El
         Salvador. Given that checks are undertaken against those  who  move
         from one gang controlled area to another,  there  is  a  reasonable
         likelihood that this would occur in the case of both appellants and
         thus internal relocation would not be a safe alternative  for  them
         and that they would be at risk  of  harm  for  which  there  is  no
         sufficiency of protection as outlined in the earlier assessment.

     87. At paragraphs 28 - 33 of the decision letter and  as  reflected  at
         paragraph 19 of the FtTJ's decision, the respondent  accepted  that
         if their factual account was accepted, that their claim fell within
         a  Convention  reason  namely  victims  of  gangs  which   form   a
         "Particular Social Group".

     88. Drawing together those matters, I am satisfied that the  appellants
         have demonstrated to the lower standard that there is a  reasonable
         likelihood that upon return to El Salvador that  they  will  be  at
         risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  for  which  there  is  no
         sufficient protection and that internal relocation is  unsafe,  and
         unreasonable and thus is unduly harsh.

     89. I therefore allow their appeals under the Refugee Convention and on
         human rights grounds (Articles 2 and 3).



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision was set  aside  and  remade  as
follows: the appeals are allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated 19 November 2020

