
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03827/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th January 2018                          |On 22nd February  2018        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                 Thamir [A]
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel instructed by A2, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant claims to be an  undocumented  Bidoon  from  Kuwait.   He
    claimed asylum and that was refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    reasons given and a subsequent appeal before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Lawrence dismissed in a decision promulgated on 13th June 2017.

 2. The appeal was dismissed because the Appellant was found not  to  be  a
    credible witness and indeed it was said that the core elements  of  the
    Appellant's case were built on lies and was  fabricated  for  the  sole
    purpose of securing asylum here.

 3. Grounds of application were lodged.  In particular it was said that the
    judge had misdirected himself at paragraphs 12 and 13 of  the  decision
    by misconstruing the Appellant's evidence that his mother lived in  the
    desert and had given birth with the help of a local  midwife.   He  had
    never said in his evidence that his mother left the desert to  come  to
    the city to give birth and the judge had concluded that  the  Appellant
    was an inconsistent witness when he was not.  The  facts  of  the  case
    generally had been misconstrued and it was necessary for another  judge
    to hear the matter afresh.

 4. Furthermore it was said the judge had misdirected himself at paragraphs
    13 and  14  when  he  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  mother  was  a
    documented Bidoon.  The reason given was  because  she  had  access  to
    medical treatment but the Appellant's evidence was that his mother  had
    her children at home with the help of a local midwife within the Bidoon
    community and not a trained  nurse.   Furthermore  children  in  Kuwait
    derive nationality through their fathers only.  It was the evidence  of
    the Appellant that his father did not register during the  1965  census
    and the Bidoon committee did not register him  between  1996  to  2000.
    Accordingly whether  or  not  whether  the  Appellant's  mother  was  a
    registered Bidoon was irrelevant as women cannot pass their immigration
    status with  nationality  to  their  children.   The  judge  failed  to
    appreciate this and this also amounted to a material error in law.

 5. It was also said that the judge had misdirected himself  at  paragraphs
    16 and 17 of the decision when he concluded that the Appellant and  his
    witness Mr [J] did not know  each  other  in  Kuwait.   The  judge  had
    arrived at this conclusion simply because the witness said he  did  not
    hear about or attend the Appellant's wedding.  The witness in his  oral
    evidence had clarified that Bidoons are very poor  and  do  not  invite
    anyone to their wedding because they cannot afford to do so.

 6. A Rule 24 notice was lodged in straightforward terms  saying  that  the
    judge had directed himself appropriately, permission to  appeal  having
    been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce who reminded the Appellant's
    representatives of their duty to the  court  that  the  Tribunal  would
    expect any contentious claims in respect of the  Appellant's  testimony
    to be supported by evidence i.e. a contemporaneous note of the hearing.
     Permission was granted on all grounds.

 7. Before me Mr Gajjar relied  on  his  grounds.  In  terms  of  what  the
    Appellant had actually said I was referred to page 4 of 9 of his  notes
    of the hearing when the Appellant had said that his  mother  lived  all
    her life in the desert.  When she moved to the city she heard that  the
    doctors were male.  She was comfortable with the midwife.  However this
    had been misconstrued by the judge to say that the  Appellant's  mother
    had moved to the city "to deliver" her child.  The judge noted that the
    only reason she would go to town to deliver is that she had  access  to
    medical care and went on to say that she did  have  access  to  medical
    care and therefore she must be a citizen of Kuwait  or  at  least  have
    registered during the 1965 census.

 8. However this was not what the Appellant had actually said.   The  judge
    had misconstrued the evidence. The other grounds had been made out.  In
    particular the witness was someone who had been granted refugee  status
    here and  the  judge  appeared  to  have  ignored  that.   It  was  not
    reasonable for the judge to conclude that simply  because  the  witness
    had not been invited to the wedding or did not know anything  about  it
    that his evidence must be false.

 9. I was asked to set the decision aside and remit the case to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

10. For the Home  Office  Ms  Everett  said  that  the  points  taken  were
    certainly concerning and the judge's reasoning was slender but arguably
    not perverse.

Conclusions

11. I consider that the points taken on the  Appellant's  behalf  are  well
    made.  The particular point taken about his mother going to deliver her
    child in  town  was  not  exactly  what  the  Appellant  said  and  the
    interpretation put on it  by  the  judge  is  arguably  unfair  to  the
    Appellant.  She did have access to medical care in the sense that there
    was a midwife but the point goes no further than that.

12. The judge makes those findings in paragraph 13 and  in  the  very  next
    paragraph states that the Appellant  has  not  demonstrated  he  is  an
    undocumented Bidoon - unfortunately before going  on  to  consider  the
    significant evidence of Mr [J].  The judge does note that  Mr  [J]  has
    been accepted as an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait but  pays  no  more
    attention to that and rejects the evidence that he knew  the  Appellant
    in Kuwait because he was not invited or was aware  of  the  Appellant's
    wedding.  In my view that is a finding that  goes  too  far  and  takes
    little  account  of  the  fact  that  Mr  [J]'s  account  of  being  an
    undocumented Bidoon was accepted as genuine by the Secretary of State -
    and dismissive of the explanation offered by Mr [J] who explains why he
    was not invited to the wedding the judge concluding that he would  have
    known about it. At the very least further reasoning was required before
    the important evidence of an accepted undocumented Bidoon was summarily
    rejected. There is also the point that the judge appears to  have  been
    wrong to have concluded that because the mother was a registered Bidoon
    so must be the Appellant - for reasons set out in the grounds.

13. For these reasons I  consider  that  the  decision  is  not  safe.   It
    therefore must be set aside.  I have  concluded  that  because  further
    fact finding is necessary the matter should be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge Lawrence.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  Practice  Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

16. I set aside the decision.

17. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is required or made.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date  16th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald









