
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03735/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 April 2018                           |  On 16 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D G ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                     MB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Iris Law Firm (Gateshead)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is national of the Republic of Congo where she  was  born
    in 1981.  We continue the  anonymity  order  made  by  the  First  tier
    Tribunal (FtT) whose decision she  appeals.  Accordingly,  pursuant  to
    Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public to identify the appellant or her children  is  prohibited.   The
    appellant will solely be  referred  to  in  these  proceedings  as  MB.
    Failure to comply with this order may result in contempt proceedings.

 2. We asked whether Ms Brakaj wished  us  to  treat  the  appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness.  She did so based on the medical evidence that  had
    been provided to the FtT.  The  hearing  proceeded  in  private  during
    which the appellant was accompanied by a friend Ms Sharky  from  Corpus
    Christie Church. We also explained to appellant how the  hearing  would
    proceed and, although no  interpreter  was  present,  she  appeared  to
    understand matters in basic terms at least.

 3. In the course of submissions, it was accepted by Mr  Diwyncz  that  the
    decision  of  Judge  Kempton  was  infected  by  material   error   and
    accordingly we set aside her decision and remit the case to the FtT for
    its reconsideration of the appeal. Mr Diwyncz was  correct  to  concede
    the appeal as, in our own view, the decision could  not  be  sustained.
    Our reasons are as follows.

 4. The background is that the appellant who has been a regular visitor  to
    the UK sought protection on the basis that she  feared  persecution  by
    the  authorities  on  account  of  her  political  opinion.   This  was
    expressed by her support for  a  candidate  (Mr  Mokoko)  in  the  2016
    elections by distributing leaflets and by providing food parcels to her
    father who lived in an area said to be peopled by the Ninja who have  a
    history of violent opposition to the government.  By sending  him  food
    parcels, the appellant was considered to be  Ninja  herself,  something
    that she denies.  This adverse  attention  resulted  in  a  summons  to
    attend the police in April 2016 and her arrest in  September  when  she
    was detained and raped.

 5. The FtT Judge disbelieved the account as "incredibly muddled"  and  set
    out her conclusions as follows

         "40. The appellant's position is that she was persecuted on account
             of her political involvement and the subsequent accusation  of
             supporting the Ninjas.

         41.  However, her account is incredibly muddled.  It  was  only  in
             the oral evidence that she said that she was in  fact  at  the
             police station in April and questioned in connection with  her
             political activities (albeit at low level).  However, the fact
             that  this  did  not   appear   in   either   interview,   her
             representatives  letter  of  corrections  or  her   subsequent
             statement does not assist her.  It is not good enough  to  say
             that she was told at the screening interview to  save  up  the
             detail for the asylum interview.  It is not good enough to say
             that she  was  not  asked  about  the  matter  in  the  asylum
             interview or even by her solicitor for the statement.   It  is
             up to her to put forward her case and she has not done so in a
             coherent manner.

         42.  I do not accept that the appellant has had some sort of trauma
             at some point which is documented in the medical evidence, but
             its causes have not been proved.

         43.  The police summons dated 6 April to attend on 2 April does not
             make sense and smacks of being a  non-genuine  document.   Why
             would a summons to attend be sent  after  the  date  when  the
             attendance is to be made?  Clearly the appellant's family  are
             willing to report her missing to the authorities in Congo  (as
             she says  they  are  still  looking  for  her).   Her  family,
             according to her account, know perfectly well that she is  out
             of the country and must know she is in the UK given  her  visa
             for here and having an uncle  here.   She  has  not  contacted
             anyone in Congo about the current position for her there.  She
             was a person who was apparently working for  a  multi-national
             company, Halliburton, and one  might  have  thought  that  she
             could even contact someone at  work  rather  than  her  family
             direct in order to find out the current  position.   There  is
             nothing from her employer to say  that  she  has  gone  absent
             without leave.

         44.   While  I  appreciate  that  Congo  is  not  blessed  with   a
             democratically elected government (irregularities in the March
             2016  election  are  detailed  on  pages  30  to  31  of   the
             appellant's bundle), the appellant has not proved that she was
             detained in April and then released  after  questioning.   She
             has also not proved that she was detained  in  September  2016
             and released irregularly.

         45.  There are also the inconsistencies in her evidence about being
             married, having a partner or being single  as  stated  in  the
             visa application.  She has  not  given  a  proper  account  or
             chronology which she could have done.  I do  not  accept  that
             she did not have sufficient time with her  solicitor,  as  her
             solicitor has provided a very  detailed  letter  to  the  home
             office after the interview and also a detailed  statement  for
             the hearing, which responds to the reasons for refusal letter.
              What the appellant has not provided is a candid statement  of
             evidence in her own words of what her story  really  is.   She
             just reacts to questions put to her.  She does  not  volunteer
             information.  I appreciate that the appellant was upset during
             the interview and something has clearly happened  to  her  but
             she has not proved that it happened in the manner she alleges.
              She has not proved that she has been persecuted on account of
             her imputed (Ninja support) or actual (support for Mr  Mokoko)
             political opinion.   Accordingly,  she  does  not  engage  the
             Refugee Convention."

 6. The grounds of challenge are twofold and are paraphrased as follows

      i) It was not clear whether the correct burden of proof was  used  and
         there was no consideration of whether  the  benefit  of  the  doubt
         "ought to be afforded in all the circumstances" in the light of the
         acceptance that something had happened to the appellant. No  reason
         had been given why the account of rape and the sexual abuse of  her
         daughter had not been accepted and to blame  the  appellant  for  a
         lack  of  coherence  was  a  "procedural  and  legal  flaw  in  the
         assessment of the evidence of a vulnerable witness.


     ii) The judge had failed to resolve an issue regarding the summons that
         had been produced; the original  showed  the  date  for  attendance
         clearly 8 April not 2 April.


 7. We began our consideration with the second ground.  The file contains a
    translation requested by the solicitors of  the  summons  (Convocation)
    dated 6 April that clearly shows that  attendance  was  required  on  2
    April.  Our initial view was that  the  judge  could  not  be  held  to
    account over this as she quite properly relied on  a  translation  that
    had been produced.  It emerged however that  the  appellant  was  asked
    about the whereabouts of the original at the hearing and responded that
    it was with her solicitors.  Mr Diwyncz explained that it had  been  in
    the respondent's file and accepted  that  it  was  not  disclosed.   He
    accepted that had it been, the error in the transcription of  the  date
    might have been picked up.  There is no suggestion  that  the  original
    was deliberately held back and unsatisfactorily, it is unexplained  why
    the appellant's solicitors did  not  alert  the  judge  to  its  actual
    whereabouts.  We saw the original  ourselves  and  it  is  clear  that,
    although feint, the date for  attendance  was  8  April  but  this  had
    appeared as 2 April on the copy on  which  that  translation  had  been
    based.  Mr Diwyncz accepted that this procedural error was material and
    for this reason alone the decision could not stand.

 8. Returning to the first ground, Ms Brakaj accepted that  the  judge  had
    correctly directed herself as the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  as
    recorded in paras [6]  to  [8].  We  reminded  her  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision in KS (Benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC) as  to  the
    correct treatment and status of benefit of the doubt as set out in  the
    headnote

         "(1) In assessing the credibility of an asylum claim,  the  benefit
             of the doubt ("TBOD"), as discussed in paragraphs 203 and  204
             of the 1979 UNHCR Handbook  on  Procedures  and  Criteria  for
             Determining Refugee Status, is not to be regarded as a rule of
             law.  It is a general guideline, expressed in the Handbook  in
             defeasible and contingent terms.

         (2)  Although the Handbook confines TBOD to  the  end  point  of  a
             credibility  assessment  ("After  the  applicant  has  made  a
             genuine effort to substantiate  his  story":  paragraph  203),
             TBOD is not, in fact, so limited.  Its potential to be used at
             earlier stages is not, however, to be understood as  requiring
             TBOD to be given to  each  and  every  item  of  evidence,  in
             isolation.  What  is  involved  is  simply  no  more  than  an
             acceptance that in respect of every asserted fact  when  there
             is doubt, the lower standard entails that  it  should  not  be
             rejected and should rather continue to be kept in  mind  as  a
             possibility at least until the end when the question  of  risk
             is posed in relation to the evidence in the round.

         (3)  Correctly viewed, therefore, TBOD adds nothing of substance to
             the lower standard of proof, which as construed by  the  Court
             of Appeal in Karanakaran v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2000] 3 All ER 449, affords a "positive  role  for
             uncertainty".

         (4)  The proposition in paragraph 219 of the  Handbook,  that  when
             assessing the evidence of  minors  there  may  need  to  be  a
             "liberal application of the benefit of the doubt" is also  not
             to be regarded as a rule of law or,  indeed,  a  statement  of
             universal application.  As a reminder about what the  examiner
             should bear in mind at the  end  point  of  an  assessment  of
             credibility, the proposition adds nothing of substance to  the
             lower standard  of  proof.   If,  for  example,  an  applicant
             possesses the same  maturity  as  an  adult,  it  may  not  be
             appropriate to resort to a liberal application of TBOD.

         (5)  Article 4(5) of the Qualification  Directive  is  confined  to
             setting out the conditions under which there will be  no  need
             for corroboration  or  "confirmation"  of  evidence.  Although
             (unlike the Handbook) Article 4(5)  does  set  out  conditions
             that are rules of law, properly read, it is not to be compared
             with the scope of TBOD as described above."

 9. We find more force in the second limb of this  ground  although  it  is
    poorly expressed.  The judge did not have an easy task  in  this  case.
    On any  reading  of  the  medical  evidence  the  appellant  had  faced
    difficulties in giving her account of rape to the health professionals.
     This should have alerted her advisers and we reminded Ms Brakaj of the
    guidance and matters considered in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123 in particular paragraph 32


         "32. In addition, the Guidance at [4] and [5] makes it  clear  that
             one of the purposes of the early identification of  issues  of
             vulnerability is to minimise exposure to  harm  of  vulnerable
             individuals.  The Guidance at [5.1] warns representatives that
             they may  fail  to  recognise  vulnerability  and  they  might
             consider it appropriate to suggest that an  appropriate  adult
             attends with  the  vulnerable  witness  to  give  him  or  her
             assistance.   That  said,  the  primary   responsibility   for
             identifying vulnerabilities must  rest  with  the  appellant's
             representatives who are better placed than  the  Secretary  of
             State's representatives to have access to private medical  and
             personal information.  Appellant's representatives should draw
             the tribunal's attention to the PD  and  Guidance  and  should
             make submissions about the appropriate directions and measures
             to be considered e.g. whether an appellant  should  give  oral
             evidence or the special measures that are required to  protect
             his welfare or make effective his access to justice.  The  SRA
             practice note of 2 July 2015 entitled 'Meeting  the  needs  of
             vulnerable clients' sets out how  solicitors  should  identify
             and communicate with vulnerable clients.  It also sets out the
             professional duty on a solicitor to satisfy  him/herself  that
             the client either does or does not  have  capacity.   I  shall
             come back to the guidance to be followed in the most difficult
             cases where a guardian, intermediary  or  facilitator  may  be
             required."

10. Ms Brakaj accepted that there had been no  steps  taken  in  accordance
    with the guidance above and she acknowledged this should have happened.
     She further acknowledged that a medial report in all the circumstances
    was desirable and should have been provided.  She further accepted that
    a detailed statement by the appellant should  have  been  produced  but
    nevertheless maintained that there was enough before the judge in order
    to determine the case.  We have some  difficulty  in  reconciling  that
    latter position with the acknowledgment by Ms Brakaj as to the  former.
    On any basis, the judge was in a difficult position  having  regard  to
    the poor preparation for this case and the absence of initiative by the
    appellant's  solicitors  to   raise   the   issue   of   vulnerability.
    Unfortunately, these difficulties were compounded by the judge  in  her
    approach to the evidence.  Putting on one side the tone of the language
    used by the judge in reaching her conclusions ("it is not  good  enough
    to say "..." it is up to her to put forward her case" ..." she does not
    volunteer information") the core difficulty is that although the  judge
    accepted the appellant had had  some  sort  of  trauma  she  failed  to
    consider the impact of this on her ability to give a  coherent  account
    of her problems.  The only evidence before the judge of that trauma was
    the appellant's account of rape and the assault on her child which  she
    had  alerted  the  medical  team  on  first  consulting   the   general
    practitioners as recorded in a letter  from  the  specialist  TB  nurse
    dated 23 February 2017.  It is also a matter  that  the  appellant  was
    dissuaded from developing further in the course of her initial  contact
    interview. Thus, it was not something that had only be introduced at  a
    late stage.

11. The judge explained that she had appreciated the  appellant  was  upset
    and that something had clearly happened to her.  However,  in  deciding
    that she had failed to prove that it had happened in the manner alleged
    the judge failed to ask the critical question which is whether the poor
    account could be attributable to that trauma and to decide  the  nature
    of that trauma.  Had the judge the benefit of a medical report that may
    well have assisted  in  the  enquiry.   That  report  might  also  have
    considered the ability of the appellant to give a coherent  account  of
    her experiences.  It was open to the judge to call for a report in  the
    absence of the failure by the representatives to do so  but  this  does
    not appear to have been considered.  Ultimately the question is whether
    the appellant had a fair hearing.  We are not persuaded  that  she  had
    and the findings based on what was said and before  the  judge  at  the
    hearing cannot therefore be upheld quite apart  from  the  difficulties
    that came about as a result of the  procedural  irregularity  regarding
    the summons.

12. The representatives are now better  informed  as  to  how  they  should
    prepare for the forthcoming re-making of  this  decision  in  the  FtT.
    With the consent of the parties the decision of the FtT  is  set  aside
    and the matter remitted to it for further consideration.


Signed                                  Date 13 April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
