
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03209/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|on 28 November 2018                |on 5 December 2018                      |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Radford, counsel, instructed by Turpin & Miller
LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. In a decision promulgated on 14 August 2018 Judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal J Pacy (the judge) allowed the  appeal  of  AA  (hereafter
        claimant)  both  on  asylum  grounds  and  humanitarian  protection
        grounds.


     2. The claimant, a national of Iraq, entered the UK in 2015 as a minor
        and claimed asylum on the basis that his family had  been  arrested
        by Daesh and that he held a well-founded fear of  persecution  from
        Daesh,  alternatively,  that  he  was  entitled  to  a   grant   of
        humanitarian protection. In a decision dated 15 February  2018  the
        SSHD did not consider that the claimant  was  entitled  to  refugee
        status and that he did not  qualify  for  humanitarian  protection.
        this decision was appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

     3. The judge heard oral evidence from  the  claimant  and  his  former
        foster carer. In a detailed and well-reasoned decision,  the  judge
        found the claimant to be a credible witness. From [51] to [56], the
        judge gave legally sustainable  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
        claimant's fear, whilst genuine, was not well-founded.

     4. The judge then  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  claimant  was
        nevertheless entitled to a grant of  humanitarian  protection.  The
        judge took account of a  psychiatric  report  indicating  that  the
        claimant suffered from moderately severe PTSD, that he came from  a
        contested area of Iraq, that, despite genuine efforts, he had  been
        unable to contact any relatives in Iraq, that he did not  have  any
        identity documents (including a CSID), that he was unlikely  to  be
        able to obtain a CSID, that he had no experience of working in Iraq
        and would be unlikely to secure employment or  accommodation,  that
        he did not speak Arabic, and that he would not be able to  relocate
        to the IKR. None of these factual findings have been challenged.

     5. Having made her factual findings, the judge allowed the appeal both
        on asylum grounds and on humanitarian protection grounds.

     6. The SSHD's grounds of appeal asserted that the  judge  intended  to
        dismiss the asylum appeal and that by  a  'slip  of  the  pen'  she
        inadvertently allowed the appeal on  asylum  grounds.  The  grounds
        requested that the asylum claim be dismissed as  this  was  clearly
        intended  by  the  judge.  The  grounds  noted  that   humanitarian
        protection could only be granted where the individual did not  fall
        to be recognised as a refugee but nevertheless required protection.
        The grounds state, "we are grateful  to  the  FTTJ  for  his  [sic]
        findings; however we are arguing  grounds  only  on  the  erroneous
        decision  notice  on  the  asylum  element  of  the  claim,   which
        contradicts the FTTJ's own findings throughout  the  determination.
        This requires a re-promulgation and the error must be corrected....
        We do not believe this will prejudice  the  [claimant]  as  to  the
        FTTJ's overall findings and this does not preclude  the  [claimant]
        from appealing further should he wish to do so."

     7. At the error of law hearing Mr Kandola accepted that there had been
        no  challenge  to  the  judge's  decision  as  to  the   claimant's
        entitlement to humanitarian protection. Mr Kandola  said  that  his
        'hands were tied'  and  issue  was  only  taken  with  the  judge's
        decision in respect of the asylum appeal.

     8. I am satisfied, having carefully considered the  judge's  decision,
        that she could not have intended to  allow  the  claimant's  asylum
        appeal. It is satisfactorily clear from her  findings  at  [52]  to
        [57] that she found the claimant did not have a  well-founded  fear
        of persecution. This conclusion is incompatible with  the  decision
        to  allow  the  asylum  appeal.  I  consequently  set  aside   this
        particular aspect of the judge's decision. The claimant  is  not  a
        refugee and is not entitled to refugee status.

     9. I hasten to add that the judge was  fully  entitled  to  allow  the
        appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.  This  finding  has  not
        been challenged and remains undisturbed. The claimant  is  entitled
        to a grant of humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of  law
and is set aside to the limited extent that the asylum appeal is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal was nevertheless entitled to  allow  the  appeal  on
humanitarian  protection  grounds,  and  this  aspect  of   the   First-tier
Tribunal's decision is undisturbed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               28 November 2018

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
