
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/03931/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                   |                      Decision & Reasons|
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 30 November 2017                |                      On 19 December    |
|                                   |2017                                    |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     RS
                          (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Paxton, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Barcello, promulgated  on  25  May  2017,  in  which  he
    refused the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "Pastor Rees is dismissed (29(iv)) as having  scant  knowledge  of  the
    appellant other than what he  is  told  whereas  (14)  Pastor  Rees  is
    recorded as knowing the appellant  as  a  three  times  a  week  church
    attender plus Tuesday evangelism expeditions plus helping with the food
    bank, a total amounting to almost  daily  engagement.   No  account  is
    taken of the longevity  of  the  relationship  with  the  church  house
    friend.  Guidance is drawn from the extensive citation of the  obsolete
    country guidance report at (24).  Arguably errors of law  have  thereby
    arisen."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Paxton relied on his skeleton argument.  In addition  he  submitted
    in relation to Ground 3 - irrationality,  findings  on  plausibility  -
    that there were  two  strands.   The  first  was  in  relation  to  the
    assumptions made by the Judge regarding what would  be  expected  of  a
    house church in Iran, that the Appellant would  be  allowed  to  attend
    despite his family background, and being out of touch with his  friend,
    and in relation to the  house  church  not  moving  around.   This  was
    supposition.


 6. Secondly the Judge had not considered  the  evidence  before  him  when
    considering implausibility.  Contrary to his finding  at  [29(ii)]  the
    religious literature and notes were not stored casually, but under  the
    carpet in a locked room.  It was a very close friend  who  had  invited
    him  to  church,  and  this  had  not  been  taken  into  account  when
    plausibility  had  been  considered.   The   circumstances   were   not
    implausible.


 7. In relation to Ground 2 and the Country Information  and  Guidance,  it
    was accepted that this would not make  a  difference  as  the  risk  on
    return to the Appellant if he were found not to be a Christian was  not
    changed by the new guidance.


 8. Mr. Richards submitted that the Judge had taken  full  account  of  the
    evidence of Pastor  Rees.   At  [29]  he  had  carefully  analysed  his
    evidence.  He was  wholly  entitled  to  give  limited  weight  to  the
    evidence of Pastor Rees.  He  did  not  reject  it  out  of  hand,  but
    carefully analysed it.  It was for the Judge to decide what  weight  to
    give to his evidence and there was no error of law in his approach.


 9. In relation to Ground 2, the 2015 report  had  been  submitted  by  the
    Appellant's representatives in the Appellant's bundle before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  He  submitted  that  legal  representatives  could  not
    submit evidence which they wanted the Judge to take into  account,  and
    then allege legal error when the Judge did take it  into  account.   In
    any event, the background evidence was not crucial to  the  credibility
    findings.


10. In relation to Ground 3, the Judge had  been  informed  that  Christian
    converts in Iran were at grave risk.   Having  accepted  that,  he  was
    entitled to find that those who attended house churches in Iran  would,
    on any common sense appreciation of the evidence, take  all  reasonable
    precautions in respect of security.  He was  wholly  entitled  to  take
    that matter into account.


11. The Judge had taken account of all of the relevant  evidence.   He  had
    come to a conclusion  properly  open  to  him  on  the  basis  of  that
    evidence.  He had not found the Appellant to be a witness of truth, and
    he had given adequate reasons for that.  There was no error of  law  in
    the decision.


12. In response Mr. Paxton submitted in relation to Ground 1 that the issue
    was that the Judge had characterised the pastor as  saying  one  thing,
    but had put limited reliance on him as a witness.   At  29(iv)  he  had
    found that the pastor had little direct knowledge of the Appellant, but
    this was contradicted by the evidence of Pastor Rees.  In  relation  to
    Ground 3, the Judge had discounted plausible explanations and in  doing
    so had acted irrationally.


Error of Law


Ground 2 - failure to consider relevant evidence


13. I will deal with this ground first as it was accepted by Mr. Paxton  at
    the hearing that, given that the risk on return to an Iranian  who  was
    not a Christian was not changed by the more recent  guidance  from  the
    Respondent, there was no material error in the  consideration  of  this
    report.  I find that this is the case.  Even had the  Judge  considered
    the more recent guidance, it would not have made a  difference  had  he
    found the Appellant to be  a  Christian  or,  as  he  found,  that  the
    Appellant was not a Christian.  Further, it  had  been  agreed  at  the
    hearing that if the Appellant was found to be Christian, he  would  not
    be able to return to Iran.


14. In relation to whether  the  Respondent's  representative  should  have
    drawn the Judge's attention to this guidance, as stated in the skeleton
    argument, it had been referred to in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    [25]  and  so  had  been  brought  to  the  Judge's  attention  by  the
    Respondent.  It was the Appellant's representatives  who  had  provided
    the 2015 guidance as part of their bundle.


15. Although the Judge referred to 2015 rather than 2017 guidance, there is
    no material error of law in his doing so.


Ground 1 - failure to give proper weight to the evidence of Pastor Rees


16. I have carefully considered the Judge's treatment of  the  evidence  of
    Pastor Rees.  It is submitted that insufficient weight was given to his
    evidence.  At paragraph 29(iv) the judge states:


    "I do  not  doubt  the  sincerity  of  Pastor  Rees.   Based  upon  the
    information available to him he considers the Appellant to be a genuine
    adherent to the Christian faith.  I have significant  concerns  however
    about the basis upon which he reached this conclusion:
    -The Pastor has little insight as to the Appellant's  history  and  has
    very little direct knowledge of the Appellant other than that which  he
    is told by other leaders of the church and seeing him  at  Bible  study
    sessions.
    - The Pastor did not make the assessment that the Appellant  was  ready
    to be baptised and relied entirely what he was told by others as to the
    Appellant's character and conduct within the church.  I can place  only
    limited weight on such evidence.
    - The safeguard which the Pastor  suggests  protects  the  church  from
    supporting people who are insincere does little to  achieve  that  aim.
    In essence, it is based upon the expectation that a person  who  has  a
    genuine faith will be prepared to undertake a number of ministries  for
    the church.  That may well  be  correct.   However,  nothing  precludes
    those who do not share their faith from performing the same activities.


    -I note that although the Appellant's actions  are  clearly  consistent
    with a legitimate adherent of the faith, they are not inconsistent with
    those of a person committed  to  perpetrating  a  fraud.   Pastor  Rees
    himself acknowledged that the benefit of a settled  immigration  status
    is a powerful motivation and that there are instances where people have
    attempted to use the church for that gain.  In my  view,  this  is  one
    such instance."


17. I have also considered the evidence of Pastor Rees as set  out  by  the
    Judge.  It is not submitted that there is any error in his  account  of
    Pastor Rees' evidence.  I do not need to set it all out, but only those
    relevant parts, all contained in paragraph 14.


    "He knows Mr. S. as  someone  who  attends  the  church  faithfully  on
    Sundays and at study meetings on Wednesday and Friday.   He  also  goes
    out with the evangelism group on Tuesdays and helps at  the  food  bank
    also."


18. When asked about how it is decided who is to be baptised, his  evidence
    was:


    "I was previously in charge, but relinquished role.  In  the  hands  of
    the leadership to speak to the individuals.  They make value  judgments
    on the people all the time.  He was spoken to about his faith.  It also
    comes out in the ministries in which he participates.  He goes  with  2
    deacons of the church.  They would have seen a lot of him and happy  he
    is sincere.  No comments were made as to why he shouldn't be baptised."


19. In relation to his direct involvement with the Appellant:


    "I would be preaching on the day.  I also have  control  over  if  they
    make wrong decision can interfere and stop  it.   On  the  day  of  his
    baptism I would have been preaching about the importance of baptism.  I
    believe he is sincere.  I look forward that if he remain in Cardiff  he
    will become a member of the church."


20. When asked how often "he directly talks" to him:


    "on a Wednesday, Friday and Sunday  I  would  see  him.   I  am  either
    preaching or teaching.  Also sometimes on a Tuesday. [....] He has come
    many times on a Tuesday as the evangelism group comes  in  around  that
    time."

21. I have also considered the account of cross-examination of Pastor  Rees
    set out at [14] on page 8.


22. Given this evidence, I find  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  place
    limited weight on the evidence of Pastor Rees.  It is submitted in  the
    skeleton that the finding that  the  pastor  had  "very  little  direct
    knowledge of the Appellant" was contrary to the evidence given how much
    the pastor saw him.  However it has not been submitted that  the  Judge
    was wrong in finding that he "saw" him, and when asked about  how  much
    he "talked" to the Appellant, his answer was that he "saw" him.  He did
    not say that he "talked" to him at all.  The Judge refers to the pastor
    seeing him at Bible study sessions, which is the evidence before him.


23. The Judge is correct in stating that the assessment as to  whether  the
    Appellant was ready for baptism was made by someone else, following the
    evidence of Pastor Rees. The fact that he could stop the  baptism  does
    not contradict the finding that it was not him who made the assessment.
     Further, the grounds point to the fact that the pastor  said  that  he
    saw the Appellant, but I have stated above that there is no  more  here
    than that he  "saw"  the  Appellant.   The  pastor  did  not  refer  to
    discussions with the Appellant.


24. The finding about the safeguards at the church was open to  the  Judge.
    This  is  based  on  the  evidence  before  him,  including  the  cross
    examination of the pastor.


25. Considering the account of the evidence of the pastor as set out which,
    as I have stated, has not been challenged, the Judge has not  erred  in
    his assessment and analysis of Pastor Rees'  evidence.   The  Judge  is
    aware of the Appellant's frequent attendance at church, but his finding
    that the pastor has "very little direct  knowledge"  of  the  Appellant
    based on the pastor merely seeing him at the church was  open  to  him.
    He has not erred in giving little weight  to  the  evidence  of  Pastor
    Rees.


26. What lies behind ground 1 is an assertion that the  Judge  should  have
    attached such weight to the evidence of Pastor  Rees  so  as  to  find,
    based on his evidence, that the Appellant  was  a  genuine  convert  to
    Christianity.  The skeleton states that the evidence of the pastor  was
    capable of being decisive.  However, it is for the Judge to decide  the
    weight to be given to the evidence before him.  He has  not  materially
    misstated the oral evidence.  He has analysed the  evidence  of  Pastor
    Rees, and there is no error of law in his giving limited weight to  his
    evidence.

Ground 3 - Irrationality - Findings on Plausibility


27. The grounds submit that the Judge  has  failed  to  take  into  account
    relevant evidence as to plausibility.  At [29(ii)] the  Judge  set  out
    "Examples of Implausible aspects of his accounts".  He states:


    "a) Having not seen Sa for 3 years, despite Sa knowing that his parents
    were involved in the police and military, the Appellant's account would
    suggest a significant departure from the sort of  security  measures  a
    house church might be expected to undertake both  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant himself (invited to the house after 2 weeks, no  surveillance
    or discussion about parents), and


    b) to the way the church was run (meetings on the same time on same day
    at same place each week).


    c) The Appellant's claimed actions run contrary to the care that  could
    be expected of him, he being someone very aware of the risk of becoming
    involved with Christianity.  As examples, him catching a private car to
    the venue and the manner in which he casually kept religious literature
    and notes in his bedroom that could easily  be  found  by  family,  let
    alone security personnel if he came under suspicion."


28. I have considered the account of the evidence of the Appellant  as  set
    out at [13].  As stated above, there  has  been  no  challenge  to  the
    account of the evidence.  The Appellant  said  that  he  "met  Sa  when
    registering for a class, he had not seen him  for  3  months,  but  had
    known him from primary school for 8 years or so".


    "Asked how hiding religious documents in bedroom in  a  draw  (sic)  or
    under carpet is inaccessible, he said the door was  locked  to  prevent
    his brother from entering the room.
    He agreed that secret service could obtain access, but questioned where
    else could have hidden them."


    "Asked why Sa carried out no checks or surveillance, he replied that Sa
    knew his parent's work but he was a believer and his duty was  to  look
    for the lost sheep, people like me.  They had known each  other  for  8
    years and were like brothers."


29. The Judge has stated in his findings that the Appellant  had  not  seen
    his friend for three years, whereas in the account of the  evidence  it
    states three months.  However, I have considered the  asylum  interview
    where the Appellant was asked if Sa had converted to  Christianity  and
    when, Q62.  His response is "It was during the period which I  did  not
    see him.  It was three to three and a half years."  There is  no  error
    of fact here.
30. It was submitted that the Judge ignored the evidence of  the  closeness
    of their relationship, but this runs counter to the evidence that  they
    had not seen each other for a period of  three  to  three  and  a  half
    years.


31. In relation to the religious literature, the  Appellant  said  that  he
    locked his bedroom.  However, he was challenged in oral evidence as  to
    how keeping the literature in a drawer  or  under  a  carpet  could  be
    described as "inaccessible", and he  agreed  that  the  secret  service
    could obtain access and asked where else he  could  have  hidden  them.
    The  Judge  states  that  the  Appellant  "casually"   kept   religious
    literature in his room.   It is arguable  that  the  use  of  the  word
    "casually" is not correct, but equally the evidence  of  the  Appellant
    was that he was keeping religious literature at home, in  his  bedroom,
    where it could have been found by security personnel.  He  stated  that
    he locked his bedroom, but arguably to keep such literature at home  at
    all, given his parents' work, and given his admission that it could  be
    found by security personnel, was casual.


32. In any event, even if the judge has erred by characterising the  manner
    in which the Appellant kept religious literature  at  home,  given  the
    rest of the Judge's findings, this is not material.


33. Regarding the submission that the Judge has made a speculative  finding
    in relation  to  the  way  that  house  churches  operated,  given  the
    Appellant's awareness of the risk of becoming involved in Christianity,
    and the risk to those involved  with  house  churches,  the  Judge  was
    entitled to make findings regarding  the  Appellant's  own  conduct  in
    relation to the house church, including the fact that Sa, who  had  not
    seen him for three years, and who knew that his parents worked  in  the
    police and the defence ministry, invited him to the house church  after
    only two weeks.  He was entitled to find that it was  implausible  that
    the house church would meet at the same place and time each week.   The
    Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant's account of the  way  in
    which he was invited to the house church, and his account  of  how  the
    house church was run, was not plausible given the Appellant's  evidence
    as to the danger of being involved with Christianity.   The  Judge  was
    entitled to  find  it  implausible  that  Sa  would  have  invited  the
    Appellant along after two weeks, having not seen  him  for  over  three
    years, and knowing what his parents did.


34. Again, even if the Judge has  speculated  on  the  operation  of  house
    churches and, given a common sense approach to the claim before him,  I
    do not find that he has, his findings need  to  be  considered  in  the
    round.  I find, considering the evidence in the round that this is  not
    material.  At 29(i) he found with reasons that he did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's motivation for leaving Iran.  This has not been challenged.
     The Judge found that the Appellant had "lied about the motivation  for
    leaving" Iran, with reference  to  his  immigration  history,  and  his
    claimed journey to the UK.


35. At 29(ii) he first set out inconsistencies in his evidence.  There  has
    been no challenge to the significant inconsistency in  the  Appellant's
    evidence of when Sa introduced him to  the  house  church.   Similarly,
    there has been no challenge to the  finding  of  inconsistency  in  the
    Appellant's evidence of his mode of travel to the  house  church.   The
    Judge finds this particularly significant given the context in which he
    was being asked.  He states that he found the context  of  his  answers
    important, given that it "came at a time when the Appellant  was  being
    challenged about an apparent lack of security measures  for  the  house
    church".  The Judge is entitled to come to this finding,  and  to  take
    into account the context in which the inconsistency occurred.   At  (d)
    he makes the important and unchallenged finding relating to the  change
    in the Appellant's evidence as to whether the secret service were aware
    of him being involved in Christianity.  At 29(iii) the Judge finds that
    the Appellant was "deliberately evasive and  argumentative  during  his
    evidence when  challenged  on  matters  of  apparent  inconsistency  or
    implausibility".  He found him to be deliberately evasive.


36. At 29(iv) he considered the evidence of Pastor Rees, and I  have  found
    that there is no error of law in this consideration.


37. Accordingly I find that if there is any error of law  in  the  findings
    relating to implausibility, and for the reasons given above, I  do  not
    find that there is, it is not material.  It is clear that the Judge did
    not find the Appellant to be a credible witness for reasons  fully  set
    out.  He gave proper reasons for not giving more weight to the evidence
    of Pastor Rees.  The Judge did not find  the  Appellant's  account  not
    credible "largely on the  basis  that  he  considered  aspects  of  his
    account to be implausible" as stated in the grounds, but he  found  him
    not to be credible having considered all of the evidence in the  round.
    The grounds do not challenge all of the findings.  The  grounds  amount
    to no more than a disagreement with the findings of the  Judge,  and  a
    disagreement as to the weight he has placed  on  the  evidence  of  the
    witness.


Notice of Decision


38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    a material error of law and I do  not  set  the  decision  aside.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
