
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03290/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 2 August 2016                              |On 8 August 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M R H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    None
For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manyarara ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 26  May  2016,  in
    which the FTTJ allowed an appeal on Article 8 grounds.


 2. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    maintain that direction.

 3. Notwithstanding this appeal is being pursued by the Secretary of State,
    I maintain the descriptions of the parties as they were in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal where the Secretary of State was the respondent.


Background

 4. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Syria born on 2 January  1999.
    His age and nationality were not accepted: the respondent  refused  his
    asylum claim and  made  directions  for  his  removal  to  Egypt.   The
    appellant's appeal against removal was dismissed on asylum grounds  and
    allowed on human rights grounds (Article  8)  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. The respondent was granted permission to appeal to this tribunal in the
    following terms:

         "..


         2. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  came  to  his
         decision because of there being  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's
         family being traced. The grounds state that the judge  should  have
         followed the case of TN and  MA  (Afghanistan)  2015  UKSC40  which
         states that a breach of the family tracing duty in Regulation 6  of
         the Asylum Seekers (reception conditions) Regulations 2005 does not
         affect the  rule  in  Ravichandran  requiring  applications  to  be
         decided on the facts existing at the decision.  The Directive makes
         no mention of family tracing as part of the process for determining
         the application.  It follows that to allow the appeal by reason  of
         the respondent's breach of her tracing obligation must be an  error
         of law.


         3. The reason the judge gave  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  human
         rights grounds was that the respondent had not attempted  to  trace
         the appellant's family. Based on the country guidance case law this
         is not a sufficient reason for the appeal under  Article  8  to  be
         allowed.


         4. There are arguable errors of law in the judge's decision."

 6. Hence the matter comes before me.

The Hearing

 7. The appellant was not present at the hearing and was  not  represented.
    He did not request an adjournment. As the appellant is a minor, I asked
    the clerk to telephone the solicitors on the tribunal record  (who  had
    represented the appellant before the FTTJ), Messrs Wai Leung.  She duly
    did so and reported to me that they had written to the  Upper  Tribunal
    two weeks earlier to advise that they were no  longer  acting  for  the
    appellant; they would not be attending the hearing.  The appellant  had
    been sent a notice of hearing by post and  I  was  satisfied  therefore
    that the notice had been validly served. No reason has been  given  for
    the absence of the appellant. No adjournment has been requested.  There
    was no indication that, were I to adjourn the  hearing,  the  appellant
    would attend on another occasion.  The appellant had been warned in the
    notice of hearing that, if a party or his representative did not attend
    the hearing, the Tribunal may determine the appeal in  the  absence  of
    that party. I therefore proceeded with the hearing because  it  was  in
    the interests of justice to do so.


 8. I heard the oral submissions for the respondent and, at the end of  the
    hearing, reserved my decision on all issues.

Submissions

 9. Mr Kotas relied  on  the  guidance  in  TN  and  MA  (Afghanistan);  AA
    (Afghanistan) [2015] UKSC 40 to the demonstrate that the FTTJ could not
    use the failure of the respondent to trace as a way of rectifying  past
    wrongdoing.  He submitted the FTTJ had erred in law in identifying  the
    failure to trace as determinative of the Article 8 claim.  He  referred
    to paragraph 72 of TN and MA: "it is not proper for a court to  require
    the respondent to grant unconditional leave to an appellant  who  would
    not be entitled to such relief under current policy (or have a  current
    right to remain in the UK on other grounds, such as article  8),  as  a
    form of relief for an  earlier  error  or  breach  of  obligation".  He
    submitted that the FTTJ had failed to follow this guidance,  albeit  in
    the context of an article 8 claim, rather than an asylum claim.


10. He referred to the reasons  for  refusal  letter  which  indicated,  at
    paragraph 75, the  respondent's  attempts  to  locate  the  appellant's
    family  in  Egypt  (notwithstanding  he  claimed  to  be  Syrian).   He
    submitted that, faced with that factual matrix, the burden was  on  the
    appellant. As in TN and MA (paragraph 55) the family of  the  appellant
    was unlikely to cooperate with the  respondent.   The  FTTJ  failed  to
    appreciate that, the appellant's case having been wholly rejected,  any
    attempt by the respondent to attempt to trace his family in Egypt would
    be futile. The FTTJ had erred in taking, in isolation, the  failure  of
    the respondent to find the appellant's family in Egypt; she should also
    have taken into account the credibility findings (TN and MA).

11. Mr Kotas also submitted that there was no breach of  the  tracing  duty
    because the appellant had withheld information (AA (Afghanistan) [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1625).

Discussion

12. The FTTJ found the appellant was not a Syrian national and that he  was
    aged 17 years and 5 months at the date of hearing (9 May  2016).  Those
    findings are not challenged before me. Nor is there  any  challenge  by
    the appellant to the credibility  findings.   The  appellant  does  not
    challenge the dismissal of his appeal on asylum grounds,  ie  that  his
    removal to Egypt would not place  the  UK  in  breach  of  the  Refugee
    Convention [50].  Finally, the appellant does not challenge the  FTTJ's
    dismissal of his Article 8 claim under the Immigration Rules.

13.  The  FTTJ  rightly  refers  to  the  need  to   identify   "compelling
    circumstances" for consideration of the Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Rules (paragraph 55).  The respondent does  not  challenge  the  FTTJ's
    consideration of the appeal on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules  (SS
    (Congo) and Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604). Her
    challenge is the method of assessment of proportionality by the FTTJ.

14. The FTTJ notes the appellant was a minor at the  date  of  hearing  and
    that the appeal concerned his return to Egypt (paragraph 58).  Extracts
    from Council Directive 2003/9/EC (the "Reception Directive") are  cited
    as is  regulation  6  of  the  Asylum  Seekers  (Reception  Conditions)
    Regulations 2005.  This requires the respondent to "endeavour to  trace
    the members of the minor's family as soon as possible after  the  minor
    makes his claim for asylum". An unaccompanied minor is one who is taken
    into the care of a responsible adult or until he reaches the age of  18
    whichever is earlier.  The appellant was aged 17 years and 5 months  at
    the date of hearing.  The FTTJ states [61]:

         "I have found that the appellant is still a minor and will continue
         to be a minor until he reaches the age of 18. I find that there  is
         no evidence before me to show what reception arrangements have been
         made in relation to the  appellant's  removal  to  Egypt.  This  is
         relevant as a direct result of the appellant's age.  The  appellant
         has been under the care of Kent Social Services and was not leading
         an independent life prior to his arrival in the United  Kingdom.  I
         therefore find that removal of the appellant at this time would  be
         disproportionate. I hold  that  there  is  a  compelling  case  for
         further leave to be granted outside of the Rules as a result of the
         appellant's age and the absence  of  any  evidence  of  his  family
         having been traced.


         62. In so finding, I have considered the five steps  propounded  by
         Lord Bingham in Razgar v SSHD [2004] 2  AC  368  (which  I  do  not
         reiterate), the last of which is material: whether any interference
         is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be
         achieved."

15. The FTTJ then goes on to refer to the public interest considerations in
    s117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  noting
    there is no distinction between adult and child migrants  (Miah  (s117B
    NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT 131 (IAC)).   Further,  at  paragraph
    64, it is stated that, with regard to the factors in s117B(1)-(5):

         "They are not however an exhaustive list  and  all  other  relevant
         factors must be weighed in the  balance.  These  may  include  age,
         vulnerability and immaturity.  The juridical status of the relevant
         Home  Office  'Immigration  Directorate   Instructions'   must   be
         appreciated. While these are subservient to primary  and  secondary
         legislation and  the  Immigration  Rules,  they  rank  as  relevant
         considerations, frame in flexible terms, to be taken  into  account
         in every case where they apply.


         65. Sections 117B(4) and (5) show  that  little  weight  should  be
         given to a private life established by  a  person  who  is  in  the
         United Kingdom unlawfully, or at a time when his immigration status
         is precarious. A person's immigration status is precarious if he is
         in the United Kingdom with limited leave to  enter  or  remain  but
         without settled or permanent status. I bear in mind  the  following
         cases of Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412  (IAC)
         and Bossade that these are not the only considerations.  I  however
         find the decision to be disproportionate in all  the  circumstances
         of this case."

16. Whilst the order in which the FTTJ addressed  the  matters  arising  in
    relation to the Article 8 claim is somewhat confusing, the findings are
    clear.


17. The respondent relies in this appeal on  the  guidance  in  TN  and  MA
    (Afghanistan) and other judgments.  However, these concern  the  impact
    of the Reception Directive and the 2005 Regulations on asylum  appeals.
    The appeal before me arises from the FTTJ's analysis of proportionality
    as  regards  his  Article  8  claim.   Furthermore,  contrary  to   the
    submissions, the FTTJ did not make findings  that  the  respondent  had
    breached her tracing duty.  There is  no  suggestion  of  this  in  the
    FTTJ's decision which resonates with the terms of the refusal letter to
    the effect that "an initial family tracing search has been  started  in
    Egypt to try and locate [the appellant's] family.".  The appellant  was
    asked in the refusal letter to  provide  further  relevant  information
    regarding his family and place of birth.   Quite  properly,  therefore,
    the FTTJ does not allude to any failure of  the  respondent  under  the
    Directive or 2005 Regulations.

18. There is no challenge by the respondent to the FTTJ's finding that  the
    appellant was a minor at the date of hearing and  promulgation  of  the
    decision.  The FTTJ was entitled to take into account, in  the  absence
    of any indication to the contrary, that the appellant would be  removed
    to Egypt as a minor and that  there  was  no  evidence  "to  show  what
    reception arrangements have been made in relation  to  the  appellant's
    removal to Egypt".  This is a relevant factor in assessing  the  degree
    of interference with the appellant's right  to  a  private  life  as  a
    result  of  the  respondent's  decision.    The   lack   of   reception
    arrangements for the appellant as a minor is  not  an  issue  which  is
    capable of being addressed by reference  to  Paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

19. The FTTJ's decision on proportionality was not based solely on the lack
    of evidence of reception arrangements. The FTTJ also took into  account
    the public interest factors in  the  2002  Act,  the  appellant's  age,
    vulnerability,  immaturity  and  the  respondent's  IDI.  There  is  no
    challenge to the inclusion of these factors in the  FTTJ's  assessment.
    Whilst the FTTJ does  not  specifically  refer  to  this,  it  is  also
    relevant that the respondent's decision had been based on an  erroneous
    assessment of the appellant's age; the FTTJ accepted  the  most  recent
    age assessment by social services and found the appellant was aged only
    17 years and 5 months at the date of hearing,  whereas  the  respondent
    had relied on an earlier age assessment putting his  age  as  one  year
    older.  Thus the respondent's  decision  to  remove  was  based  on  an
    inaccurate assessment of the appellant's age: the  decision  to  remove
    was taken a year earlier than should have been the case,  according  to
    the respondent's  policy  on  the  treatment  of  unaccompanied  asylum
    seeking children. The appellant  should  not  be  disadvantaged  by  an
    earlier breach of policy by the respondent (SL (Vietnam) v SSHD  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 225)).

20. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of  the  FTTJ  does
    not contain a material error  of  law.  The  respondent's  reasons  for
    appealing are misconceived  and  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the FTTJ.

Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law.


22. The decision of the FTTJ is upheld.


Signed           A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M  Black                               Date  8
August 2016


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award

The FTTJ made no fee  award  because  no  fee  was  paid  or  payable.  That
decision also stands.


Signed           A M Black
Deputy       Upper       Tribunal       Judge        A        M        Black
       Date 8 August 2016
