
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03853/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th December  2016                         |On 15th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                MR SAJID KHAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Faryl (instructed by Whitefield Solicitors
Ltd)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Amin) promulgated on 26th February 2016 by  which  she
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to refuse his protection claim.

   2. The Appellant claimed to be at risk in  his  home  country,  Pakistan,
      because he claimed to be a member of the Awami  National  party  (ANP)
      and in particular he  fears  the  Muhadia  Komi  Movement  (MQM),  the
      Taliban and the state.


   3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern.  He
      found that largely, the grounds were no more  than  an  expression  of
      disagreement with the  clearly reasoned findings of fact that  it  was
      for the Judge to make and, as he had heard oral evidence, he was  best
      placed to do so. However he noted that the grounds complained that the
      Judge simply ignored one important item of evidence that, if accepted,
      was capable of supporting the Appellant's claim, that being  the  Rule
      35 report of Dr Yousafz that contained the observation: "his  injuries
      appear consistent with his account of being tortured in the context of
      his country's political turmoil". Judge Southern said that it  may  be
      that the comprehensively adverse credibility  assessment  recorded  by
      the Judge is such as to represent a more than adequate  foil  to  that
      observation but it is arguable that the Appellant was entitled to know
      what the Judge made of that  evidence  and  that  it  was  not  simply
      overlooked in the rejection of the Appellant's claim.


   4. The report referred to  is  not  a  medical  report  obtained  by  the
      Appellant but a Rule 35 report said to be a "Report of Special Illness
      or Condition (including torture claims) obtained when he was  detained
      in Harmondsworth detention centre. The report is very brief and refers
      to Mr Khan having alleged  that  he  had  two  episodes  of  attempted
      murder, the first being on 21 April 2009 and the second  on  22  March
      2010. He did not know who the attackers were but suspected  that  they
      belonged to MQM in the first attempt and the Taliban in the second. He
      said that he was attacked because he belonged to an opposing political
      party, Pukhtoon Student Federation, student wing. In the first  attack
      he was fired upon and he had a bullet wound to his left flank with  an
      entry and exit wound. He was said to have a medical report to  confirm
      that as well (not in the bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal).  The
      second attack was also a gunshot, with the bullet passing through  his
      right elbow. When he tried to run away his left foot hit a  metal  rod
      and sustained an injury in the process. He has a  scar  on  his  right
      foot medially. The report then recites further matters claimed by  the
      Appellant, namely that he had 3  FIRs  (First  Investigation  Reports)
      lodged against him to put  psychological  pressure  on  him  from  the
      opposing political parties. He said his  brother  was  also  shot  and
      murdered by the opposing political party. He said that  he  had  close
      family  members  who  were  injured  in  other  politically  motivated
      attacks. He said that he suffered from mental stress due to the  scars
      of previous injuries and his sleep is disturbed due  to  it.  He  said
      that he suffers  from  nightmares  and  anxiety  episodes.  The  final
      sentence of the brief report states:-"his injuries  appear  consistent
      with his account of being tortured in the  context  of  his  country's
      political turmoil." On the reverse  of  that  report  is  a  body  map
      indicating the bullet wounds referred to. That  is  the  evidence  not
      dealt with by the Judge in her  Decision  and  Reasons.  However,  the
      Judge did give very careful and detailed consideration to each  aspect
      of the Appellant's claims and she  indicated  at  the  outset  of  her
      findings  that  she   had   concluded   that   there   were   material
      inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence which undermined his  core
      asylum claim and damaged his credibility. She noted that the Appellant
      claims to be a key player in his party and that he was active and held
      high positions in that party. In the light of that the Judge said  she
      would have expected  some  reasonable  level  of  consistency  in  his
      evidence.

   5. The Judge then  said  at  paragraph  53  that  on  the  contrary,  the
      Appellant, for example stated in his screening interview that  he  was
      detained in Pakistan  for  4  to  5  days  because  of  his  political
      activities. However, elsewhere the Appellant stated he had  only  ever
      been detained by the immigration authorities in the UK which she found
      to be a significant omission and inconsistency which the Appellant had
      failed to explain.


   6. The Judge noted that the Appellant's account  in  any  event  was  not
      supported by his documentary evidence. In his screening  interview  he
      said that the ANP believed that the  MQM,  Taliban  or  the  Pakistani
      authorities were behind the two attacks in April 2009 and March  2010.
      He relied on a newspaper article dated 22 April 2009  and  updated  in
      November 2010 in support of that evidence. However,  the  Judge  noted
      from that article that it was said that a rival  student  organisation
      was behind the attack and that they knew who the  attackers  were  and
      had lodged cases against them. This was in direct contradiction to the
      Appellant's evidence  that  it  was  the  MQM,  Taliban  or  Pakistani
      authorities.


   7. The Judge further noted that the newspaper article did not support the
      Appellant's belief that his political opinion  led  to  him  having  a
      valid fear on return to Pakistan. She noted that the newspaper article
      and an article from Dawn.com referred to 4 motorcycles involved in the
      attack. The Appellant's evidence was that there were only 3. The  same
      article noted that 1 person was killed and around 8 to 9 students  had
      bullet injuries. The Appellant in his asylum  interview  said  that  4
      persons in total, including him, were injured. The  Appellant  claimed
      there was 1 witness to the attack  in  2009  but  the  same  newspaper
      reported there were more witnesses.


   8. The Judge noted that the Appellant had  not  mentioned  at  the  first
      reasonable opportunity that there  was  a  court  warrant  outstanding
      against him for his arrest in Pakistan, having failed to mention  this
      in his first two interviews. She said that  there  was  no  reasonable
      explanation offered for that omission.


   9. She then referred to the second attack in  2010  and  noted  that  the
      Appellant initially named the people who  attacked  him.  However,  in
      interview he claimed he did not know who they were.  He also failed to
      mention the March 2010 attack in his screening interview.


  10. The Appellant claimed in his asylum interview that  after  the  second
      attack he reduced his political activities on the advice of his party.
      However, he was unable to explain why, if that  were  the  case,  FIRs
      were then lodged against him.


  11. She noted that the Appellant's evidence as to who had lodged the  FIRs
      was inconsistent.


  12. The Judge considered the Appellant's evidence that he was  wanted  for
      murder and yet, despite that, the Appellant returned  to  Pakistan  in
      July 2012, apparently because his  brother  had  been  killed  and  he
      stayed there for one month. The Judge found  that  behaviour  did  not
      demonstrate the Appellant to be in fear of the authorities as claimed.
      It also was evidence that the Pakistani authorities did not  have  any
      adverse interest in him  because  neither  the  FIRs  nor  the  arrest
      warrants were executed against him when he returned.

  13. The Judge also noted that the evidence that the Appellant returned for
      one month was also in stark  contrast  to  his  claim  that  MQM,  the
      Taliban and the authorities were all pursuing him.


  14. With regard to his return to Pakistan in 2012  the  Judge  also  noted
      that he had given inconsistent evidence as to the reason for that.  On
      one occasion he said that he wanted to attend  his  brother's  funeral
      but later said that when  he  arrived  in  Pakistan  the  funeral  had
      already taken  place  and  he  stayed  for  one  month  at  the  party
      headquarters. However,  none  of  the  documentation  from  the  party
      headquarters made any mention of that.


  15. The Judge did not accept his evidence that his brother was  killed  as
      claimed  as  there  was  no  evidence  put  before  her  to  show  the
      relationship between the dead man and  the  Appellant  and  the  death
      certificate itself contained many omissions.


  16. The Judge did not accept the Appellant to be  a  high  profile  person
      because the documentary evidence supplied by him made no reference  to
      any of his high-profile roles. Similarly there was no reference in the
      material produced to his  brother  having  any  high-profile  position
      either at a national or a local level.


  17. The Judge noted that notwithstanding  the  three  FIRs  including  for
      murder, the Appellant was able to enter and leave Pakistan without any
      incident.


  18. Finally the Judge indicated that she accepted the Appellant  to  be  a
      low level supporter but was not satisfied even on the low standard  of
      proof that he held a high profile role  or  that  the  authorities  or
      indeed anyone else was interested in him. She noted some very  low-key
      sur place activities which she found would not place him  at  risk  on
      return.


  19. The Judge, it is true, did not deal with the Rule 35 report.  However,
      whilst it confirmed that he has received bullet wounds that  does  not
      establish that he was deliberately targeted  in  attacks  or  that  he
      would be at risk on return and the Judge's findings in that regard are
      unaffected by those conclusions.   The report makes no attempt to date
      the injuries and simply reports the  Appellant's  claims.  The  report
      fails to take into  account  other  explanations  in  a  country  like
      Pakistan for the Appellant having received bullet wounds and indeed it
      recites  his  evidence  which,  as  the  Judge  indicated   had   been
      inconsistent throughout.


  20. Accordingly, whilst it is arguably an error of law  to  fail  to  take
      into account material evidence, the evidence I find was not  material.
      The report falls a long way short  of  corroborating  the  Appellant's
      claims save that he has at some point  received  gunshot  wounds.  The
      other numerous adverse credibility findings are all properly  reasoned
      on the basis of the evidence and no reasonable Judge, even taking into
      account that Rule 35 report, would have  reached  another  conclusion.
      Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal's Decision and  Reasons  contains
      no material error of law and I uphold it.


  21. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

  22. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.


Signed                              Date 14th December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
