
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03070/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2016                            |On 26 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                            mrs tam thanh nguyen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jasri, Counsel instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart in which  she  dismissed  her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 11 November  2015
    to deport her from the UK and to refuse her human rights claim.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Vietnam  born  on  27  July  1975.   She
    entered the UK on 29 December 2002  using  a  false  name  and  claimed
    asylum.  She was given temporary admission but failed to attend  for  a
    full interview.  Her claim was refused on  non-compliance  grounds  and
    the refusal letter was sent to the address she had supplied.

3.   On 7 April 2005 the appellant was convicted at Woolwich Crown Court  of
    cultivating cannabis and sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.  She
    wrote to the Home Office on  1  July  and  4  July  2005  querying  her
    immigration status.  On 16 April 2010 she applied  for  Certificate  of
    Approval to marry Van Tam Hoang.  There was correspondence between  the
    Home Office and the appellant's representatives and on  7  March  2011,
    the application for a Certificate of Approval was granted.   There  was
    further  correspondence  from  her  legal  representatives   requesting
    conclusion of her asylum and human rights submissions and a request for
    indefinite leave, their representatives claiming that the asylum  claim
    was extant.

4.   A notice of  liability  to  deportation  was  issued  on  5  June  2014
    referring to the conviction of  7  April  2005.   A  questionnaire  was
    completed and returned to the Home  Office  on  14  June  2014.   On  1
    September 2014 the appellant was encountered by immigration enforcement
    at a nail and hair salon although she claimed not to be working.  On  5
    March 2015 a deportation order was signed against  her.   On  13  March
    2015 her  solicitors  sent  a  Pre-Action  Protocol  letter  requesting
    withdrawal of the certification made on 5 March 2015 and sought a fresh
    decision and an in-country right of appeal.  The decision was withdrawn
    on 22 May 2015.  In  subsequent  correspondence  their  representatives
    confirmed that the appellant maintained her asylum claim to have a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Vietnam.  They were given a further  ten
    working days to provide grounds for the asylum  claim.   There  was  no
    response and the asylum claim was refused on 11 November 2015.

5.   The judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  no  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution when she left Vietnam and neither does she have a  fear  of
    persecution  now.   This  decision  has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    appellant.

6.   The judge also found that on the evidence the appellant does  not  have
    a parental relationship with a child in the UK.  This finding has  also
    not been challenged by the appellant.

7.   In respect of the appellant's appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds,  the
    judge considered the appellant's claimed relationship with her  partner
    by reference to paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules.   The  judge
    found that the relationship between the appellant and Van Tam Hoang was
    genuine and subsisting and had been continuing since 2004.   She  found
    that at the time the relationship was formed Mr Hoang conceded that  he
    was aware  from  the  outset  of  the  appellant's  immigration  status
    although she claimed that it was in 2008.  Nevertheless the judge found
    that the relationship was formed at a time when the  appellant  was  in
    the UK  unlawfully  and  she  knew  that  her  immigration  status  was
    precarious.  The judge found on the evidence that  the  appellant  does
    not qualify within the Rules.

8.   She went on to find as follows:

         "32.  I  consider  the  appellant's   circumstances   outside   the
             Immigration   Rules   and   whether   there   are   compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraph EX.2
             of Appendix FM and it would be unduly harsh for him to  remain
             in the UK without the appellant who is to be deported.


         31.  The compelling circumstances are set out  in  paragraph  EX.2.
             Paragraph EX.2 refers to insurmountable obstacles meaning  the
             very significant difficulties which  would  be  faced  by  the
             applicant or their partner in  continuing  their  family  life
             together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
             would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or  their
             partner.  Does it apply in deport?


         32.  The appellant's partner is a  national  of  Vietnam.   He  has
             continuing ties with that country.  His father is there and he
             last visited him four years ago.  At the time the relationship
             started the partner was aware of the appellant's circumstances
             which included not only her criminal conduct but also that she
             was in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  Whilst they applied for
             and obtained a Certificate of Approval for  marriage  this  in
             itself did not mean that her status was  not  precarious.   On
             the application form at  4.1  it  stated  that  she  had  been
             previously refused asylum and her human rights application was
             pending.


         33.  There has been a considerable period  of  delay  in  the  Home
             Office in  concluding  matters.   In  the  refusal  letter  at
             paragraph 40  it  states  that  some  of  the  delay  must  be
             attributed to the appellant  given  that  she  had  failed  to
             maintain regular contact with the Home  Office  and  absconded
             from immigration control until 2010 with the submission of her
             COA application.  However  in  its  summary  the  Home  Office
             referred to two letters from the appellant on 1 July 2005  and
             4 July 2005 querying her immigration status and advising  that
             she wished to go to college to learn English.   There  was  no
             indication of any reply.  Whilst the appellant's  offence  was
             serious, she  pleaded  guilty  and  having  been  remanded  in
             custody that time  went  towards  her  sentence  and  she  was
             released soon after sentencing.  The sentence would have  been
             spent  in  2010  prior  to  the  Legal  Aid,  Sentencing   and
             Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.  There is no evidence of any
             further offending and the appellant appears to  have  remained
             in a stable relationship since that time.


         34.  It is not reasonable to expect her husband who fled Vietnam as
             a refugee and who had lived outside of the country for over 26
             years and is a British citizen to have to relocate to  Vietnam
             and given the length of time since the appellant herself  left
             the country it may well be that she is no  longer  in  contact
             with anyone there although she will have retained cultural and
             linguistic ties and indeed  both  she  and  her  husband  gave
             evidence in Vietnamese.  I accept  that  it  would  be  unduly
             harsh to expect her partner to relocate.   However,  the  fact
             that the relationship was  formed  and  established  during  a
             period when the appellant and her partner knew that she had no
             status and there was nothing from the Home Office in  response
             to her letters in 2005 to confirm the position was  otherwise,
             I find that it would not be unduly harsh for  her  partner  to
             remain in the UK  without  the  appellant.   It  is  a  choice
             whether he joins her in Vietnam or remains here.  There is  no
             evidence that he owns any property.  He said he formerly owned
             a restaurant in the UK and now works in a nail  bar,  both  of
             which occupations he could take up in Vietnam.   His  children
             are adult.  There is  no  supporting  evidence  from  them  or
             evidence of the grandchildren or evidence of  the  quality  of
             the relationship that he might have with them.  In Vietnam  he
             has his father.  It is for the appellant and  her  husband  to
             decide whether they return to Vietnam together and make a life
             there.


         36.  Exception 2 applies as the appellant was sentenced to  a  term
             of imprisonment of less than 4 years and is in a  genuine  and
             subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner.   Very
             compelling circumstances are required  to  be  shown  why  she
             should not be deported.  The only factor is the marriage.  The
             husband was aware of her status before they married.   If  she
             did make contact with the Home Office in  2005  it  was  after
             committing a serious criminal offence, an enterprise in  which
             she was involved as soon as she was given temporary admission.
              Despite  the  delay  in  making  the  deportation  order  her
             presence in the UK was always unlawful.  She and  her  husband
             are from the same country.  Both needed interpreters.  She has
             no doubt retained social, language and cultural ties with  her
             own country.  Her partner has family in Vietnam.  She probably
             does also.  Even if she does not, she was able to open and run
             her own business there and so can  be  self-supporting  again.
             It is a decision for them whether her  husband  joins  her  in
             Vietnam or maintains contact some  other  way.   I  find  that
             there are no compelling circumstances why the appellant should
             not be deported."

9.   Permission was granted to the appellant by FtTJ Holmes  who  said  that
    it is arguable, as set out in the grounds, that the judge erred in  her
    approach to s.117A-D, and the Immigration Rules.   The  judge  accepted
    that the appellant's spouse was a refugee from Vietnam  [34],  but  the
    remainder of the judge's conclusions in relation to the proportionality
    of the decision to deport would appear to  be  inconsistent  with  that
    finding.  Arguably s.117C(5) applied, so that the public  interest  did
    not require the appellant's deportation, since the  judge  had  already
    concluded that requiring a spouse to relocate was unduly harsh.

10.  I agreed with Mr Jasri that the judge erred in her  approach  when  she
    stated at paragraph 36 that "very compelling circumstances are required
    to be shown why she should not be  deported".   This  is  an  erroneous
    reference to Section 117C(6) where the sentence is  of  at  least  four
    years.

11.  I also find that at paragraph 32 the judge got into a muddle  when  she
    said she was considering  the  appellant's  circumstances  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and yet  the  words  in  bold  type  are  taken  from
    paragraph 399(b)(ii) and (iii) of the Immigration Rules.

12.  Be that as it may, I accept Ms Brocklesby-Weller's argument that  these
    errors are not material to  the  judge's  decision.   This  is  because
    firstly.  The Upper Tribunal held in AB (para 399(a)) [2015]  UKUT  657
    (IAC) (20 November 2015) that the requirements in paragraph 399(b)  are
    conjunctive.   Therefore  the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant's
    relationship was formed at a time when she was in the UK unlawfully and
    she knew that her immigration status was  precarious,  meant  that  the
    appellant could not satisfy paragraph 399  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Consequently, in view of the closing words of Rule 398,  the  appellant
    was  required  to  establish  whether  "there   are   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A".

13.  This approach is set out in  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  MM
    (Uganda) & another v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, paragraph 17(3).

14.  This also means that there was no need for the judge to  even  consider
    paragraph 399(b) (ii) which she referred to  at  paragraph  32  of  her
    decision, although I accept that the same  factors  would  have  to  be
    considered  in  relation  to  the  closing  requirements  of  398   and
    399(b)(ii).

15.  The judge properly considered the evidence from  the  second  paragraph
    32 to paragraph 34.  Indeed, the appellant had told the judge that  her
    husband last visited Vietnam in 2012.  So whilst he entered the UK as a
    refugee from Vietnam and is  now  a  British  citizen,  his  visits  to
    Vietnam in 2012 indicated that he  had  no  fear  of  being  persecuted
    there.

16.  I find that on the evidence before her the  judge  made  findings  that
    were perfectly sustainable.  The errors she made were not  material  to
    her decision.  Her decision dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  shall
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Signed                                  Date: 27 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
