
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03028/2016




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 December 2016                      |On 23rd December 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     YT
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Oommen, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


   DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 39 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                 RULES 2008


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea,  born  on  1  January  2002.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) against a decision to refuse
    leave to remain on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Geraint  Jones  Q.C.  ("the  FtJ")
    dismissed his appeal after a hearing on 5 September 2016.

 2. Permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  the  FtJ  having  been
    granted, his appeal came before me.

 3. By consent, the parties agreed the following:

    (i) that the FtJ erred in law in dismissing the appeal  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds;

    (ii) that the FtJ's decision should be set aside; and

    (iii) that in the light of the decision in  MST  and  Others  (national
    service-risk categories)  Eritrea  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00443  (IAC),  the
    accepted facts including the appellant's age and his illegal exit  from
    Eritrea, that his appeal falls to be allowed on asylum and human rights
    grounds with reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.

 4. Having heard the parties, and  considering  rule  39  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I make a consent  order  in  the
    terms expressed in [3] above, considering it appropriate to do so,  and
    thus allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds
    with reference to Article 3 of  the  ECHR.  The  consent  order  is  as
    contained herein, no separate document being required.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because of the age of the appellant I consider that an  anonymity  order  is
appropriate. Therefore,  unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.
 Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            22/12/16


