
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/03707/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On August 24, 2017                       |  On September 1, 2017            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR S R
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Jones, Counsel, instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association
     Newham
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend  the  anonymity  direction  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national.  The appellant left  Sri  Lanka
    on his own passport with a  tourist  visa  but  upon  arrival  in  this
    country on October 20, 2015 he claimed asylum claiming his passport had
    been handed to the agent. He pleaded guilty to  failing  to  present  a
    valid Identity Document and sentenced on November 30, 2015  to  a  six-
    week prison sentence. He attended a substantive interview on March  11,
    2016 and in a decision dated April 5, 2016 the respondent  refused  his
    asylum claim.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on April 14, 2016 under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll on September
    2, 2016 and in a decision promulgated on September 16, 2016  the  Judge
    refused his appeal on all grounds. Permission to appeal  that  decision
    was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robertson  and
    following a  hearing  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Davey  on
    November 11, 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Carroll's
    decision was set aside.

 4. The appellant's appeal was then relisted de novo before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett on March 31,  2017.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on April 20, 2017 Judge Bartlett dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision on  May  4,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Kelly
    on May 16, 2017 but when  those  grounds  were  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
    on July 5, 2017. She granted permission to appeal primarily on  grounds
    (2) and (3) of the grounds of appeal

 6. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response dated July 20, 2017  in  which
    she opposed all grounds of appeal.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date.

    Submissions

 8. Miss Jones adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that  the  Judge
    had erred. She submitted that her central  complaint  was  the  Judge's
    treatment of the medical evidence. She  referred  to  the  decision  of
    Regina (on the application of Natcha Ngirincuti)  v  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] EWHC 1952 (Admin)  submitted  that
    the as the Judge had failed to engage with the medical  evidence  there
    was an error in law. She submitted Dr  Persaud's  report  was  properly
    reasoned contrary to what the Judge had suggested in his  decision  and
    the Judge had approached the report incorrectly.  The  Judge  had  also
    failed to deal with the GP's report and failed to take into account the
    GP could make an assessment  as  well.  The  Judge's  criticism  of  Dr
    Dhumad's report again failed to take into account that he had  all  the
    papers necessary to undertake his assessment and the  Judge  failed  to
    engage with his finding that the appellant was  unstable  mentally  and
    posed a suicide risk as  well  as  suffering  from  PTSD  and  moderate
    depression.

 9. Miss Jones argued that people with perceived LTTE  connections  face  a
    risk of arrest. Paragraphs 21(b) to (e) and 22 of  AM  (Afghanistan)  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA 1123  should
    be considered as the Judge did not consider how the objective  evidence
    supported the appellant's account.

10. The Judge had similarly failed to have regard to the doctor's  findings
    that his current  problems  were  the  cause  of  his  current  medical
    problems.

11. The Judge erred by failing to follow GJ and  others  (post  civil  war:
    returnees) [2013] UKUT 319. The Tribunal found there  was  insufficient
    psychiatric treatment for those with serious mental  health  such  that
    the appellant  suffered  from.  Dr  Dhumad  found  there  would  be  an
    increased risk of suicide on return and  the  Judge  failed  to  attach
    weight to this.

12. Whilst there were factual inconsistencies the appeal  could  have  been
    allowed for medical reasons alone.

13. Mr Whitwell adopted the Rule 24  and  submitted  Miss  Jones  had  gone
    beyond the grounds of appeal and the Tribunal should confine itself  to
    the grounds considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith. There had been no
    challenge to the treatment of the GP's evidence and it would  be  wrong
    to start now. The Judge had considered the reports of Dr Persaud and Dr
    Dhumad and he concluded little  weight  should  be    attached  to  the
    evidence. The Judge found the appellant was not a credible witness  and
    when  considering  the  appellant's  evidence  he  had  regard  to  the
    Presidential Guidance. The doctors failed to have regard to the fact he
    would have his family network when returned  so  when  considering  the
    appellant's medical condition this was a factor that should  have  been
    taken into account. He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

14. I reserved my decision after hearing these submissions.

    FINDINGS

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith.  She
    found the grounds arguable and today  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives.

16. The grounds of appeal that I have to  consider  are  contained  in  the
    grounds drafted by former counsel, Nishan  Paramjorthy,  dated  May  4,
    2017. Miss Jones sought to widen the scope of those grounds but I  have
    confined myself to  those  matters  raised  in  those  grounds  and  in
    particular paragraphs (2) to (5) of those grounds.

17. Miss Jones argued that the Judge erred by attaching  little  weight  to
    the two reports of Doctors Dhumad and Persaud and by failing to  engage
    with the fact the two reports clinically  corroborate  the  appellant's
    account of having been detained and ill-treated and the  fact  that  Dr
    Dhumad concluded the appellant was not feigning his symptoms.

18. The two medical reports were considered by the Judge at paragraphs [34]
    and [35] of his decision.

19. At paragraph [34] the Judge found in respect of Dr Persaud's report:

      a) The report was extremely brief and it was difficult to identify the
         basis on which he formed  his  conclusions  about  the  appellant's
         condition.

      b) The doctor placed reliance on the fact the appellant's GP  put  him
         on sertraline and recommended counselling.

      c) A dose of anti-depressants and a recommendation for counselling was
         not evidence the  appellant  has  been  detained  and  tortured  by
         individuals.

      d) Many people in  the  United  Kingdom  suffer  from  depression  and
         receive similar treatment and  they  did  not  suffer  his  alleged
         problems.

      e) The doctor found blood in the urine supported the appellant's claim
         he was sexually abused but he failed to mention other common causes
         of blood in the urine including urinary tract infections  which  is
         what the appellant was seeking treatment from his GP for.

20. At paragraph [35] the Judge found in respect of Dr Dhumand's report:

      a) The report was lengthier  than  Dr  Persaud's  report  because  the
         typeface was double spacing and the extensive information  he  used
         in the report.

      b) Closer reading of the report led the Judge to conclude the  reports
         of both doctors were similar in nature. The report was based on one
         two-hour meeting,  the  letter  of  instruction,  the  Home  Office
         bundle, the GP report and Dr Persaud's report. The report was based
         on only four months of consultations.

      c) The appellant told Dr Dhumad that he was not a member of  the  LTTE
         but that his father was and he, the appellant, was arrested because
         of his father's involvement with the LTTE and that he was  detained
         and tortured  twice  in  2015.  Nowhere  else  in  the  appellant's
         evidence is there a claim that this father was an LTTE member.  The
         number of detentions differ from the one period that he  identified
         in his substantive asylum interview.

21. The reports of Doctors Persaud and Dhumad were considered by the Judge.
    Pages 13 to 17 of Dr Persaud's report contain country evidence  and  it
    is this evidence that  the  expert  relies  on  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant  suffered  from  anxiety  and  depression   and   significant
    psychiatric  disorder  and  in  his  opinion  he  was  suffering   from
    significant low mood  and  PTSD.  Miss  Jones  argued  that  the  Judge
    attached too little weight to the report.

22. The problem the Judge had with Dr Persaud's report was that Dr  Persaud
    based his case on the GP's report. It is clear  from  the  GP's  report
    that this report was based a 51 day registration with  the  clinic.  He
    presented with dysuria and some symptoms of a urinary tract  infection.
    He did not present any external evidence of trauma.

23. The Judge made it clear that he had read the report very carefully  but
    Dr Persaud based his report on the GP's report. The GP gave  no  reason
    why he concluded the  appellant  suffered  from  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder or what was causing him to be depressed. Dr  Pernaud's  report
    contained extracts from various articles but  as  the  Judge  found  it
    contained very little else. Dr Persaud accepted what he  was  told  and
    considered no possible alternatives.  He  concluded  he  suffered  from
    anxiety  and  depression  and  that  he   suffered   from   significant
    psychiatric disorder and that he believed the appellant  was  suffering
    from a significant low mood and PTSD. From pages 18-19 he attempted  to
    justify his conclusion.

24. The Judge considered Dr Dhumad's  report.  He  saw  the  appellant  and
    considered Dr Pernaud's report and the GP records. He concluded that he
    suffered with severe depressive episode, post traumatic stress disorder
    and he posed a moderate risk of suicide. The Judge noted he  considered
    whether he had feigned or exaggerated his mental illness but found that
    as his report was based on one two-hour interview he could  not  attach
    much weight to the report.

25. Miss Jones challenged the Judge's  approach  but  I  am  satisfied  the
    findings made were open to the Judge. There is clear evidence that  the
    Judge considered the two reports and the GP's report and  the  findings
    were clearly open to the Judge because  neither  expert  addressed  any
    alternative prognosis and  the  fact  both  doctors  identified  mental
    health issues took the case  no  further  because  the  Judge  was  not
    satisfied the  findings  put  forward  were  attributable  to  what  he
    claimed. He concluded  after  careful  consideration  that  there  were
    several factors that could have caused his ill health  other  than  his
    claimed detention in 2015.

26. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith  found  the  grounds
    contained in paragraphs [4] and [5] of the grounds  arguable.  Although
    the Judge  rejected  the  doctors'  reasons  for  finding  why  he  was
    suffering from these symptoms he  was  still  required  to  assess  his
    condition and whether or not he accepted his account.

27. At paragraph [38] the Judge recognised the appellant's condition.

28. The Judge treated him as  a  vulnerable  witness  and  had  regard  to,
    contrary to the argument put forward by  Miss  Jones,  the  appropriate
    presidential guidance. The Judge is not required to spell  out  exactly
    how this was done  but  must  acknowledge  the  guidance  and  indicate
    whether he has taken it into consideration. The  Judge  considered  not
    only the country evidence  but  also  had  regard  to  the  effect  his
    condition would have on him recalling events and he also considered the
    country guidance decision of GJ. At paragraph [44]  he  considered  his
    mental health and the relevant  case  law.  The  Judge  considered  his
    article 3 claim on the basis he suffered  from  mental  ill-health  and
    took his mental condition at its highest. At paragraph [44]  the  Judge
    set out the basis upon which he considered the risk.

29. In rejecting the appellant's claim  the  Judge  was  satisfied  he  had
    family support in Sri Lanka to whom he could turn to. He  discussed  in
    detail what was available for him and acknowledged  the  facilities  in
    Sri Lanka did not match the facilities here. The argument  advanced  by
    Miss Jones amounts to a disagreement with  those  conclusions  and  re-
    argument of the same issues afresh. That is not  the  purpose  of  this
    hearing. The Judge's findings  in  paragraphs  [44]  and  [45]  of  his
    decision clearly takes into account the matters raised in  the  grounds
    before me. I accept those findings reach a different conclusion to that
    put forward by Miss Jones but nevertheless the  findings  made  by  the
    Judge are sustainable. The Judge did not reject  the  medical  evidence
    but concluded, as was his right, that there were options in  Sri  Lanka
    which meant there was no breach of either article 3 or 8 ECHR.

30. The Judge's decision was well-reasoned and there is no error in law.




    DECISION

31. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.

Signed                              Date     29.08.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     29.08.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





