
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03719/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2017                   |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                ASHRAF USMAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwah, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal R G Walters, promulgated on 12  October  2016,  dismissing
         the Appellant's protection and  human  rights  appeal  against  the
         Respondent's decision of 25 November 2015 refusing  his  protection
         and human rights claims.



Background

      2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan,  date  of  birth  09  June
         1987. He entered the United Kingdom in  May  2006  with  a  student
         Visa. He was granted further periods of leave to remain in the same
         capacity. The last period of leave granted  to  him  as  a  student
         expired on 22 August 2014. A further application by  the  Appellant
         for leave to remain, again as a student,  was  refused  on  9  June
         2014. On the following day the Appellant was served with form IS151
         A as the Respondent believed he had  used  deception  in  obtaining
         earlier leave to remain in the UK  (through  the  use  of  a  proxy
         tester in an ETS English language test).  On  11  August  2014  the
         Appellant lodged a judicial review against the refusal to grant him
         leave to remain as a student. He also raised article 8  grounds  at
         this time but these were refusing  28  August  2014.  His  judicial
         review applications was refused on 22 May 2015 and, on 7 July 2015,
         directions were set for his removal to Pakistan. On the day  before
         he was supposed to be removed the applicant lodged an asylum  claim
         (16th of July 2015).

      3. The Appellant's asylum claim can be summarised as follows. Although
         born into a Conservative Sunni Muslim the Appellant was  introduced
         to the Ahmadi faith by Mansoor Ahmad, a friend  of  his  uncle,  in
         2014. The Appellant was living with his uncle at the time  and  the
         uncle discovered his growing interest in the  Ahmadi  faith.  As  a
         result the Appellant's uncle made him leave his home in June  2014.
         The Appellant went to live with Mr Ahmad and his  formal  preaching
         began in December 2014. The Appellant was detained by  the  British
         authorities July 2015 with a view to his removal. It  was  at  this
         time that the Appellant's  uncle  informed  his  father  about  his
         interest in the Ahmadi faith. The Appellant's father, together with
         a mullah, telephoned the  Appellant  and  threatened  him.  Mansoor
         Ahmad was also threatened by  the  Appellant's  father.  After  his
         release from detention  the  Appellant  met  with  a  local  Ahmadi
         scholar (Murabi) and had a question and answer session in 2015, and
         met another Murabi in November 2015. Satisfied that  he  wanted  to
         become an Ahmadi the Appellant undertook a  conversion  ceremony  -
         Bait - in December 2015. The Appellant maintains that he is  now  a
         true Ahmadi and that preaching is a fundamental  component  of  his
         faith. He has  attended  Ahmadi  stalls  and  was  invited  to  and
         attended the annual Ahmadi convention in 2016.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

      4. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant,  Mansoor
         Ahmad and Saima Nasir (who said she was the secretary for 'Humanity
         First' and who was born into the Ahmadi community and has  been  an
         active member ever since).

      5. The judge did not find it credible that the Appellant's  uncle  had
         thrown him out of his home in June 2014 because of his interest  in
         the Ahmadi faith but would wait for a year to inform his father  of
         that fact. The judge noted inconsistencies between the evidence  of
         the Appellant and the evidence  of  Mr  Ahmad  in  respect  of  the
         location of the 'Baturfutuh' mosque (the Appellant said this mosque
         was located in Morden but Mr Ahmad said  that  the  mosque  was  in
         Putney).  There  was  also  an  inconsistency  in  the  Appellant's
         evidence relating to the number of instructions he undertook from a
         Murabi (in his statement the  Appellant  made  mention  of  only  2
         instances, and this was confirmed by Mr Ahmad in his oral evidence,
         but in the Appellant's oral evidence  he  said  that  he  had  been
         receiving instruction for 2 months prior to his conversion and that
         this instruction took place every week). The judge noted a  further
         inconsistency relating to the  texts  the  Appellant  studied  (the
         Appellant claimed that he studied the Koran  and  that  the  Murabi
         gave him no other texts besides that, whereas Ms Nasir said that  a
         prospective convert must also read "The Promised Messiah").

      6. The judge noted that it was usual practice in  cases  of  religious
         conversion which were said to result in persecution for a  minister
         of religion (in the present case a Murabi) to give evidence on  the
         question of whether an Appellant's conversion was genuine  or  not.
         The judge noted the absence of any explanation  why  such  evidence
         had not been produced. The judge found the Appellant's evidence  to
         be 'extremely vague' as to the process of his conversion. The judge
         drew an  adverse  inference  from  the  late  stage  at  which  the
         Appellant made his asylum claim (the Appellant was  notified  on  7
         July 2015 that directions were set for his removal to  Pakistan  on
         17 July 2015, but he only claimed asylum on 16 July 2015)  and  the
         judge rejected the Appellant's evidence that  he  received  threats
         from his father by telephone the 17th and 18th of July 2015  whilst
         he was detained at an immigration removal centre.

      7. Having found the Appellant to be an incredible  witness  the  judge
         rejected his account of having been threatened by his  father.  The
         judge concluded that the Appellant was not a genuine convert to the
         Ahmadi faith and concluded that he  had  no  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution on being removed to Pakistan.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

      8. The grounds contended that the judge  failed  to  take  account  of
         material evidence before him. No reference was made by the judge to
         the Appellant's Ahmadiyya Muslim Association (AMA) ID card, to  the
         photographs of his attendance at the annual AMA convention  and  at
         Ahmadi mosques, to receipts of donations made by him to the AMA and
         to  text  messages  inviting  him  to  meetings  and   the   annual
         convention. The grounds further contend that the  judge  failed  to
         consider evidence from the AMA in line with binding case law  (such
         as MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG
         [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC), and R (on the application of Nj and YJ)  v
         SSHD IJR [2016] UKUT 00032 (IAC)). It was said that the judge erred
         in law by dismissing the appeal on the  basis  that  the  Appellant
         gave 'vague answers' given that he was a new convert and his  level
         of knowledge could not be as of an extensive nature. It was finally
         submitted that even if the Appellant was not a convert he would  be
         perceived to be a convert on his return to Pakistan.

      9. In granting permission judge of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  Osborne
         stated,

             "In  an  otherwise  focused  and  well-reasoned  decision  and
             reasons it is nonetheless arguable that the  judge  failed  to
             consider the [relevant] country guidance  case.  Additionally,
             although the judge at [5] accorded  that  he  had  taken  into
             account all the  documents  listed  (including  the  Appellant
             supplementary bundle) it is at least arguable that  the  judge
             failed specifically  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
             Ahmadiyya Muslim Association ID card  and  the  text  messages
             from the UK you Ahmadi department. In all the circumstances it
             is arguable that the judge erred in law in arguably failing to
             consider the appropriate country guidance  case  and  arguably
             failing to consider the ID card and text messages to which  no
             reference was made in the decision and reasons."

Submissions at the error of law hearing

     10. Mr Khan submitted that the judge failed to take  into  account  the
         AMA ID card and the text messages. In order  to  ascertain  whether
         the Appellant was a genuine  convert  the  court  was  required  to
         consider all documents. It was next submitted that  the  judge  was
         not entitled to conclude the Appellant had given vague  information
         in relation to the conversion. The judge had  erroneously  presumed
         that  conversion  to  the  Ahmadi  faith  requires  something  more
         detailed than what is actually required. Conversion in  the  Ahmadi
         faith was said to be a simple act and, in support, I  was  referred
         to page 74 and  115  of  MN  and  others  in  support.  Given  that
         conversion involved a  very  simple  ceremony  the  judge  was  not
         entitled to expect the Murabi who was present at  the  ceremony  to
         have given evidence. It was finally submitted  that  the  Appellant
         would be perceived as an Ahmadi on return to Pakistan.

     11. Ms Fijiwah submitted that the evidence the judge  allegedly  failed
         to consider could not have assisted him in determining whether  the
         Appellant was a genuine convert.  It  was  not  disputed  that  the
         Appellant had undergone a conversion ceremony and  had  joined  the
         AMA. The photographs did not  show  the  Appellant  was  a  genuine
         convert. The judge's decision was based on  an  assessment  of  the
         Appellant's credibility. The judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
         aspects of the Appellant's account  were  implausible,  that  there
         were inconsistencies in the account, and that  the  timing  of  the
         Appellant's asylum claim undermined his credibility. It was finally
         submitted that the Appellant would not be perceived as a convert as
         he  was  found  incredible  and  would  not  undertake  any  Ahmadi
         activities in Pakistan.

Discussion

     12. The sustainability of the FTT decision is first challenged  on  the
         basis that the judge failed to take into account material evidence.
         I accept that the judge did  not  make  express  reference  to  the
         Appellant's AMA ID card contained in the supplementary  bundle,  to
         the receipt of two donations made to the AMA , to the text messages
         from the UK New Ahmadi Department, or to the photographs purporting
         to show the Appellant at a mosque and at an Ahmadi convention. I am
         not however satisfied that failure to  make  express  reference  to
         this evidence indicates that it was not taken into account, or that
         the evidence had any material bearing on  the  genuineness  of  the
         Appellant's conversion. At [5] the judge did refer to the 2 bundles
         of evidence provided by the Appellant and  indicated  that  he  had
         taken these bundles into account. The fact that the  Appellant  had
         been issued an AMA ID card was also expressly  referred  to  by  Ms
         Nasir in her evidence. More significantly, it was  not  in  dispute
         before the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant had  undergone  a
         conversion ceremony or that he formally joined the AMA.  The  issue
         that the judge had to decide, which he  was  fully  aware  of,  was
         whether the Appellant was a genuine convert  to  the  Ahmadi  faith
         (see [64]). The issuance of an ID card and payment receipts by  the
         AMA do not go to the issue of the genuineness  of  the  Appellant's
         conversion,  they  merely  show  that  the  Appellant  underwent  a
         conversion  ceremony.  Nor  could  the  text  messages  assist  the
         Tribunal in determining the core issue. The two text messages  were
         merely an invitation to the Appellant to attend the  annual  Ahmadi
         convention in 2016.  Likewise,  the  photographs  merely  show  the
         Appellant at a mosque on  an  undetermined  occasion,  and  at  the
         Ahmadi convention. Given the limited probity of  the  documents  to
         the issue in contention the failure by the judge  to  make  express
         reference to them in no way undermines the basis  for  his  adverse
         findings. The judge has not failed to take  into  account  relevant
         evidence.

     13. Mr Khan submitted that the judge failed  to  appreciate  the  basic
         nature of the bait conversion ceremony and that  his  dismissal  of
         the appeal on the basis that the Appellant gave 'vague answers' was
         not sustainable. I was referred to the schedule of evidence  in  MN
         and others where Dr Iftikhar Ayaz described the  conversion  itself
         as 'very simple'. All an applicant needs to do is sign a letter  of
         pledge and swear allegiance to the head based in London and  he  is
         then accepted. Mr Khan contended that the judge was  not  entitled,
         in the circumstances, to regard the  Appellant's  evidence  of  the
         process of his conversion as 'extremely vague'.

     14. I cannot accept this  submission.  The  judge's  reference  to  the
         Appellant's 'extremely vague' evidence related to  the  process  of
         his conversion and not to the actual ceremony. The  judge  did  not
         draw an adverse inference in  respect  of  evidence  given  by  the
         Appellant relating to  the  ceremony  itself  or  to  any  lack  of
         knowledge of the Ahmadi  faith.  Rather,  the  judge  drew  adverse
         inferences  based  on  the  inconsistent  evidence  given  by   the
         Appellant and his witnesses (identified  in  paragraph  5  of  this
         decision), the implausibility relating to the uncle's delay of over
         a year in informing the Appellant's father of his interest  in  the
         Ahmadi faith, and the very significant  delay  in  the  Appellant's
         asylum claim. The judge was rationally  entitled  to  draw  adverse
         inferences on the aforementioned bases.

     15. In his statement the Appellant  described  a  question  and  answer
         session in October 2015 with a local Ahmadi  scholar  (Murabi).  At
         [61] the judge drew an adverse inference based on  the  absence  of
         any evidence from the Murabi relating to  the  genuineness  of  the
         Appellant's  conversion.  Given  that  the   genuineness   of   the
         conversion was a core issue in dispute the  judge  was  undoubtedly
         entitled to draw an adverse inference  from  the  absence  of  such
         evidence.

     16. The grounds of appeal contended that the judge failed  to  consider
         evidence from the AMA in line with binding case law.  Mr  Khan  did
         not expand upon this ground in his oral submissions. I  find  there
         is no merit whatsoever in this ground. The extracts from the  cases
         referred to by the Appellant (MN  and  others  and  R(NJ  and  YJ))
         indicated that the AMA was a highly organised association  and  was
         capable of providing sophisticated information on the  numbers  who
         had  converted  and  of  providing  letters  that  were  relatively
         detailed  and  which  contained  sourced  information.  There  were
         however no letters at all in the present appeal from the AMA and no
         document containing any detailed and sourced  information  relating
         to the Appellant. The only documents issued by the AMA specifically
         relating to the Appellant are his ID card, the two text invitations
         and the money receipts. There was simply no evidence from  the  AMA
         before the judge for him to consider in line  with  the  identified
         cases.

     17. It was finally submitted that the Appellant would, even  if  not  a
         genuine convert, be liable to persecution on return to Pakistan  as
         he  would  be  perceived  as  a  convert.  There  was  however   no
         explanation as to how the Appellant's family, society in general or
         the Pakistani authorities would be aware of the Appellant's  formal
         conversion. Given that the judge was  fully  entitled  to  conclude
         that the conversion was not genuine and that it was a ploy  by  the
         Appellant to remain in the UK, there was  no  likelihood  that  the
         Appellant  would  undertake  any  Ahmadi  related   activities   in
         Pakistan. Moreover, the  judge  had  comprehensively  rejected  the
         Appellant's account of being threatened by his father and a mullah.
         There was no basis upon which the Appellant would be perceived as a
         genuine convert if returned to Pakistan and the judge did not go in
         law by failing to consider this possibility.

     18. In light of the above assessment I am satisfied that the First-tier
         Tribunal judge did not make a material error of law.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the first-tier Tribunal is  not  vitiated  by  any  material
legal error. The appeal is dismissed.

[pic]    13 January 2017

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
