
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03356/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                              |On 22 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     RMR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Talacchi, Counsel, Temple Court Chamber
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by RMR against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
     Judge Alis, promulgated on 14 September 2017,  in  which  he  dismissed
     RMR's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  a
     grant of asylum.


 2. I have made an anonymity direction, continuing on from that made in the
    First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "Although the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to point  out  flaws
         in the psychiatric report prepared by Dr  Gupta,  it  has  arguably
         failed to take into account Dr Gupta's "mental  state  examination"
         of the appellant (pg 19 of the bundle) and arguably erred in law in
         attaching no weight to this aspect of the report at all.


         The mental state examination is arguably  not  based  on  what  the
         appellant told Dr Gupta.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  arguably
         erred in law in finding at [60] that the report was prepared "based
         only on what he was told by the appellant".

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 5. The skeleton argument provided by Mr. Talacchi  expanded  on  ground  1
    only.  At the outset of the hearing it was confirmed that this was  the
    only ground being pursued.   Ground 1 goes to the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant.  Ground 2 relates to the treatment of the case of GJ, but at
    [56] of the decision it appears  to  have  been  agreed  that,  if  the
    Appellant's account was credible, he would fall within the category  of
    persons defined as being at risk in GJ.  Ground 3 also related  to  the
    findings made after credibility had been established.


 6. Mr. Talacchi relied on his skeleton  argument.   He  further  submitted
    that the judge had not appreciated  that  the  psychiatric  report  was
    independent evidence.  He referred to [34] of  JL  (medical  reports  -
    credibility) [2013] UKUT 145.  Even when a medical professional  relied
    on an account from an appellant, this did not mean that his report lost
    its status as independent evidence.


 7. The Tribunal ought to  have  taken  other  factors  into  account  when
    assessing the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  evidence  including  the
    qualifications of the person producing the report and his  observations
    when he had assessed  the  Appellant  (page  19).   He  had  found  the
    Appellant to be nervous, struggling to cope with his anxiety, and  with
    increasing distress.  This was independent evidence which went  to  the
    weight which ought to have been placed on the report by the Judge.  The
    mental state examination had taken around three hours  following  which
    the report had been produced.  Had the correct weight being  placed  on
    the report, in  its  entirety  it  was  capable  of  being  independent
    corroborative evidence.


  8. It followed that the Joint Presidential Guidance relating to vulnerable
     witnesses should have been applied in relation to the treatment of  the
     evidence.  The Judge had found that there were inconsistencies  in  the
     evidence of the Appellant's father's arrest [64(i)], but regard  should
     have  been  paid  to  his  medical  condition  when   assessing   these
     inconsistencies.  Had the correct approach being taken to  the  medical
     evidence, the Judge would have been in a position to assess whether the
     inconsistencies could  have  been  explained  by  the  Appellant.   Mr.
     Talacchi accepted that in the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  had  not  been
     requested that the Appellant be treated as a vulnerable witness, but it
     was incumbent upon the Tribunal to consider the guidance.   However,  I
     was referred to [64(i)] of the decision where it recorded that  it  had
     been submitted that regard should be paid to  the  Appellant's  medical
     condition in relation to the inconsistencies.  I was referred  to  [26]
     of JL.  Had the First-tier Tribunal taken  the  correct  approach,  the
     issue would have been whether the inconsistencies were as a  result  of
     the Appellant's medical condition.


 9. In response Mr. Nath relied on the Rule 24 report.  He  submitted  that
    the Judge had considered the medical evidence in depth.  I was referred
    to [59] to [62].  At [64] he had been through the facts and details  of
    the evidence.  Medical support was available in Sri Lanka.  He referred
    to [74].  The Appellant needed to show that he could not deal with  his
    medical condition in Sri Lanka.  In summary he submitted that the judge
    had considered the medical evidence in detail.


10. Mr. Tallacchi submitted that the fact that  the  Appellant  was  taking
    medication which was available in Sri Lanka was irrelevant to the issue
    of how the medical report should have been  dealt  with  [62].   I  was
    referred to [60].  The Judge found that the report  had  been  prepared
    based only on what the doctor had been told, but this was  inconsistent
    with [34] of JL.  Further, it was not correct to state that the medical
    professional had relied only on what the Appellant said, the letter  of
    instruction had been provided to him.

Error of law


 11. I have carefully considered the grounds and the  decision.   The  Judge
     deals with the medical report at [59] to [62].  He states  that  during
     the hearing he expressed  his  concerns  about  the  medical  evidence.
     These concerns stemmed from the fact that there was  "no  evidence  the
     doctor had been sent any of the papers" [60].  He records that there is
     no reference in the report to Dr. Gupta having seen  the  interview  or
     the refusal letter.  He states:

         "It seems the doctor prepared his report based only on what he  was
         told by the appellant."

 12. Paragraph [61] addresses what the Appellant did, or rather did not  do,
     following his  assessment  with  Dr.  Gupta  and  is  not  relevant  to
     consideration of the report.  This is not relevant to the weight to  be
     given to the report.


 13. Paragraph [62] states:

         "Based on the appellant's  own  account  of  his  troubles  and  my
         concerns about how the report  was  prepared  I  do  not  find  the
         medical report assists me in  deciding  the  case.   The  fact  the
         appellant claimed to take medication sent from Sri Lanka  and  then
         failed to mention this to  the  expert  or  even  his  own  doctors
         undermines this aspect of  his  claim.   The  report  was  prepared
         without access to any medical records despite the appellant's claim
         to have suffered from mental health since 2010."

 14. I find that the Judge has focused on  what  the  expert  did  not  have
     before him, rather than considering what he did have, both in  relation
     to medical professional's own qualifications, and the time  spent  with
     the Appellant.  His assessment of the report is set  out  in  only  two
     paragraphs, but it is only paragraph [60]  that  really  addresses  it.
     The fact that the appellant did not mention to Dr. Gupta that  he  took
     medication sent  from  Sri  Lanka  in  [62]  is  not  relevant  to  the
     assessment of the weight to be given to the report.


 15. I find that the Judge essentially dismisses the medical report because,
     as stated at [60], "It seems the doctor prepared his report based  only
     on what he was told by the appellant."  There is no assessment  of  Dr.
     Gupta's own qualifications and experience which are set out  in  detail
     at pages 1 to 3 of his report.  There is no reference to the  interview
     itself which lasted three hours (page 4 of the report).  Dr. Gupta  has
     then taken a detailed history from the Appellant, from childhood up  to
     his arrival in the United Kingdom.


 16. At page 14 of the report Dr. Gupta records the mental state examination
     carried out on 19 July 2016.  He states that the Appellant came  across
     as anxious, struggled  to  cope  with  his  anxieties  and  experienced
     "increasing distress".  He states that his mood was  "subjectively  and
     objectively anxious".  He appeared "increasingly distracted".


 17. On page 15 of the report Dr. Gupta sets out his diagnostic opinion  and
     formulation.  He states, "following my examination, I am of the opinion
     that he presents with a primary diagnosis  of  a  "Reaction  to  severe
     Stress, unspecified".   He  states  that  he  has  a  "comorbid  second
     diagnosis of "Mixed anxiety and Depressive disorder".  These  diagnoses
     "have been considered against specific criteria  as  described  in  the
     International Classification of Diseases".


 18.  Dr.  Gupta  then  considers  the  "Diagnostic  formulation  of   RMR's
     difficulties",  and  the   formulation   of   "cognitive   distortions"
     associated with his depression and anxiety.  He  concludes  his  report
     with recommendations as to care and treatment.  As  stated  above,  the
     fact that the Appellant did not act on  these  recommendations  is  not
     relevant to the weight to be given to the report.  At page  23  of  the
     report is a statement of truth.


 19. I find that the Judge has not considered the report in any detail.   In
     particular, in assessing the weight to be given to the report,  he  has
     not taken into account the professional qualifications  and  experience
     of Dr. Gupta.  He has not taken into account that he spent three  hours
     with the Appellant, during which time he assessed the  Appellant  using
     his professional skills and experience, as he is qualified to do.


 20. I have considered the case of JL.  At [34] it states:

         "Even where a medical expert relies heavily on the account given by
         a client, that does not entail that his  or  her  report  lacks  or
         loses its status as independent evidence, although  it  may  reduce
         very considerably the weight that can be attached to it."

 21. The Judge has not attached any weight at all to the report based on the
     fact that Dr. Gupta relied on the  Appellant's  account.   He  has  not
     stated that the weight is reduced, but that the report does not  assist
     him [62].  The report  contained  a  diagnosis  made  by  a  consultant
     psychiatrist following  assessment  of  the  Appellant.   There  is  no
     reference to this diagnosis, which the Judge has essentially  dismissed
     on the basis that the professional who made the diagnosis  made  it  on
     the basis only of what he was told by the Appellant.  JL is clear  that
     a report does not lose its status as independent evidence if it  relies
     on the account given by an appellant,  and  in  circumstances  where  a
     diagnosis is made following a three hour assessment, by a  professional
     so qualified to make such a diagnosis, I find that the Judge has  erred
     in dismissing the report on this basis.


 22. Further, I find that  the  Judge  had  evidence  before  him  that  the
     Appellant had  a  mental  health  problem,  but  at  no  stage  has  he
     considered the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010:  Child,
     vulnerable adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance.   The  Appellant
     claimed to have suffered from a mental health problem  aside  from  the
     production of the report.  It is recorded at [64(i)]  that  submissions
     were made that regard should be had to  his  medical  condition.    The
     Judge states that he did not find this argument persuasive.  The  Judge
     is bound to take the guidance into account.  Even if a Judge finds that
     the mental health of an appellant does not explain any inconsistencies,
     he is  bound  to  take  the  guidance  into  account.   The  Judge  had
     independent evidence of vulnerability before him which he has dismissed
     for a reason which is not sound in law.


 23. I find that the Judge failed properly and fully to consider the medical
     evidence before him, and failed to give due weight to the report taking
     into account the professional  qualifications  and  experience  of  the
     expert, and the time he had spent with the Appellant in this  capacity.
     It was open to the Judge to find that there were reasons why the weight
     to be attached to the report was limited, but to  fail  to  attach  any
     weight at all to the independent report prepared by  an  expert  is  an
     error of law.


 24. The error is clearly material as the effect of the  Appellant's  mental
     health problem on his evidence is a matter which has to be  taken  into
     account  in  accordance  with  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance,  and
     following the case of AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.


 25. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
     law.  I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10  February
     2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be  remitted
     to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error  has  been  to
     deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or
     other opportunity for the party's case to be put to and  considered  by
     the First-tier Tribunal.  The error affects  the  credibility  findings
     and  therefore,  given  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-finding
     necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
     overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
     to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


 26. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 27. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


 28. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Alis.



Signed                                  Date 22 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

