
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03072/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2019                    |On 15 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    a n e
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Zapata Besso, Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss R. Bassi, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Eldridge ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 24 July 2019 by which the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to
    grant him international protection was dismissed.

 2.  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Macdonald   granted
    permission on all grounds.


Anonymity

 3. The judge issued an anonymity direction. No application was made by the
    representatives before me to set aside this order. I therefore  confirm
    the direction.


Background

 4. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan and is  presently  aged  22.
    Having been born in Afghanistan the appellant accompanied his family to
    Pakistan at the age of 2 and he resided in  that  country  for  several
    years before returning to Afghanistan  in  2009  with  members  of  his
    family. A year later he relocated to Kabul where he  resided  with  his
    mother, younger brother and five sisters. His  father  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom and is now a British citizen.

 5. On or around 11 June 2014, when aged 17, the appellant  was  approached
    by a masked man whilst travelling to school. The man attempted to place
    a handkerchief over the appellant's mouth and nose, but  the  appellant
    managed to struggle free and went to a neighbour's  house.  The  police
    were called. Though his statement was taken the police did  not  follow
    up the incident.

 6. The appellant arrived in this country in April 2015 and claimed  asylum
    upon arrival. He asserted that the attempted kidnapping  had  been  for
    ransom because his family lived in a big house in  a  wealthy  area  of
    Kabul.  The  respondent  refused  his  application  for   international
    protection and his appeal was subsequently dismissed by the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In his decision of 16 November 2015 JFtT Mitchell  found  the
    appellant to be credible but noted that the  attempted  kidnapping  had
    occurred some several years previously and there had  been  no  further
    attempts at kidnapping members of the appellant's family. Consequently,
    the appellant's claim to be at real risk of suffering serious  harm  at
    the hands of an unknown kidnapper or kidnappers was simply not made out
    to the low standard required in refugee claims.

 7. The appellant submitted further representations in July 2018 which were
    accepted by the respondent to constitute a fresh claim for the purposes
    of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules. The respondent  refused  the
    application by way of  a  decision  dated  22  February  2019  and  the
    appellant enjoyed a right of appeal.

 8.  The  appellant  contends  that  further  to  his  original  claim  for
    international protection he is also at risk of persecution and  serious
    ill-treatment because of a relationship he had outside of marriage with
    the daughter of General Jurat, a military officer formerly connected to
    Ahmad Shah Masoud, who held several high-level positions in Afghanistan
    including that of Deputy of  Minister  of  Tribal  Affairs  and  Border
    Affairs. Up and  until  September  2018  General  Jurat  was  a  senior
    Presidential advisor and was Deputy of the National  Security  Council.
    It is the appellant's case that he believes that the General was behind
    the attempt to kidnap him. He states by way of his fresh claim that  he
    had not previously been 100% sure that General  Jurat  was  behind  the
    kidnapping until he was notified as to  the  true  circumstances  by  a
    friend called Najeeb in late  2015.  He  further  states  that  General
    Jurat's sons approached Najeeb and  asked  him  about  the  appellant's
    whereabouts. An argument ensued which escalated into a  physical  fight
    and one of Najeeb's bodyguards shot one of General Jurat's  sons  dead.
    Najeeb then fled to India where he claimed asylum.  It  is  appropriate
    to observe  that  the  underlying  reason  for  the  purported  adverse
    interest in the appellant  is  that  General  Jurat's  daughter  became
    pregnant consequent to their relationship.


Hearing before the FtT

 9. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  12  July
    2019. The Judge noted the previous positive credibility  findings  made
    by JFtT Mitchell as  to  the  attempted  kidnapping.  He  proceeded  to
    consider the  evidence  and  found  to  the  lower  standard  that  the
    appellant had not been in a sexual relationship with  the  daughter  of
    General Jurat and that he was not being truthful as  to  his  being  of
    adverse and persecutory interest of a person in a position of power.

10. At [59] of the decision and reasons the Judge detailed:

         'The appellant has  faced  one  incident  in  Afghanistan  of  what
         appears to be an attempted kidnap. That may have been for  any  one
         of a number of reasons, but I am not satisfied, even to  the  lower
         standard, that it had anything to do with  General  Jurat  and  his
         family. There is no logical reason given why his family are said to
         have fled from their former home. None of them has been the subject
         of any adverse interest. Additionally, the  uncles  who  built  the
         fine house in an apparently prosperous part of Kabul have  remained
         untouched. I do not accept that  this  former  home  is  no  longer
         occupied by the family or available to them.'

11. The Judge further found as to the appellant's health concerns  at  [66]
    that he could return to Afghanistan and be supported by  a  network  of
    people including his siblings. He would be able to access accommodation
    as well as emotional, moral  and  practical  support.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed on both international protection and human rights grounds.




Grounds of Appeal

12. Grounds of appeal were drafted by Miss Zapata Besso who represented the
    appellant before the Judge. Five grounds of appeal are identified;  the
    last ground being subdivided  into  two  separate  challenges.   It  is
    submitted that the Judge:

      i) failed to consider whether the appellant would now be  at  risk  on
         the basis of his previously accepted account;


     ii) failed to correctly apply the guidance on child,  vulnerable  adult
         and sensitive witnesses and also  to  consider  mitigating  factors
         made on behalf of the appellant.  This is said to have resulted  in
         procedural unfairness;


    iii) failed to assess the appellant's credibility "in  the  round"  with
         reference to the medical evidence;


     iv) adopted an  erroneous  approach  to  credibility  by  reference  to
         inherent implausibility; and


      v) placed erroneous reliance upon unsafe country guidance case law and
         further failed to apply the correct test for departing from country
         guidance case law.

13. As to ground 5 this was developed during the course of the  hearing  to
    incorporate a challenge to the Judge's  consideration  of  the  medical
    evidence which Miss.  Zapata  Besso  asserted  strongly  supported  the
    appellant's evidence that if returned to Afghanistan he  would  live  a
    self-contained life within the family home and would not seek  support.
    At the hearing Miss Zapata Besso  further  addressed  me  upon  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive in light of the appellant's mental
    health vulnerabilities and I was referred to the judgment of  the  CJEU
    in C-465/07 Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van  Justitie  EU:C:2009:94;
    [2009] 1 W.L.R. 2100.

14. In granting permission to appeal to this Tribunal  on  29  August  2019
    DJFtT Macdonald observed:

         'The grounds of application are numerous: it is said  there  was  a
         failure to consider whether the appellant would be at risk  now  on
         the basis of his previously accepted account,  that  he  failed  to
         correctly apply  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  on  vulnerable
         witnesses, that he failed to assess the appellant's credibility  in
         the round and applied erroneous reliance on unsafe country guidance
         caselaw.


         While the Judge gave reasons for rejecting the appellant's  account
         including that  there  were  inconsistencies  and  implausibilities
         (paragraph 58 of the decision)  there  is  arguable  merit  in  the
         grounds for the reasons stated. Permission to appeal is granted  on
         all grounds.'

15. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.


Decision on Error of Law

16. The primary issue addressed before this Tribunal  concerned  ground  2,
    and in particular [2], [11], [12] and [13] of the grounds:

         'The  appellant  is  a  former  UASC,  originally  from  Kabul   in
         Afghanistan. He was born on 1 January  1997  and  is  currently  22
         years old. The appellant's fresh asylum/protection claim,  dated  4
         July 2018, is founded on  his  risk  of  persecution/serious  harm,
         including  honour  killing,  on  account  of  his  identity  as  an
         adulterer, based on the pre-marital relationship he had with a girl
         named Sadaf, who was the  daughter  of  a  powerful  warlord  named
         General Jurat. It was also claimed his return to Afghanistan  would
         breach Articles 2, 3 and/or 8 of the ECHR.


         ...


         The  Judge  fails  to  consider  the  effect  of  the   appellant's
         vulnerabilities on his ability to disclose. The Judge  states  that
         the appellant's 'disclosure of this account is not a matter, in  my
         judgment, in which the appellant's current mental health plays  any
         significant factor' because the psychiatric experts do not  comment
         on it [49]. This is  wrong.   Dr  Burman-Roy  recognises  that  the
         appellant suffers 'significant guilt and self-blame  for  having  a
         relationship that has resulted in so much trauma  for  himself  and
         his family' [...] This is clearly  relevant  to  his  reticence  to
         disclose that relationship.


         The appellant's account is that, in late 2015,  his  friend  Najeeb
         relayed the death of General Jurat's son to him on  the  telephone,
         which had happened a 'couple of weeks  beforehand'.  The  appellant
         provided a press report in respect of the death [...,] which stated
         that General Jurat's son had been killed  in  Kabul  on  1  January
         2015. At [53], the Judge finds that  'these  very  different  dates
         cannot be reconciled.  [...]  I  do  not  find  any  mental  health
         difficulties will have contributed to a mistake of this nature.' In
         saying so, the Judge entirely  fails  to  mention  or  consider  Dr
         Burman Roy's explicit advice that the appellant's PTSD may lead  to
         conflicting accounts.


         The appellant's written and live evidence, as well as his  father's
         live evidence, was that the appellant had informed his father about
         his relationship with General Jurat's daughter in 2017.  The  Judge
         places an unlawful reliance on an apparent inconsistency present in
         Dr Burman-Roy's summary of his interview with the appellant,  where
         the appellant is recorded as having said that he  told  his  father
         about the relationship around 18 months after arriving  in  the  UK
         (which would have been in April 2016) [53]. He fails to  take  into
         account the fact that Dr  Burman-Roy's  summary  is  not  a  formal
         record of evidence. The appellant was never given an opportunity to
         read through it or sign it as true. The inconsistency was  not  put
         to the appellant in cross-examination, so the appellant  was  never
         given an opportunity to respond to it. This is procedurally unfair.
         Again, the Judge  fails  to  take  (sic)  consider  the  effect  of
         vulnerabilities on cogent memory.'

17. Considerable forensic analysis was undertaken before me by Miss. Zapata
    Besso and Miss. Bassi upon two  paragraphs  of  the  Judge's  decision,
    namely [49] and [53]:

         'The disclosure of this account is not a matter, in  my  judgement,
         in which the appellant's current mental health pays any significant
         factor. I note  that  the  report  from  Dr  Bose,  the  consultant
         psychiatrist, does not seek to comment on this aspect [...] I  have
         also considered the report of  Dr  Soumitra  Burman-Roy  [...]  and
         nothing in that report leads  me  to  conclude  otherwise  on  this
         issue.'


         ...


         'The appellant  relies  upon  the  account  of  the  death  of  the
         General's son and this being related to him by Najeeb in late  2015
         and how this had happened 'a couple of weeks beforehand' (paragraph
         24 of his witness statement of April  2018).  He  actually  relies,
         however, on a press report in respect of the death of the  son  and
         this may be seen at page  B474  of  the  appellant's  bundle.  That
         report is of a son of the General being killed in  Kabul,  but  the
         report is dated 1 January 2015. These very different  dates  cannot
         be reconciled. In my judgement these are really important issues in
         the life of the appellant if his account is true and I do not  find
         any mental health difficulties will have contributed to  a  mistake
         of this nature. Rather, I conclude that what has happened  is  that
         it has been convenient for the appellant to relate  a  conversation
         in late 2015 rather than have to explain in greater  detail  why  a
         matter about which he was now certain had not been  raised  in  his
         appeal that year. I also note in this context that is apparent from
         the report from Dr Burman-Roy that the appellant told him  that  he
         had informed his father of the relationship  with  Sadaf  about  18
         months after he came into the United Kingdom. That would have  been
         in about April 2016, where he now says it was during 2017.  He  has
         not given a consistent or credible account, even taking note of his
         health issues.'


                                               (Emphasis added in bold type)

18. It is apparent from reading the decision that the Judge endeavoured  to
    take great care in considering the evidence before him and in detailing
    his considered reasons. However, the two  sections  of  the  paragraphs
    detailed above in bold are of concern. As to [49] it is not the current
    status of the appellant's mental health that is to be considered as  to
    late disclosure, but his state of mind at the time he made and  pursued
    his first asylum claim. As observed by Dr Bose in a psychiatric  report
    dated 10 November 2017 the  appellant  suffers  from  severe  PTSD  and
    depression and the symptoms include recurrent involuntary and intrusive
    distressing memories of the attempted kidnapping  that  he  experienced
    one week before he came to this country. In the medico-legal report  of
    Dr Burman-Roy dated 13 April 2019 the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  and  severe
    depression is again confirmed, although  it  is  noted  that  over  the
    course of eighteen months the  symptoms  have  worsened  with  him  now
    experiencing more depressive symptoms including  some  pseudo-psychotic
    phenomenon. The mental health conditions were therefore existing during
    the course of the previous asylum claim. It is  difficult  to  identify
    any reasoning on behalf of the Judge  as  to  why  such  mental  health
    concerns could not play any role  in  the  delayed  disclosure  of  the
    appellant's history. It may be that a Tribunal  having  considered  the
    evidence and taken into account the medical evidence  could  reasonably
    conclude that the appellant's ability to be coherent and consistent  on
    other matters undermines his delay in  raising  the  issues  concerning
    General Jurat, but it is not appropriate for a Judge to dismiss medical
    opinion as to the  possible  impact  of  mental  health  concerns  upon
    disclosure out-of-hand with no explanation in  circumstances  where  it
    would  be  reasonably  open  for  a  JFtT  to  accept  the  appellant's
    explanation in light of such evidence. The Tribunal  should  always  be
    mindful that it is not  expert  in  medicine  or  psychiatry  and  must
    consider expert medical or psychiatric opinion with care.

19. I accept the submission of Miss Zapata Besso that this  approach  flows
    through into [53] where again, without more, the Judge  simply  asserts
    that having mental health difficulties could not explain a  significant
    discrepancy as to the date the General's son was killed. Looking at the
    sentence. 'In my judgment these are really important issues in the life
    of the appellant if his account is true and I do not  find  any  mental
    health difficulties will have contributed to a mistake of this  nature'
    the words 'will have' attain importance. There is real concern that the
    adoption of such approach fails to engage with Dr Burman-Roy's  opinion
    that the appellant may be suffering  from  memory  loss  and  that  his
    recall of events may vary consequent to his  worsening  mental  health.
    The reasoning of the Judge precludes any express  consideration  of  Dr
    Burman-Roy's opinion when assessing  the  impact  of  memory  loss  and
    recall in light of inconsistent presentation of evidence. This approach
    is materially erroneous in law and  the  findings  made  in  those  two
    paragraphs are sufficient to undermine what in many other respects is a
    carefully crafted decision  and  reasons.  The  failure  to  adequately
    consider relevant medical evidence  on  a  core  issue  of  discrepancy
    adversely affects the safety of this decision.

20. Having found for the appellant as to a material  error  of  law  having
    been identified by ground 2, I am not required to  consider  grounds  1
    and 3 to 5.  The identified material error of law arising from ground 2
    is such that this decision must be set aside.


Remittal

21. As to remaking the  decision,  given  the  fundamental  nature  of  the
    material error identified, I accept the submissions made by  both  Miss
    Zapata Besso and Miss Bassi that clear findings of fact will have to be
    made when this decision is remade. Both advocates  submitted  that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  if  a  material
    error of law was established.  I have given  careful  consideration  to
    the Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal that reads
    as follows at paragraph 7.2:

         'The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-


             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal'

22. I have reached the conclusion that it  is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  matters.
    The appellant has enjoyed no adequate consideration of his asylum claim
    to date and has not yet had a fair hearing.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the judge's decision  promulgated  on
    24 July 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

24. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Eldridge.



25. No findings of fact are preserved.

26. The anonymity order is confirmed.



Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 October 2019






