
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03278/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20th July 2018 & 18th December 2018    |On 9th January 2019            |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

               SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT / SM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                        Appellant/respondent
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Representation:
For SM:  Mr Sadiq, Adam Solicitors
For the SSHD: Mr Tan on 20th July 2018, Mr C Bates on 18th December 2018,
                    Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    person in this determination identified as SM. This  direction  applies
    to, amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. For the reasons set out in my decision promulgated on  10th  August
         2018, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which had
         allowed  the  appeal  of  SM  against  a  decision  to  refuse  her
         protection claim. The resumed hearing  listed  for  10th  September
         2018 was adjourned with directions, inter alia, that the  SSHD  use
         his  best  endeavours  to  take  a  decision  on  the   outstanding
         application for indefinite leave to remain made by SM's partner.

      2. Although the SSHD had not  taken  a  decision  on  the  outstanding
         indefinite leave to remain application, following  discussion,  the
         parties agreed to the hearing of the instant appeal  proceeding  on
         18th December.

      3. SM was born in Chamchamal in the Sulaymaniyah Governate, IKR on 1st
         August 1995. She arrived in the UK on 19th September 2017 and  made
         a protection claim.  Her protection claim was refused by  the  SSHD
         and her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal allowed. The Secretary of
         State sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal.  I  found  a
         material error of law by the First-tier Tribunal judge  who  failed
         to make a properly reasoned finding on the impact upon SM returning
         to Iraq as a lone woman with a child, whether it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for her to relocate, whether her family have influence in the
         IKR, relied upon evidence whose provenance he did not identify  and
         he failed to consider Article 8.

      4. The findings made by the First-tier Tribunal were preserved:

          a) SM had, prior to coming to the UK resided in Kirkuk;

          b) Her family resided in Kirkuk;

          c) She had been abused by her father and a brother;

          d) She and her partner (an Iraqi  national  with  an  outstanding
             application for indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK  having
             had 6  years  discretionary  leave  to  remain)  have  a  long
             standing genuine and subsisting  relationship  and  have  been
             living together since she arrived in the UK;

          e) SM's parents were authoritarian and strict and were planning a
             marriage for her to which she did not consent;

          f) At the date of the hearing the  couple  were  expecting  their
             first child (now born).

      5. Mr Bates accepted that SM does not  have  a  CSID  and  would  have
         difficulty obtaining one. He accepted that, on  the  basis  of  the
         evidence as it stands at present, without  a  CSID  she  could  not
         return to Iraq. He confirmed that  he  had  considered  the  SSHD's
         recent policy documents and the letters from the Iraqi  authorities
         in connection with CSID but had concluded that even if she were  to
         be issued with a laissez passer or similar document to  enable  her
         to travel to Iraq, she would still need a CSID  in  order  to  gain
         access to services and be able to travel to and regularise her stay
         in the IKR. He acknowledged that she would have to  obtain  a  CSID
         from Kirkuk, where her family now live, and she would then have  to
         register in the place where she was going to live in  the  IKR.  He
         acknowledged that SM had been found credible and that although  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge had not made  findings  on  her  evidence
         that she had an uncle in the security services in Erbil and another
         uncle in the  security  services  in  Sulaymaniyah,  he  could  not
         seriously dispute that evidence.

      6. Mr Bates raised the possibility that her partner could travel  with
         her to the IKR and provide her with any required support. He  noted
         that the partner had been refused asylum several years ago and been
         granted discretionary leave to remain but noted that time had moved
         on; in any event there was nothing in  the  papers  that  indicated
         that the partner had or had previously had any  necessary  identity
         documents (including a CSID) and there was no evidence to support a
         submission that he remained in contact with his  family  who  could
         assist him. He said he could not point to anything  in  the  papers
         that could suggest that he was not credible. He said he  could  not
         argue that SM's partner either had or would be  able  to  obtain  a
         CSID and thus be able to return to Iraq with SM to provide her with
         support.

      7. If SM could get to Kirkuk to obtain  her  CSID  to  enable  her  to
         register in the IKR, it would, Mr Bates submitted,  be  speculative
         to conclude that whilst she was in Kirkuk she would  be  found  and
         identified by her parents as being there and thus to  be  at  risk.
         Whilst I agree that there is a degree of speculation in  connection
         with that, the fact remains that even if she were  able  to  obtain
         her CSID to enable her to register in the  IKR,  that  registration
         process, indeed her entry into  the  IKR,  would  require  security
         checks. I am satisfied that with two uncles  at  relatively  senior
         levels in the security  service  (one  a  major  and  the  other  a
         lieutenant) in Erbil and Sulaymaniyah, she would be placed at  real
         risk of her whereabouts becoming known and thus to  be  at  serious
         risk of being persecuted.  She would be a lone  woman  in  Iraq/IKR
         with no means of accessing support. As accepted by  Mr  Bates  this
         would place her at Article 3 risk of  serious  harm  and  therefore
         entitled to humanitarian protection on that basis. I  am  satisfied
         that even if she could obtain a CSID, that her partner could obtain
         a CSID and return with her to Iraq  and  that  they  were  able  to
         relocate to IKR, she would, as  a  woman  who  has  been  found  to
         dishonour her family as set out in the findings of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, be at serious risk  of  being  found  in  any  event  and
         persecuted.

      8. Mr Sadiq reiterated the risks on entry to the IKR, the serious risk
         of her whereabouts becoming known, and that she will be at  serious
         risk of 'honour  killing'.  He  drew  attention  to  the  need  for
         security checks at  the  border  with  the  IKR  before  entry  and
         residence was permitted.

      9. Taking these matters overall, I am satisfied that if SM were to  be
         removed to Iraq, she would be at serious risk of  being  persecuted
         for a Convention reason. She would be unable to relocate to the IKR
         without her  whereabouts  being  discovered  by  her  family,  thus
         reinstating the persecutory risk. There was no evidence that  there
         was sufficiency of protection for her and Mr Bates did not seek  to
         argue this.

     10. Accordingly, as I said at  the  hearing,  I  allow  the  appeal  on
         international protection grounds; the appellant has a  well-founded
         fear of persecution on Refugee Convention grounds.

     11. SM is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a man  who  has
         resided in the UK for the past six years and they have a child. The
         man is awaiting a decision on an application for  indefinite  leave
         to remain. It follows that her appeal is successful  on  Article  3
         grounds. Although I have allowed the appeal on refugee grounds  and
         heard no specific submissions on Article 8, I am satisfied that  on
         the basis of the evidence before me, SM's appeal  under  Article  8
         succeeds. There is nothing significant in the papers before me that
         could lead to a  conclusion  that  the  couple  should  not  remain
         together.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  SM's  appeal  on
    international protection (refugee) and human rights grounds.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 18th December 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
