
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/03963/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th January 2018                       |   On 25th January 2018           |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                      mr Abdueraouf Abdoesalam Ebhialil
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Pountney, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya, born on  22nd  August  1980.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK  on  10th  January  2015  by
    direct plane from Libya.  Prior to that he had had leave to remain as a
    Tier 4 (General) Student between 2011 and 2015.  On 7th August 2015 the
    Home Office received notification that the Appellant was  intending  to
    enter into marriage and he claimed asylum on  28th  August  2015.   The
    Appellant's asylum claim was based on the fact that he had  a  fear  of
    returning to Libya because of the  general  situation  there  and  also
    feared he would be targeted as his wife was a British national.  He had
    met his wife in November 2014, had an Islamic marriage ceremony on 22nd
    March 2015, thereafter by way of a  civil  ceremony  on  7th  September
    2015.  The Appellant's application for asylum was refused by Notice  of
    Refusal dated 7th December 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Sharkett sitting at Manchester on 4th April 2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 2nd May 2017 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 16th  May  2017.
    Those grounds contended that the  Immigration  Judge  had  applied  the
    wrong legal test in respect of Article 8.  In making his  decision  the
    judge had accepted that the Appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage to a British citizen and that he was the biological father  of
    a British child.  He also found (at paragraph 107) that there would  be
    a real risk to the Appellant's wife in Libya.  However  the  judge  had
    found that Article 8 was not breached because the Appellant could go to
    an undefined country and make an application to return back to  the  UK
    and that the judge had also found that  the  Appellant's  daughter  was
    "young enough to adjust to a temporary absence  of  her  father".   The
    grounds contend that the error in law was that the judge had  taken  no
    account of both the Immigration Rules and relevant Article 8  case  law
    when coming to these findings.

 4. On 5th September 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Hodgkinson noted that the  grounds  argued
    that the judge had  erred  in  her  consideration  of  Article  8  with
    specific reference to the provisions of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act
    and in failing to conclude that there were insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life with his wife continuing outside the United Kingdom.  Judge
    Hodgkinson noted that there was no challenge to the protection  element
    of the judge's decision and  concluded  that  the  grounds  as  pleaded
    disclosed arguable errors of law and granted permission on all grounds.



 5. No Rule 24 response seems to have been filed.  It is on the above basis
    that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     The Appellant appears  by  his  instructed  legal  representative,  Mr
    Pountney.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
    Officer, Mr Bates.

 6. As a preliminary issue Mr Pountney refers me to an application to amend
    the Grounds of Appeal that was lodged at the Tribunal on 25th September
    2017 and was chased  up  by  letter  dated  7th  December  2017.   That
    application has not been addressed.  The basis for seeking to amend  is
    for the change to country guidance to be considered and for  permission
    to be granted on Article 15(c) grounds in addition to Article 8.  It is
    open for party to seek to amend the  grounds.   I  took  the  view  the
    amended grounds represent fresh submissions that would  be  made  if  I
    find a material error of law.  It is accepted by all parties  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge cannot be criticised for not  taking  account
    of a decision that clearly was not before her when she considered  this
    appeal.





Submissions and Discussion

 7. Mr Pountney relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits that the judge
    has failed to go through the appropriate considerations that  would  be
    necessary in this case and that the judge has found  at  paragraph  107
    that the Appellant's wife would be at risk on return to Libya.  She has
    then gone on  to  conclude  (or  indeed  concluded  prior  to  that  at
    paragraph 104) that there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant reintegrating into life in Libya or that his wife  would  not
    face insurmountable obstacles in following him there.  He submits  that
    there is a clear contradiction in these findings acknowledging that the
    Appellant's wife is British and that it is not reasonable to expect her
    to leave the UK and that the judge has not  considered  whether  family
    life could continue in Libya.  He submits that this is a clear error of
    law.

 8. Mr Bates' approach is both pragmatic and helpful.  He accepts that  the
    finding that there are no insurmountable obstacles to  the  Appellant's
    wife travelling to Libya is a clear error although he submits that  the
    judge did consider the Home Office policy and that a family  split  had
    been considered by the judge to be proportionate.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. I agree with the submissions of both legal representatives.  There is a
    clear error of law in the judge's reasoning, in particular  in  finding
    the Appellant's wife would  be  at  risk  at  paragraph  107  and  then
    concluding paragraph 104 that his wife would  not  face  insurmountable
    obstacles in following her husband to  Libya.   I  further  accept  the
    judge has not considered fully or  properly  whether  family  life  can
    continue in Libya and that the  case  law  is  not  supportive  of  the
    findings made by the judge.  In such  circumstances  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision.

Remaking of Decision

12. In remaking of the decision it is accepted by both Mr Pountney  and  Mr
    Bates that it is now appropriate to consider the  submissions  made  by
    the Appellant's legal  representatives  in  their  amended  Grounds  of
    Appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  dismissed  the  appeal
    pursuant to Article 15(c) in line with FA (Libya: art 15(c))  Libya  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00413 (IAC).  On 3rd May 2017 the Upper Tribunal issued the
    new country guidance in ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT  00263
    (IAC).  That case is authority for the proposition

         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person.".

13. Such authority was clearly not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  as
    the case had not been published.  However it is now clear that  country
    guidance indicates in principle that Libyans are at risk  of  treatment
    contrary to  Article  15(c)  of  the  Refugee  Qualification  Directive
    2004/83/EC on return to Libya.  Consequently I find that following  the
    country guidances now existing  the  Appellant  would  be  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection and  consequently  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained material  errors  of
law and is set aside.  On hearing the further  submissions  from  the  legal
representatives of both parties the decision is remade allowing the  appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed
                                Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
