

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03814/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 June 2017                        |On 12 September 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     JF

                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni        (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                                   DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and decision in brief

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of
the  First-tier Tribunal  (hereinafter  "the tribunal"),  whereupon   it
dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's   decision   of
16 March 2016 refusing to grant him international protection.  My decision
is that  the tribunal's  decision,  as  explained  in  written  reasons  of
19 October 2016 (promulgated on 21 October 2016) involved the making of an
error of law.  Accordingly,  that  decision  is  set  aside.   The  case  is
remitted for a complete rehearing before a differently constituted  tribunal
(effectively before a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal).

Anonymity

2.    The claimant was granted anonymity by the tribunal.  I  have  assumed
that that was done because, at that stage, he  was  a  minor.   Nothing  was
said regarding anonymity at the hearing before me but I have decided  it  is
appropriate, at this stage, for the status quo to be maintained.  If it  is
thought necessary  or  appropriate  that  matter  may  be  revisited  before
the tribunal at the rehearing. So, I have not named the claimant and I have
used initials rather than the full names of other  individuals  referred  to
in the documentation before me.

How the matter comes before me

3.    The claimant is a national of Afghanistan.  He  has  been  treated  as
having been born on 1 January 1999.  He made his way from  Afghanistan  to
the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.  Pursuant to his claim  he  attended
what is often referred to as a "screening interview"  which  took  place  on
16 September 2015.  He then  provided  the  Home Office  with  a  witness
statement of 23 November 2015.  That is a short  document  but  sets  out,
building upon some  limited  information  he  had  given  in  the  screening
interview, the basis for his claim.   On  1 February 2016  he  attended  a
substantive  asylum  interview  at   which   he   was   accompanied   by   a
representative from the firm of solicitors  which  has  been  assisting  him
throughout.  It is recorded that there was  also  present  a  Dari  speaking
interpreter.   That  interview  was  relatively  lengthy,  running  to  some
147 questions.  On  12 February 2016  his  representative  wrote  to  the
Home Office seeking to clarify certain things he had said in interview  and
making some further points on his behalf.  On 16 March 2016 the  Secretary
of State decided to refuse the claim.

4.    It is perhaps appropriate, at this  stage,  for  me  to  set  out  the
detail of the claim in summary form.  The claimant said that he was  from  a
place called Kajak in the Parwan Province in Afghanistan.  He had said  that
his parents are deceased and that he had been raised by  a  maternal  uncle.
He said that one day he was playing football with his maternal  uncle's  son
and some of the locals.  His maternal uncle's son became  involved  in  some
fighting and stabbed another child.  The maternal uncle  told  the  claimant
that he had to take the blame for the stabbing.  The claimant says  that  he
did not do so and that, in consequence, the maternal  uncle  now  wishes  to
kill him and will do so if he is returned to Afghanistan.   It  was  also  a
part of the claimant's claim that he would, upon return, suffer  persecution
as a result of his being of Hazara ethnicity.

5.    The Secretary of State, having decided to refuse the  claim,  set  out
her reasoning in a document attached to the decision notice and which  bears
the heading "detailed reasons for refusal".   In  summary,  though  I  shall
refer to the content of that document in a little more detail later, it  was
said that the account involving the uncle and his son was  disbelieved  such
that there would be no risk, on that account, upon return.  Further  it  was
said that he had failed to substantiate his claim to be at  risk  solely  on
the basis of his ethnicity.

6.     The  claimant  appealed  and,  as  already  noted,  his  appeal   was
unsuccessful.  The Tribunal, like the Secretary of State,  did  not  accept
the proffered account of events nor did it  find  material  to  support  the
proposition that he would  be  at  risk  simply  as  a  consequence  of  his
ethnicity.  The appeal having been dismissed he sought permission to  appeal
to  the  Upper Tribunal  which  was  refused  by  a  judge  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal  and  then  by  a  judge  of  the   Upper Tribunal.    The
Upper Tribunal judge refusing permission, though, did make the comment that
the tribunal's written reasons had a "slightly impatient  tone"  which  was
said to be regrettable.  The refusal of permission was not the  end  of  the
matter though because the claimant's representatives applied for a  judicial
review. I have not seen the grounds of application but it is  apparent  from
the documentation before me that that two separate  grounds  were  advanced.
The  flavour  of  those  grounds  is  apparent  from  the  decision  of  the
High Court granting permission to bring judicial review  proceedings.   The
salient part of that decision, which was made on 9 February 2017, reads as
follows:

      "Observations:

       It appears that the First-tier Tribunal (F-tT) judge failed properly
      to consider and decide the appeal on  the  basis  that  the  claimant,
      aged 17, was a minor, and failed to apply the Country Guidance in  AA
      (Unattended Children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 15 at [129] - [135]
      (whether a child can safely be returned to Kabul and travel thereafter
      to his home area).  Permission to appeal ought to have been given.   I
      am satisfied that this ground meets the test in CPR 5.54.7A(7).

      I refuse permission on ground 2, as the F-tT judge  was  entitled  to
      find the claimant's evidence contradictory or inconsistent even in the
      absence   of   cross-examination   by   the   Secretary   of   State's
      representative."

7.    On 24 April 2017 the decision of the Upper Tribunal judge refusing to
grant permission to appeal from the decision of  the Tribunal  was  quashed
without further argument from the  parties.   Thereafter,  the  matter  came
before the Vice President of the  Upper Tribunal  who,  on  16 May 2017,
granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  As  there  was  some
argument before me as to whether the  Vice President  was  doing  something
more than merely granting permission to appeal I shall set  out,  here,  the
salient part of that decision. It reads:

      "Notice of decision of application for permission to appeal

      Permission to appeal is now granted.

      Reasons

      Permission is granted in the light of the decision of the  High Court
      in this case.  The parties are reminded that the Upper Tribunal's task
      is that set out in s.12 of the 2007 Act."

8.    So, the appeal was listed before the Upper Tribunal (before me)  with
a view to its being considered whether the tribunal had erred in  law  and,
if so, what should flow from that.  Representation at that  hearing  was  as
stated above and I am grateful to each representative.

The hearing before me

9.    There was agreement between the parties on a  number  of  matters  but
disagreement between them on two matters.   There  was  disagreement  as  to
what the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal had been deciding.  Read  at
face value it seems entirely  clear  that  what  he  was  doing  was  simply
granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   That  was  the  view
taken by Mrs Aboni.  Mr Bedford, though, referred me to the sentence which
reads "the parties are reminded that the Upper Tribunal's task is that  set
out in s.12 of the 2007 Act".  His argument, I think, was that  section 12
is concerned with the Upper Tribunal's powers once a decision of  a  First-
tier Tribunal has been set aside.  So by implication,  runs  the  argument,
the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal in referring to section  12  must
have been actually been setting aside the decision of the tribunal.

10.   Assuming, however, that there was simply  a  grant  of  permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  there  was  agreement  between  the  parties
(although I will say a little bit more about this below) that the  grant  of
permission was not to be regarded as limited to what had been  ground 1  of
the application for permission to bring judicial review proceedings.

11.   Importantly, there was agreement  that  the Tribunal's  decision  had
involved the making of an error of law.  Specifically,  Mrs Aboni  accepted
that the Tribunal had erred in the manner it had been  suggested  it  might
have done by the High Court with reference to ground 1 before it. In other
words it had failed to consider whether it  might  be  safe  to  return  the
claimant to Kabul and whether he might be able to safely travel  from  Kabul
to his home area.

12.   The parties agreed that, in consequence of the Tribunal having erred,
its decision had to be set aside.  They disagreed as to what should  follow.
 Mrs Aboni urged me to remit to the  First-tier Tribunal  for  a  complete
rehearing on all matters.  Mr Bedford, however,  urged  me  to  remake  the
decision myself.  It is important to make clear the basis upon which he  was
doing that.  He was not asking me to simply rehear all the  evidence  myself
and stand in the shoes of the First-tier Tribunal  with  respect  to  fact-
finding.  Rather, his argument was that since  the  claimant  had  not  been
subjected  to  cross-examination  at  the  hearing  before   the tribunal,
the tribunal had been obliged as a matter of law to accept the truthfulness
of the entirety of his account.  It followed from that said Mr Bedford that
I should, indeed must, not only set aside the tribunal's decision but allow
the appeal myself because if the account is true the claimant is  inevitably
a refugee.  He relied upon authorities to which I will refer below  for  the
proposition that an account is effectively accepted or must  be  treated  as
having been accepted if not challenged by way of cross-examination.

My resolution of the disputed issues

13.   The first matter to consider  is  the  Vice President's  decision  of
16 May 2017.  Since I have accepted the agreed position of the parties that
the tribunal's decision has to be set aside  in  any  event,  it  does  not
really matter now whether I conclude that its decision has already been  set
aside by the Vice President or not.  Nevertheless, there was some  argument
about this before me, albeit not lengthy argument, so I  shall  address  the
issue but can be brief in doing so.

14.   I am satisfied that the Vice President  of  the  Upper Tribunal  was
doing no more than grant permission  to  appeal.   The  decision  bears  the
heading "Notice of decision of application for permission  to  appeal".   It
contains the wording "permission to appeal is  now  granted"  and  then  the
wording "permission is granted ...".  It says nothing about the decision of
the tribunal being set aside.  That, in my judgment, is comfortably  enough
to lead me to conclude that the decision  being  taken  was  a  decision  to
grant permission to appeal and nothing more than that.

15.    As  to  reference  to  section 12  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007,  I  do  not  agree  with  what  I  understand  to  be
Mr Bedford's view that section 12 is only concerned with what happens when
a decision has been set aside.  That view seems to me to ignore the  wording
of section 12(1).  To be clear, the relevant part of that section  provides
as follows:

      "     12.  Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal

                 (1)   Subsection (2) applies if  the  Upper Tribunal,  in
                 deciding an appeal under section 11, finds that the making
                 of the decision concerned involved the making of  an  error
                 on a point of law.

                 (2)   The Upper Tribunal -

                             (a)  may (but need not) set aside the  decision
                            of the First-tier Tribunal and

                             (b)  if it does, must either -

                                        (i)  remit the case  to  the  First-
                                       tier Tribunal with  directions  for
                                       its reconsideration, or

                                        (ii) remake the decision."

16.   The limited underlining is mine.  But it is clear from section 12(1),
it seems to me, that section 12  is  concerned,  first  of  all,  with  the
threshold question of whether a decision of a First-tier Tribunal  involved
the making of an error on a point of law. So, the reference  to  section 12
by the Vice President  cannot  be  construed  as  an  indication  that  the
decision has been, at that stage, set  aside.   As  I  say,  though,  having
regard to matters set out above the question is now somewhat academic.

17.   There was agreement that the grant of permission was  not  limited  in
its scope.  On one reading I suppose it might be thought  that  the  wording
"permission is granted in the light of the decision of the High Court ...",
might imply that the grant was only limited to  the  argument  which  formed
ground 1 of the application for judicial review. I  think  Mr Bedford  had
anticipated that either I might take that view or that Mrs Aboni might urge
me to do so.  However, she did not. Absent disagreement perhaps I  need  say
no more at all about the matter but, just briefly, and insofar as  it  might
be necessary to say anything about this, the Upper Tribunal's consideration
of an application for permission to appeal is governed by  rule 45  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  When sub-paragraph (4) and
sub-paragraph (5) of rule 45 are read together it is clear that where  the
Upper Tribunal is giving permission to appeal only on  limited  grounds  it
must provide reasons why permission is being refused on  the  other  grounds
together with notification of any rights to challenge  the  refusal  on  the
unsuccessful grounds.  There is no evidence that any of that was done.   So,
even absent the agreement between the parties, I would  have  construed  the
grant, on the material before me, as being an unlimited one.

18.   As to error of law itself, as indicated, there  is  agreement  between
the parties.  Mrs Aboni accepts that the Tribunal did err with respect  to
ground 1 of the application to the High Court and, since she also  accepts
that the grant is unlimited and that there should be  a  complete  rehearing
before the First-tier Tribunal, it would not be necessary for me to say any
more were it not for Mr Bedford's interesting argument which underpins  his
contention that I should remake the decision and can  lawfully  only  remake
the decision in the one way he contends.  So, I shall move  straight  on  to
that.

19.   Mr Bedford, relies, to a large extent, upon  what  was  said  by  the
Supreme Court in a judgment which has the neutral  citation  number  [2005]
EWCA Civ 267.  The judgment, in turn, refers to a rather old  judgment  of
the House of Lords in Browne v Dunn [1894] 6 R 67 and an Australian case,
that  of  Allied  Pastoral  Holdings v Federal  Commissioner  of  Taxation
(1983) 44 ALR 607.  He argues that the  judgment  of  the  Supreme Court
approves the two earlier decisions, the eldest of which has clearly he  says
withstood the test of time and that it is not for  the  First-tier Tribunal
to effectively overrule what is decided therein.  This,  in  fact,  was  the
real issue before me.

20.   It is perhaps worth  setting  out  certain  of  the  passages  in  the
judgment of the Supreme Court upon which Mr Bedford relies.  I  quote,  as
indeed did Mr Bedford, from the judgment of Lord Justice Jacob:

      "     57.  Prior to the hearing before us we  drew  the  attention  of
      the parties to the decisions of the House of Lords in  Browne  v  Dunn
      (1894) 6 R 67 and the Australian case of Allied Pastoral Holdings v
      Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1983) 44 ALR 607.  One member of the
      court was aware that Australian practitioners were very alive  to  the
      rule in Browne v Dunn (so  also,  he  has  ascertained,  are  Canadian
      practitioners).  The case reference and the Pastoral Holdings decision
      were supplied to him through the helpfulness of Justice Heerey of the
      Australian Federal Court.

            58.  Browne v Dunne is only reported in a very  obscure  set  of
      reports.  Probably  for  that  reason  it  is  not  as  well-known  to
      practitioners here as it should be although it is  cited  in  Halsbury
      for the following proposition:

            'Where the court is to be asked to  disbelieve  a  witness,  the
           witness should be cross-examined; and failure to cross-examine a
           witness on some material part of his evidence or at all, may  be
           treated as an acceptance of the truth of that part or the  whole
           of his evidence.'

            59.  Because the decision is so difficult to  lay  hands  on  we
      take the opportunity here of citing all the material passages.  We  do
      so via the decision of Hunt J in Allied Pastoral because his judgment
      also contains his own valuable comments.  He said (p.623):

                  'It  has  in  my  experience  always  been   a   rule   of
           professional practice that, unless notice  has  already  clearly
           been given of the cross-examiner's intention to rely  upon  such
           matter, it is necessary to put to an opponent's witness in cross-
           examination the nature of the case upon which it is proposed  to
           rely in contradiction of his evidence, particularly  where  that
           case relies upon inferences to be drawn from other  evidence  in
           the proceedings.  Such a rule of practice is necessary  both  to
           give the  witness  the  opportunity  to  deal  with  that  other
           evidence, or the inferences to be drawn from it,  and  to  allow
           the other party the  opportunity  to  call  evidence  either  to
           corroborate that explanation  or  to  contradict  the  inference
           sought to be drawn.  That rule of practice follows from  what  I
           have always believed to be rules of conduct which are  essential
           to fair play at the trial and which are  generally  regarded  as
           being established by the decision  of  the  House  of  Lords  in
           Browne v  Dunn (1894) 6 R 67.

                 No doubt because that decision is to be found  only  in  an
           obscure series of law reports (called simply "The  Reports"  and
           published briefly between 1893  and  1895),  reliance  upon  the
           rules said to be enshrined in that decision seems  often  to  be
           attended more  with  ignorance  than  with  understanding.   The
           appeal was from a defamation action brought against a  solicitor
           and based upon a document which the defendant had drawn  whereby
           he was to be retained by a number of local residents to have the
           plaintiff bound over to keep the  peace  because  of  a  serious
           annoyance which it was alleged he had caused to those residents.
            Six of the nine signatories to the document  gave  evidence  on
           behalf of the defendant that they had genuinely retained him  as
           their solicitor and that the document was really intended to  be
           what it appeared on its face to be.  No suggestion was  made  to
           any of these witnesses in cross-examination that  this  was  not
           the case and, so far as the conduct of the defendant's case  was
           concerned, the genuineness of the document appeared to have been
           accepted.  However, the defence of  qualified  privilege  relied
           upon by the defendant depended in part upon whether the retainer
           was in truth genuine or whether it was a sham, drawn up  without
           any honest or legitimate object but rather for  the  purpose  of
           annoyance and injury to the plaintiff.  This issue was  left  to
           the jury.  The plaintiff submitted to the jury that the retailer
           was not genuine and was successful in obtaining a verdict in his
           favour.  In support of that submission, the plaintiff asked  the
           jury to disbelieve the evidence of the six signatories  who  had
           said that the retainer was a genuine one.

                 Lord Herschell LC said (at  70-71):   'Now  my Lords,  I
           cannot help  saying  that  it  seems  to  me  to  be  absolutely
           essential to the proper conduct of a case, where it is  intended
           to suggest that a  witness  is  not  speaking  the  truth  on  a
           particular point, to direct his attention to the  fact  by  some
           questions put in cross-examination showing that that  imputation
           is intended to be made, and not to take his evidence and pass it
           by as a matter altogether unchallenged, and  then,  when  it  is
           impossible for him to explain, as perhaps  he  might  have  been
           able  to  do  if  such  questions  had  been  put  to  him   the
           circumstances which it is suggested indicate that the  story  he
           tells ought not to be believed, to argue that he  is  a  witness
           unworthy of credit.  My Lords, I have always understood that if
           you intended to impeach a witness you are bound, whilst he is in
           the box, to give him an opportunity of  making  any  explanation
           which is open to him; and, as it seems to me, that is not only a
           rule of professional practice in the conduct of a case,  but  is
           essential to fair play and fair dealing with witnesses.'

                 His Lordship conceded that  there  was  no  obligation  to
           raise such a matter in cross-examination in circumstances  where
           it is 'perfectly clear that (the witness) has  had  full  notice
           beforehand that there is an intention to impeach the credibility
           of the  story  which  he  is  telling'.   His  speech  continued
           (at 72):  'All I am saying is that it will not do to impeach the
           credibility of a witness upon a matter on which he has  not  had
           any opportunity of giving an  explanation  by  reason  of  there
           having been no suggestion whatever in the  course  of  the  case
           that his story is not accepted.'

                 Lord Halsbury said (at 76-77):  'My Lords, with regard to
           the manner in which the evidence  was  given  in  this  case,  I
           cannot  too   heartily   express   my   concurrence   with   the
           Lord Chancellor as to the mode  in  which  a  trial  should  be
           conducted.  To my mind nothing would be more  absolutely  unjust
           than not to cross-examine witnesses  upon  evidence  which  they
           have given, so as to give them  notice,  and  to  give  them  an
           opportunity of explanation, and an  opportunity  very  often  to
           defend their own character, and, not having given them  such  an
           opportunity, to ask the jury afterwards to disbelieve what  they
           have said, although not one question has been directed either to
           their credit or to the accuracy of the facts they  have  deposed
           to.'

                 Lord Morris (at 77-79) said that  he  entirely  concurred
           with the two speeches which preceded  his,  although  he  wished
           (at 79) to guard himself with respect to laying down any  hard-
           and-fast  rules  as  regards  cross-examining  a  witness  as  a
           necessary preliminary to  impeaching  his  credit.   The  fourth
           member of the House of Lords, Lord Bowen, is reported (at 79-80)
           to have said that, on the evidence of the  six  signatories,  it
           was impossible to deny that there had been a  real  and  genuine
           employment of the defendant.  But his Lordship made no statement
           of general principle.

                  These  statements  by  the  House  of  Lords  led  to  the
           formulation of a number of so-called 'rules'.   They  have  been
           stated in various ways in the cases and  by  text-book  writers,
           and it is fair to say that there is some room for debate  as  to
           their correct formulation.

                  For  example,  in  Cross  on  Evidence   (2nd   Australian
           ed, 1979) the authors state (at para 10:50):  'Any matter upon
           which it is proposed to contradict the evidence in  chief  given
           by the witness must normally be put to him so that he  may  have
           an opportunity of explaining the contradiction, and  failure  to
           do this may be held to  imply  acceptance  of  the  evidence  in
           chief.'

                 In Phipson (12th ed, 1976)  the  authors  state  the  rule
           somewhat more discursively (at para 1593):  'As a rule a  party
           should put to each of his opponent's witnesses in turn  so  much
           of his own case as concerns that particular witness, or in which
           he had a share ...  If he asks no questions he will in England,
           though not perhaps in Ireland, generally be taken to accept  the
           witness's account and he will not be allowed to attack it in his
           closing speech, nor will he be allowed in  that  speech  to  put
           forward  explanations  where  he  has  failed  to  cross-examine
           relevant witnesses on the point ...  Where it  is  intended  to
           suggest that the witness  is  not  speaking  the  truth  upon  a
           particular point his attention must first  be  directed  to  the
           fact by cross-examination, so that he may have an opportunity of
           explanation; and this probably applies to all cases in which  it
           is proposed to impeach the  witness's  credit ...   Failure  to
           cross-examine, however, will not always amount to an  acceptance
           of the witness's testimony, e.g. if the witness has  had  notice
           to the contrary  beforehand,  or  the  story  is  itself  of  an
           incredible or romancing character.'

            60.  Hunt J concluded (p.634):

                 'I remain of the opinion that, unless  notice  has  already
           clearly been given of the  cross-examiner's  intention  to  rely
           upon such matters, it is  necessary  to  put  to  an  opponent's
           witness in cross-examination the nature of the case  upon  which
           it is  proposed  to  rely  in  contradiction  of  his  evidence,
           particularly where that case relies upon inferences to be  drawn
           from other evidence in the proceedings.'

            61.  We think all that applies here.  It  is  not  necessary  to
      explore the limits of the rule in Browne v Dunn for  this  case  falls
      squarely within  it.   Indeed  the  position  is  stronger  here,  for
      the Judge was not even asked to disbelieve the witnesses.  Mr Watson
      was right not to support the Judge's findings - the only puzzle is why
      he did not take that position earlier."

21.   I should make it clear that the above underlining is mine. By  way  of
reminder, Mr Bedford says that the above decisions,  when  taken  together,
clearly establish a rule that a failure to challenge an account  by  way  of
cross-examination means that the account has been accepted.   Applying  that
to the  instant  case,  he  says  that  because  the  Secretary  of  State's
representative did not  cross-examine  the  claimant  before  the tribunal,
the tribunal had to proceed on the basis that that account was true.

22.   In looking at the Record of Proceedings it is right to  say  that  the
claimant did, in evidence in chief, adopt  two  witness  statements.   Those
witness statements  are  dated  23 November 2015  and  26 September 2016
respectively.  It appears, according to that  record,  that  there  were  no
supplementary questions asked  in  examination-in-chief  and  that,  indeed,
there was no cross-examination.  So Mr Bedford is right when he  says  that
the Secretary  of  State's  representative  could  have  cross-examined  the
claimant (since he had been called to give evidence) but had chosen  not  to
do so.

23.   But I  do  not  agree  with  Mr Bedford  that  the  judgment  of  the
Supreme Court upon which he relies and which in turn relies  upon  the  two
other judgments cited above, sets out a rigid principle.  On my reading  the
passage which I have set out above makes it clear that concern arises  where
a party or a witness has not, before closing submissions are made  regarding
credibility,  been  put  on  notice  that  his/her  credibility   is   being
challenged.  It seems to me that the passages I have  underlined  illustrate
that.

24.   In the case of the claimant before me, there can have  been  no  doubt
in his mind or that of his representatives prior to  the  hearing  that  his
credibility was, indeed under  challenge.  So,  he  knew  the  case  he  was
required to meet, as did his representatives, at the time he  was  preparing
his written case and at the time he was called  to  give  evidence.  I  have
referred above to the Secretary of State's "detailed reasons  for  refusal".
In so far as it relates to credibility I will now quote from  that  document
as follows:

      "Neighbour Murdered by Uncle

            10.  You have claimed that your maternal uncle who  you  resided
      with from being a small child murdered your neighbour's son [I].  As a
      result of this you were asked an array of questions in regard to  this
      at asylum interview.

            11.   You  state  that  you  were  playing  football  with  your
      maternal uncle's son, [I] and  some  other  boys  when  your  maternal
      uncle's son and [I] started to argue and a fight broke out.  You  have
      stated where you were playing and how far that was from  your  uncle's
      house (AIR Q 38).  You were asked why the argument started, but  you
      claim not to know, stating they were playing with  the  ball  when  an
      argument broke out.  It is considered that given you were present when
      the argument broke out that a more  informed  reasoning  of  why  this
      happened be given (sic).

            12.  You state that [I] was older  than  your  maternal  uncle's
      son and punched him, resulting in him crying and  going  to  tell  his
      father, your uncle (AIR Q 44).  Further you have  stated  that  your
      uncle came to the scene of where you were playing and stabbed  [I]  in
      the neck.  You claim he stabbed him because he was older than his  son
      and would bully  your  maternal  uncle's  son.   You  were  questioned
      further, as to the reason why the two would play together if they were
      bullying.  You state you don't  know.   It  is  considered  internally
      inconsistent that the two would be playing together on  regular  basis
      as neighbours, given that one was bullying the other.

            13.  You were asked what you did when your  uncle  stabbed  [I],
      to which you respond nothing (AIR Q 55).  Further you were asked about
      who witnessed the incident.  You state that you and  two  others  were
      present and there were other people working away  on  the  land  also.
      You were asked more  about  these  people,  claiming  they  were  just
      working on the land (AIR Q 58).

            14.  Further, you state you returned home with  your  uncle  and
      his son and your uncle told you to take  the  responsibility  for  the
      murder of [I]. As a result of this you were questioned as to why  your
      uncle was asking you to take  the  blame  given  that  witnesses  were
      present.  Notably you state that 'he said when you are  questioned  by
      the police tell them you did it' (AIR Q 60).  It is considered  that
      your response to this question is generally evasive.  It is considered
      that given it was clear other people had witnessed your  uncle  commit
      the murder, a more thorough and detailed explanation be  given  as  to
      why your uncle was forcing you to take responsibility for  the  murder
      of [I].

            15.  You state that the police came to your  uncle's  house  the
      same night.  However in your witness  statement  you  state  that  the
      elders came to your village and there was many  an  argument  and  the
      police were contacted coming  to  your  house  this  next  day.   This
      appears internally inconsistent.  At asylum interview you  didn't  not
      specify and substantiate  the  fact  that  the  elders  came  to  your
      village.  Moreover, you were asked about this at interview stating the
      incident happened at 6-8 pm and the next day the police arrived at 7-
      8 am.  This is not considered a reasonable response.

            16.   Moreover when the police came  to  your  house  you  state
      that you were arrested and taken  with  you're  uncle  to  the  police
      station.  You have stated that [I's] father was with the  police  when
      they came.  You state that he wasn't there but turned up at the police
      station later on.  When questioned about this further you  state  that
      he wasn't present and you were taken at different time (AIR Q 74-75).
      This is considered to be internally inconsistent.  You have failed  to
      provide a response as to why [I's] father,  knowing  you  didn't  kill
      [I], didn't tell the police about this  but  you  claim  not  to  know
      stating that the police were low rank and  couldn't  make  a  decision
      (AIR Q 77).

            17.  You and your uncle were both  placed  in  a  room  together
      where he was continuously threatening you and saying he was  going  to
      kill you, maintaining that you killed [I] (W/S 8).

            18.  It is considered  that  this  aspect  of  your  account  is
      generally  lacking  in  detail.   You  have   also   been   internally
      inconsistent through aspects of your account.  Therefore, taking  into
      consideration the written above, it is considered that this aspect  of
      your claim be rejected.

            19.  It is therefore rejected that  your  uncle  murdered  Islam
      and you're at risk because you didn't take responsibility."

25.   The tribunal's own adverse credibility finding is  explained  in  this
way:

      "     Consideration of Evidence and Findings

            13.  The Appellant's claim is based on two contentions  that  he
      is in fear of a return to Afghanistan because his uncle has threatened
      to kill him and more generally is at risk  because  of  his  being  of
      Hazara ethnicity.

            14.  With regard to the uncle the Appellant claims that  he  was
      playing football with his uncle's son and other locals.   His  uncle's
      son got into an argument with another boy, by the name of  [I]  and  a
      fight broke out.  [I] punched his uncle's son, who then  went  to  his
      father and his father being informed of this returned and stabbed  [I]
      to death.  The Appellant's uncle then insisted that the Appellant take
      the blame for the killing and if he did not said he  would  kill  him.
      At the police station the Appellant denied killing [I] and as a result
      his uncle's threatened to would kill him.

            15.  The first point I would make is that  the  story  does  not
      have a general ring of truth about it.  The Appellant has  lived  with
      his uncle, on his account, since he was a small child.  The  Appellant
      in his witness statement says that if he admitted  to  the  crime  the
      case would be closed and the  matter  resolved.   That  however  would
      surely not have been the case for  the  family  of  the  dead  boy.  I
      struggle to believe that someone who has been in "loco parentis" with
      regard to the Appellant, namely his uncle, would insist on him  taking
      the blame for something he has not done with  all  the  problems  that
      that might subsequently cause.

            16.  The Appellant says an argument broke out  between  the  two
      boys whilst playing football.  He does not know what the argument  was
      about, AIR Q42, despite the fact he was present at the time.  The boy
      [N] (his uncle's son) is apparently regularly bullied by [I], AIR Q54.

            17.  I must ask myself why if he was regularly  bullied  by  [I]
      he was playing with him?  If he was regularly  bullied  and  therefore
      presumably the one who was forever  on  the  receiving  end  would  he
      become involved in a fight with the bull?   In  answer  to  the  first
      question the Appellant can only say he did not know.  In answer to the
      second that they played together because they lived  near  each  other
      and would fight and play.  But if [N] was regularly fighting with  [I]
      I struggle to understand what it so remarkable about the fact that [I]
      punched him.  So remarkable that he has to rush home, tell his  father
      and his father has to arm himself and kill him.

            18.  There were a number of witnesses to the stabbing, not  just
      the boys playing but working people, neighbours, AIR Q58.  A neighbour
      reported the matter to the police.  Given that that is the case it  is
      unlikely that the uncle should insist  on  the  Appellant  taking  the
      blame.  One must presume that in the village everyone would know  that
      the uncle was the killer.  When this was  put  to  the  Appellant,  he
      replied 'he said when you are questioned by the police tell  them  you
      did it  The neighbours such as [GN] said I didn't and that  is  why  I
      was released and [GN] took me to his home' (AIRQ60).

            19.  I agree with the Respondent that that  answer  is  evasive;
      it does not do  justice  to  the  question.   However  if  there  were
      multiple witnesses who were testifying to the fact that the  Appellant
      did not kill the boy could the uncle suggest that he did.

              20.    The   Appellant   in   his   witness    statement    of
      26th September 2016 seems to be suggesting anyone could admit to  it
      because all the police were looking for was an  excuse  to  close  the
      case.  If that was indeed the case I  am  surprised  that  the  police
      decided to arrest anyone.

            21.  At AIR Q67 the Appellant indicates that  a  neighbour  and
      three elders had given evidence that it was the uncle who  killed  the
      boy.   In  those  circumstances  I  reject  the  suggestion  that  the
      Appellant could in any meaningful way take the blame.

            22.  At AIR Q98 it is said that the uncle is rich and  powerful
      and has connections with the government 'if he didn't  have  links  he
      wouldn't have been able to kill somebody'.  I am obliged to ask myself
      why if the uncle was in that position was he worried  about  admitting
      it, as the Appellant goes on to say 'if you have  many  livestock  you
      can get away'.

            23.  In his  witness  statement  the  Appellant  says  that  the
      elders came to the village that night and the police came to the house
      the next day (paragraph 7, witness statement).  At AIR Q61 he says it
      was the same night.  Given the seriousness of these  events  I  regard
      that as a significant inconsistency.  In  his  witness  statement  the
      Appellant says that [GN] the dead boy's father travelled to the police
      station in the same police car as the Appellant  and  his  uncle.   At
      AIR Q73 he says that [GN] was not present at the police station.  When
      this was put to him at AIR Q76 he states 'we were in the same  vehicle
      but not sitting close to each other'.  I can only  presume  it  was  a
      very large police car.

            24.  Despite the police officers being low rank  (AIRQ77)  they
      beat the powerful and well connected uncle with a Kalashnikov.   These
      presumably being the same policemen who have  so  little  concern  for
      getting at the truth and they would be prepared to  simply  close  the
      case knowing they had the wrong person.

            25.  [GN] though he has no apparent connection to the  Appellant
      beyond the fact that his uncle has killed his son puts him up  in  his
      house.  He does not return to his own house because [GN] tells him his
      uncle will kill him. He remains at the house for about a month but  no
      attempts are made by the rich and powerful uncle or his sons  to  come
      to the house and kill him though it must have been obvious  that  that
      was where he was.  [GN] then pays out of his own pocket for  his  exit
      to Europe.

            26.  I am satisfied that his  account  riddled  as  it  is  with
      contradictions and inconsistencies is such that the Appellant has  not
      established that he would be  at  risk  from  his  uncle  if  he  were
      returned to Afghanistan.   I  am  satisfied  the  whole  storey  is  a
      complete invention, invented to support a claim for asylum."

26.   It is clear that, in fact,  the Tribunal  relied  upon  a  number  of
points which had already been raised in writing by the Secretary  of  State,
prior to the hearing and which the claimant and his representatives had  had
much time to consider, for  the  adverse  credibility  finding.   Since  the
judgment of the Supreme Court does not lay down an inflexible rule  I  would
conclude   that,   in   the   particular   circumstances   of   this   case,
notwithstanding Mr Bedford's determined putting of the point, that,  whilst
it might have been better had the Secretary of State's representative cross-
examined (albeit there might possibly have been a reluctance to do so  given
that the claimant was then a minor), the Tribunal  was  not  obliged,  as  a
matter  of  law,  to  accept  the  account   proffered   by   the   claimant
notwithstanding that failure to  cross-examine.  Perhaps  there  might  have
been some scope for the reaching of  a  different  view  on  the  particular
circumstances if the tribunal  had  relied  substantially  upon  credibility
points other than those previously raised in writing but that  was  not  the
case.

27.   In light of the above,  whilst  I  am  setting  aside  the Tribunal's
decision for the reasons referred to above and already  agreed  between  the
parties, I am not remaking the decision myself  in  the  terms  and  on  the
basis argued for by Mr Bedford.  Rather, I  am  remitting  for  a  complete
rehearing.

Observations for the First-tier Tribunal

28.   The tribunal rehearing the appeal will, effectively, be starting with
a blank canvass.   It  will  not  be  bound  by  any  of  the  findings  and
conclusions of the previous tribunal and will reach its own decision on  all
matters raised by the appeal on the basis of the evidence  before  it  which
may include further written material and, perhaps,  further  oral  evidence.
As to that, I do not know why the  claimant  was  not  cross-examined  given
that credibility clearly is (as matters currently stand) in issue.   If  the
lack of cross-examination was in whole or part connected with  the  claimant
then being a minor it should be noted  that  (on  the  assumption  that  the
above date of birth is correct) he is now an  adult.   If,  therefore,  that
was felt to be an impediment to cross-examination it is one which no  longer
exists.  It will be for the Tribunal to decide the  significance  (assuming
it decides he is) of the claimant now being an  adult.   No  doubt  that  is
something which the representatives  will  wish  to  address.   Since  I  am
remitting for a complete rehearing I will say nothing further about that.

29.   I have issued some brief directions concerning  the  rehearing.   They
are brief because I do not wish to tie the hands of the First-tier Tribunal
in any way.

Directions for the remaking of the decision

A.    Since the previous decision of  the tribunal  is  set  aside  in  its
      entirety, there shall be a complete rehearing of the appeal  before  a
      differently constituted tribunal.

B.    The rehearing shall take place at the Birmingham Hearing Centre.

C.    The claimant shall  be  provided  with  a  Dari  speaking  interpreter
      unless his representatives shall indicate otherwise within 14 days  of
      this decision being issued.

D.    These directions may be replaced, amended or varied  at  any  time  by
      any salaried judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
      law and is set aside.

The case is remitted for a complete rehearing in accordance with  directions
      set out above.


Signed:                      Date: 11 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.   I  continue  that  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,
therefore, the claimant and members of  his  family  are  granted  anonymity
throughout these proceedings.  No report of these  proceedings  in  whatever
form shall directly or indirectly identify the claimant  or  any  member  of
his family.  Failure to comply with this order could lead to a  contempt  of
court.


Signed:                      Date:  11 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.


Signed:                      Date:  11 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

