
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03367/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th May 2018                              |On 25th May 2018                |
|                                              |                                |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    S F P
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, instructed by Quality Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Jamaica  and  is  recorded  as  having
    experienced mental health difficulties (schizophrenia) and subjected to
    sexual abuse.  She appealed against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    dated 27th November 2015 refusing her protection claim.

 2. In a determination dated 8th December 2017  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge Mr R J Walters refused the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made on the following  four
    grounds

       i) the judge took into account an irrelevant factor - that being  the
          Facilitated Return Scheme (FRS) - this only applied to  deportees.
          Further this was not raised at the hearing.

      ii) the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  relevant  material  -
          specifically pages 37- 64 of the report entitled 'Sent "Home" with
          Nothing' on the Deportation  of  Jamaican  nationals  with  mental
          health  difficulties.  This  illustrated  the  difficulties   that
          awaited  those  with  mental  health  difficulties  with   regards
          reintegration,  such  as  employment  and  homelessness  and   the
          passages were specifically cited to the judge.

     iii) it was incumbent on the judge to engage with the question  of  the
          nature of  the  mechanisms  in  the  receiving  state  that  would
          minimise the risk of suicide, and, the judge failed to do so

      iv) the judge declined to apply Paposhvili v Belgium No 41738/10 which
          was an error.

Conclusions

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Walker conceded that the judge  had  indeed
    taken into account the FRS Scheme when this applied to deportees  only;
    this was an error  of  law.   The  AVRIM  programme  appeared,  on  the
    evidence before the judge, to be confined to  assistance  returning  to
    the home town without more.

 5. As Mr Lee indicated at the hearing, the appellant  had  been  sectioned
    and suffered with severe mental health difficulties. In fact the  judge
    does not make clear findings as to what he/she accepts with regards the
    mental health difficulties, but, against the evidence as set out in the
    decision, paragraphs [33] - [50],  the  judge  does  indeed  take  into
    account, when considering very significant  obstacles  to  return  with
    reference to Article 8, (and Article 3), the Facilitated Return  Scheme
    which did not apply to the appellant.

 6. The judge made no findings with regard the evidence identified at pages
    37 to 64 of the 'Sent "Home" with Nothing'  Report.   If  the  findings
    regarding the family were sound that might not be a material error  but
    the findings in  respect  of  the  appellant's  family  are  inadequate
    bearing in mind the  context  of  the  appellant's  mental  health  and
    vulnerability. The judge did not accept that  the  appellant  would  be
    without family support in Jamaica but his  findings  to  that  end  are
    limited to paragraph [62] where he stated

          'I did not accept that  the  Appellant  will  be  without  family
          support in Jamaica.  She said in her A1 that she was  in  contact
          with her youngest brother (now aged 19) by WhatsApp.  She  has  a
          further two brothers in Jamaica, concerning  whom  she  makes  no
          allegations of sexual abuse against her.  I find, therefore, that
          she has family members in Jamaica and did not  accept  that  they
          would refuse to help her.  Indeed, if (sic) she gave no  evidence
          to the effect that she had asked for their help if  returned  and
          that they had refused'.

 7. The judge does not explain why he asserts that he did not  accept  that
    they would refuse to help her. Indeed although the appellant is said to
    be treated as a vulnerable witness [61], it is nonetheless held against
    her that 'she gave no evidence to the effect that  she  had  asked  for
    their help'.

 8. As such I find material errors of law  with  regards  grounds  (i)  and
    (ii).  It is not necessary to proceed to analyse grounds (iii) and (iv)
    and certainly (iv) would depend on adequate and relevant findings.

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007). I considered retaining this matter  in
    the Upper Tribunal but bearing in mind the nature  and  extent  of  the
    findings to be made the matter should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2
    (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 24th May      2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

