
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03559/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 August 2017                      |On 03 October 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Jackson, of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the  decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Coutts (the Immigration Judge) to  dismiss  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse an  application  for
    asylum and human rights protection in the UK.   The  appellant  entered
    the UK, it seems, on 6 October 2016 when  he  managed  to  get  through
    customs and immigration control on the back of a lorry. He subsequently
    claimed asylum.  However, he explained that he  had  travelled  through
    Iran, Turkey, Greece, Macedonia, Serbia, Austria, Hungary, Germany  and
    France before coming to the UK.  He also admitted  being  fingerprinted
    in Greece, Hungary and Germany where he had  remained  for  two  months
    before going to France. The respondent's records show that he had  been
    fingerprinted in Greece on 6 June 2015, Hungary on  23  June  2015  and
    Germany on 25 August 2015.

2.   The Immigration Judge dismissed his appeal because he  did  not  accept
    the appellant had given a truthful account of having been  targeted  by
    the Taliban in Afghanistan.  The appellant was at that time 17,  having
    been born on 20 November 1999.  He will be 18 on 20 November 2017.

3.   The appellant applied for permission to  appeal  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. His grounds  of  appeal  extend  to  8  pages.  He
    contends that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  relevant
    evidence regarding the state of Afghanistan and had failed to take into
    account the appellant's own witness statement dated 2  May  2017  filed
    with the Tribunal on 5 May 2017, the hearing heard  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 9 May 2017.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers considered the grounds of appeal  on
    22 June 2017 and he  found  that  at  least  one  of  the  grounds  was
    arguable.  He criticised the grounds of appeal, which were  settled  by
    Miss Miranda Butler of Counsel, because  they  considered  them  to  be
    unduly lengthy and repetitive. Of course, that is not  the  appellant's
    fault. Judge Cruthers found there to be merit in the criticism  of  the
    Immigration Judge's failure to properly consider  the  evidence  of  Dr
    GIUSTOZZI. Judge Cruthers considered the reasons the Immigration  Judge
    gave for dismissing the appeal, in paragraphs 28 to 42 of his decision,
    to be arguably insufficient. It  seemed  from  consideration  of  those
    paragraphs that the Immigration Judge  had  not  fully  considered  the
    report by Dr Giustozzi dated 26 April 2017 and a witness  statement  by
    the appellant dated 2 May 2017.   However,  Judge  Cruthers  in  giving
    permission to appeal pointed out that even if  the  appellant  faced  a
    real risk of persecution or serious harm in his home area, he may  have
    a reasonable internal relocation option available (see paragraphs 43 to
    45 of the decision). Judge Cruthers also referred to paragraphs 25  and
    26 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  where  the  respondent
    pointed out that she did not accept the  appellant  had  been  forcibly
    recruited into the Taliban.

5.   Following the grant of  permission,  the  respondent  has  submitted  a
    response under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008. In that response, the respondent points out that the leading case
    law showed that while forcible recruitment by  the  Taliban  cannot  be
    discounted as a risk, particularly in areas of high militant  activity,
    evidence is required to show a real risk to the  particular  individual
    and not a mere possibility that he will be at risk of recruitment  into
    the Taliban.


The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

6.    At  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal   both   parties   were
    represented. Ms Jackson  appeared  for  the  appellant  and  Mr  Walker
    appeared for the respondent. Ms Jackson began by  summarising  the  law
    before presenting the arguments on behalf of her client.  At the end of
    her submissions I pointed out that I intended  if  possible  provide  a
    decision in the appeal later that day, as subsequently occurred.  Other
    professional engagements  prevented  Ms  Jackson  remaining  until  the
    conclusion of the appeal.  Mr Khoshal  attended  the  Tribunal  when  I
    provided an oral decision later in the day.

7.   Ms Jackson said that the  real  basis  for  the  appeal  was  that  the
    Immigration Judge had not properly demonstrated that he had  considered
    Dr Giustozzi's report. Dr Giustozzi was an acknowledged  expert,  whose
    evidence had been referred to in a number of cases. She referred me  to
    some key passages in expert's report. In particular,  she  referred  to
    pages 23 et seq in the appellant's bundle of  documents  submitted  for
    the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms  Jackson  said  that  the
    Immigration Judge had only made a passing reference to  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report by stating  that  had  considered  "all  the  evidence"  without
    mentioning Dr GIUSTOZZI by name.  She said that that was not sufficient
    reference given the report's importance. Ms Jackson accepted  that  the
    Immigration Judge had engaged  with  some  of  the  key  points  in  Dr
    Giustozzi's report she did not consider he had engaged in  all  aspects
    of the report. She submitted that an expert of such note, who had dealt
    so thoroughly  with  the  issues,  should  have  been  more  thoroughly
    considered by the Immigration Judge. Ms Jackson  went  on  to  identify
    other errors which she said were material to the outcome of her client'
    s appeal. She submitted that only safe way of rebalancing  matters  was
    to find a material error of law, set aside the decision  and  direct  a
    fresh hearing of her client' s appeal in either the First-tier Tribunal
    or before the Upper Tribunal. Ms Jackson submitted that the  issues  of
    expert evidence were so closely tied- up with the issue of  credibility
    that the Immigration Judge' s assessment of the appellant's credibility
    could not be allowed to stand. If Dr Giustozzi's report  were  properly
    considered, a different tribunal might reach a different decision.  She
    took me to a number of key passages in the law which,  helpfully,  were
    provided to the Tribunal in a ring binder file of  authorities.  In  so
    far as those authorities are material to the outcome of this  appeal  I
    will refer to them later in this decision.

8.   I am grateful to Mr Walker for his succinct and concise submissions.  I
    also have the benefit of the respondent' s Rule 24 response, to which I
    have already referred. This was drafted  by  his  colleague  Mr  Tufan,
    another Presenting Officer. The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  Dr
    Giustozzi has the elevated status the appellant's  representatives  had
    purported to give him.  The country guidance case of CG [2010] UKUT 378
    indicated that, whilst evidence is available to  the  effect  that  the
    Taliban can place individuals at risk, evidence is required to  show  a
    real risk to a particular child and not a mere possibility.   Mr  Tufan
    in his Rule 24  response  indicated  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    rejected the credibility of the appellant's account and therefore to  a
    large extent the Upper Tribunal, which had not had the  opportunity  to
    hear the appellant give evidence, should accept finding of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Any disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    amounted to no more than a disagreement  with  the  adverse  conclusion
    that the First-tier Tribunal had reached. Mr  Tufan  also  referred  to
    paragraph 253 of the case of AK [2012] UKUT  163.  In  that  paragraph,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey rejected the appellant's  account  in  that
    case and said that  even  if  the  Tribunal  were  persuaded  that  the
    appellant was at risk of serious harm in his  home  area  the  Tribunal
    would not find  that  he  was  lacking  a  viable  internal  relocation
    alternative in Kabul. Judge Storey considered that  Dr  Giustozzi's  an
    assessment had been made on a mistaken basis  that  the  appellant  had
    given a credible account of his past experiences but in fact the First-
    Tier Tribunal had not accepted the appellant's account. In  any  event,
    it was the Upper Tribunal's finding that the appellant would be safe to
    live in Kabul without  undue  hardship.  The  appellant  would  now  be
    returning as a single adult to the Kabul area and  there  would  be  no
    reason to think, based on the evidence, that he would not  be  able  to
    receive help with accommodation and finding employment  in  that  city.
    Respondent therefore urged the same conclusion on the Tribunal in  this
    case as had been reached by the Upper Tribunal in the case of A K.

Discussion

9.   It is well-established that the burden rests on the appellant  to  show
    that  he  falls  within  the  Refugee  Convention.  Alternatively,  the
    appellant must show that he  is  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) in that his  right  to  life
    under article 2 of that Convention would be infringed or that he  would
    be subject to inhuman and degrading treatment contrary to article 3  of
    the ECHR. In addition, there is an  obligation  on  the  respondent  to
    ensure, in a case where a  person  can  show  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that he would, if returned to the country of  return,  be  at
    real risk of suffering serious harm. In such a case, the respondent  is
    under an obligation to  grant  the  appellant  humanitarian  protection
    within the UK. A low standard of proof  applies  to  these  claims.  In
    particular,  the  appellant  must  show  to  a  reasonable  degree   of
    likelihood that his claims are true.  Furthermore,  the  Tribunal  must
    give the matter its anxious scrutiny.

10.  I find the law to be accurately summarised in the case of A  K  and  in
    the submissions by the  representatives  in  this  case.  I  have  also
    considered the other authorities to which I was referred by Ms Jackson.
    The appellant must establish his risk on return but it is open  to  the
    Tribunal to conclude that  Kabul  city  represents  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative even if the appellant's account is true. Matters
    of credibility are always for the  judge  hearing  the  witnesses  give
    evidence, weighing in the  balance  their  oral  evidence  against  the
    background material and the objective facts.

Conclusions

11.  Ms Jackson has been unable to persuade me that the adverse  credibility
    findings made by the Immigration Judge were not  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  I  accept  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has  not  referred
    specifically to Dr Giustozzi by name, but reading  the  decision  as  a
    whole the Immigration Judge demonstrated that he thoroughly  considered
    all the evidence.  He referred to all the key points that  were  raised
    before him. He clearly had Dr Giustozzi's  report  in  his  mind.   The
    skeleton argument submitted on the appellant's behalf in advance of the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 9th May 2017, does not  refer
    to the report from Dr Giustozzi, so the Immigration Judge ought not  to
    be criticised for not referring to it by name. In any event,  the  fact
    that the Immigration Judge did not refer Dr Giustozzi by name does  not
    mean that he did not take it into account.  Furthermore, although there
    are additional points in the appellant's own witness statement dated 12
    May 2017 which may be of importance, I have concluded that  the  points
    that the appellant makes in his updated witness statement do not go  to
    the core of his case. In any event, they were essentially considered as
    part of the Immigration Judge's analysis of the appellant's case.

12.  I have carefully whether there is any error of law  which  may  require
    the Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    within the ambit of Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
    Act 2007. However, I have concluded that there is no material error  of
    law in this case. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

An anonymity direction was made  by  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.  It  appears
appropriate to continue that anonymity direction and  I  order  that  unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 30 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 30 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

