
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/03066/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 April 2019                   |On 24th July 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                     BB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani of counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    and Co
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellant is a Mongolian national born on the 14 August  1970.  She
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal (UT) against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FTT) on 7 February 2019 to dismiss  her  appeal  against
    the  respondent's  decision  dated  19  February  2018  to  refuse  her
    asylum/claim for humanitarian  protection  and/or  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

 2. She claimed to have been abused by her partner, [B]. Indeed, she claims
    to have been tortured by [B] in the past. The appellant claimed  before
    the FTT that she would come to the attention of [B] if she returned  to
    Mongolia. She also claimed that she  would  fear  persecution  for  her
    political opinions if she returned to Mongolia.  The appellant  claimed
    she would be contacted by Mr [B]. She would be  incarcerated  and  face
    further torture and ultimately may be killed.

 1. The current appeal is against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Andrew (the judge) in the FTT to dismiss her asylum  and  human  rights
    claims on 7 February 2019.Permission  to appeal was given by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Blundell, who was satisfied that it  was  arguable  that
    the judge had erred in failing  to  put  the  appellant  on  notice  of
    matters which  ultimately  resulted  in  adverse  credibility  findings
    following  the hearing in the FTT, for  example,  at  paragraph  34  et
    seq., where she had made a  number  of  findings  about  her  husband's
    political connections. Secondly, Judge Blundell thought the  judge  may
    have "inverted the standard of proof" by reference to a case called  AZ
    (Iran) [2018] UKUT 245  (IAC).  He  found  a  number  of  points  "less
    meritorious" and indeed some of the points "marginal  at  best".  Judge
    Blundell nevertheless decided to give permission to appeal  all  points
    despite the "prolixity of the grounds".

The hearing

 2. At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.  The
    appellant's  representative  submitted  that  there   were   favourable
    findings by the judge but the key issue she should have  addressed  was
    risk on return. The respondent had been unrepresented at  the  tribunal
    below, which lasted only 12  minutes.  The  judge  was  criticised  for
    putting no questions to the appellant or  her  representative.  It  was
    submitted that the hearing had been unfair,  not  so  much  because  of
    anything said or done but  because  the  appellant  was  not  given  an
    opportunity to address new matters, which clearly concerned  the  judge
    as became clear when they were subsequently dealt with in her decision.
    The judge was also criticised for "inverting  the  standard  of  proof"
    (ground 1 of the grounds advanced before the UT). It was suggested that
    in paragraph 38 the judge had gone "off-piste"  by  making  assumptions
    about her medical condition (in relation  to  her  left  buttock).  She
    could have asked the appellant whether there was another explanation in
    relation to the ailment concerned but had not done so. At paragraph 39,
    the judge had made her own medical assumptions  about  the  appellant's
    medical condition which had not been justified on the evidence.  I  was
    referred to  the  appellant's  expert  report  at  G89  where,  it  was
    submitted,  the  expert  had  given  a  balanced  explanation  for  the
    conclusion in his report which was to the effect that  the  appellant's
    condition was consistent with her account. That account suggested  that
    the appellant was a "vulnerable witness" who should have  been  treated
    in that way by the judge. Next it was  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    inverted the standard of proof at 22, 24,25  and  44  of  the  decision
    where she had dealt with the relationship between the appellant and her
    husband, her property rights consequence on that relationship,  certain
    credibility issues connected to that relationship. The judge also dealt
    with the extent to which she would be able to cover up her injuries.

 3. The respondent submitted that the case of WN (DRC) [2004] UKIAT  00213,
    [2005] INLR 340 (WN) where the Immigration Appeal Tribunal had  made  a
    number of key points at paragraphs 25-29 and 31-40. The guidance in and
    in  Maheshwaran v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ  173  was  also  noted  and,  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe said, had to be followed. The case  of  WN  considered
    the so-called "Surendran guidelines". In the Surendran case it was said
    that, particularly where the respondent  was  unrepresented,  care  was
    needed in the type of questions put to the appellant to ensure  he  had
    an opportunity to put his own case and was treated fairly.  Any  doubts
    in the adjudicator's mind should have been put to the appellant. If  an
    adjudicator/judge, is to make negative credibility  findings,  he  must
    first put his credibility concerns to the appellant to give the  latter
    an opportunity to comment. The object of these guidelines was to ensure
    a fair hearing and to prevent circumstances arising where it  could  be
    said that there was a real possibility that the adjudicator was biased.



 4. As I pointed out at  the  hearing,  certain  advantages  relate  to  an
    appellant not having to be cross-examined in cases such  as  this  one,
    where the respondent had  not  been  represented  before  the  FTT.  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe also  relied  on  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Balasingham Maheswaran [2002] EWCA  Civ  173  particularly
    the following passage in paragraph 5, where the Court  of  Appeal  said
    that:

         "Where much depends on the credibility of a  party  and  when  that
         party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before  the
         decision maker, that party manifestly has a forensic problem.  Some
         will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight  on  and  make
         evidential or forensic submissions on them. Others will  hope  that
         "least  said,  soonest   mended"   and   consider   that   forensic
         concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
         would be better to try and switch the tribunal's attention to  some
         other aspect of the case. Undoubtedly it is open  to  the  tribunal
         expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
         considers that the witness may not  be  alerted  to  the  point  or
         because  it  fears  that  it  may  have  perceived   something   as
         inconsistent  with  an  earlier  answer  which  in  truth  is   not
         inconsistent. Fairness may in some circumstances require this to be
         done but this will not be the usual  case.  Usually  the  tribunal,
         particularly if the party is represented, will  remain  silent  and
         see how the case unfolds."

 3. Ms Willocks-Briscoe said it was  unnecessary  to  put  every  point  of
    possible adverse credit to an appellant. It was accepted, however, that
    it was good practice to alert  the  appellant  to  any  adverse  credit
    points that  concerned  the  tribunal.  Here  the  FTT  had  completely
    rejected the appellant's account of having been under the influence  of
    one [B]. The appellant was well aware of the issues before the tribunal
    but decided to give the answer concerned.

 4. Mr Willocks- Briscoe also relied on the VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA  Civ
    522. And on the Semu v Secretary of State for  Home  Department  [2006]
    EWCA  Civ  1153  which  also  dealt  with  the  correct   approach   to
    consideration of evidence in a case of this type. In the last-mentioned
    case, the Court of Appeal found no error of law in  a  case  where  the
    adjudicator had considered all the evidence including medical  evidence
    which tended to undermine the  appellant's  case.  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    submitted that it was not necessary to put all credibility points to  a
    witness, that the judge can put  the  concerns  to  the  witness  in  a
    particular way relevant to the case in hand and since the appellant was
    represented she had a full opportunity to put her case. If  there  were
    inconsistencies in the evidence the judge was quite  entitled  to  draw
    attention to these and to dismiss her appeal against the refusal of her
    claim on that basis. In terms of fairness, the judge's  decision  could
    not be faulted. She gave clear reasons for her decision. The judge  had
    to grapple with the issues, and she did so. She had  to  weigh  up  the
    evidence make credibility findings, and  this  is  what  she  did.  The
    country evidence  was  also  considered  by  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe.  She
    produced a  Home  Office  asylum  policy  instruction  on  medico-legal
    reports, such as the one from the Helen Bamber foundation. She accepted
    this was a reputable organisation and that no report  should  be  given
    little weight on the ground that the writer was a GP as  opposed  to  a
    consultant (apparently the case here). Nevertheless, the judge, not the
    medical expert, was there to judge the credibility of  the  appellant's
    account. The diagnosis of PTSD/depression was "consistent"  with  other
    causes and  there  was  no  reversal  of  the  burden  of  proving  the
    appellant's case. The Istanbul protocol had to be followed.

 5. Mr Bendagani responded by saying fairness is the heart of  the  process
    and if there was any failure to this minimum level of fairness  then  I
    should interfere with the decision. Home Office guidance recognises the
    expertise of the medical expert. The medical evidence here had  broadly
    supported the appellant's case. If there were  any  problems  with  the
    medical  report  they  should  have  been  drawn  to  the   appellant's
    attention.

 5. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion

 6. There were several strands to  the  appellant's  claim,  including  her
    former marriage to NS and the rape and ill-treatment at  the  hands  of
    [B]. She produced evidence at the hearing before  the  FTT  to  confirm
    that her condition of depression and PTSD was broadly  consistent  with
    the account she had given. The  threat  from  influential  people  made
    internal relocation impossible, she said, but the judge appears to have
    made no express finding on  that  point.  She  claimed  to  fear  these
    influential people  and  on  that  basis  could  rely  on  the  Refugee
    Convention on the basis that she had an imputed political opinion.

 7. The judge  was  far  from  satisfied  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's  account,  pointing  out  a  number   of   inconsistencies.
    Additionally, the judge considered that if the  appellant  did  have  a
    legitimate asylum claim she would have  come  to  the  UK  as  soon  as
    possible and advanced it soon after her arrival  the  UK  in  March  or
    April 2011. A person who truly feared for their personal safety,  would
    leave the country  because  of  the  risk  of  persecution.  The  judge
    believed that the appellant would receive some benefit  from  the  fact
    that her son had carried out military service in Mongolia. It  was  her
    clear view that the appellant had not established a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution and she attributed  her  PTSD  to  her  anxiety  over  a
    possible return to Mongolia. She noted that the appellant's account  of
    the assaults  by  [B]  were  only  supported  by  the  appellant's  own
    assertions and therefore she could not be satisfied, even  to  the  low
    standard which applied,  that  they  actually  took  place.  The  judge
    appears to make her own assessment of the appellant's medical condition
    and prognosis, speculating that the dermatitis on the appellant's  left
    buttock may have been due to another reason.  Nevertheless,  given  her
    rejection of the veracity of the appellant's claim, it is  questionable
    whether the medical evidence would  have  tipped  the  balance  in  the
    appellant's favour even if the judge had considered it in much  greater
    detail.

 8. The issues before the UT are therefore as follows:

      i) Whether the judge erred in her approach to the  hearing  so  as  to
         make the hearing material unfair by:

          a) not asking questions of the appellant that  should  have  been
             asked; or

          b) failing to put concerns she had credibility of the appellant's
             account generally, so  as  to  give  the  appellant  a  proper
             opportunity to comment?

     ii) Whether the judge had erred in her treatment  of  the  standard  of
         proof?

    iii) Whether such errors as have been established were material  to  the
         outcome in the sense that if the appellant was a victim of domestic
         violence or abuse was she at real risk on return to Mongolia?

     iv) If so, what steps should be UT take to correct that material  error
         of law?

 9. I will deal with these issues in turn.

(i)   Was the hearing fair?

10. It is said on behalf the appellant that care was needed, in the absence
    of the respondent's representative at the hearing. The  hearing  lasted
    for only 12 minutes and, according to paragraph 8  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal, the judge asked no questions of the appellant. It is also  said
    that the judge, far from adopting an interventionist approach, was  too
    passive in her conduct of the case and she should have routed  out  the
    concerns expressed by the respondent which may have helped her  address
    some of her adverse assessment of the  appellant's  credibility,  which
    subsequently formed part of her findings.  This  was  particularly  the
    case in the absence of a representative on behalf the  respondent.  The
    judge is said to have acted contrary to the guidance given by Lord Reed
    in the Court of Session in  HA  and  TD  v  SSHD  [2010]  CSIH  28  (at
    paragraph 14).

11. I have  carefully  considered  the  failure  to  follow  the  Surendran
    guidelines arguments but have rejected them. The assertion that a judge
    has acted unfairly in his conduct of a hearing should only be  made  on
    proper grounds. Breaches of  the  Surendran  guidelines  are  sometimes
    alleged but rarely succeed, as is clear from the authorities to which I
    was referred.  The thrust of the authorities  is  to  the  effect  that
    circumstances may arise where a  judge  is  expected  to  take  a  more
    prominent role than would otherwise be the case. An example of  such  a
    case is where the respondent is unrepresented at the hearing.  However,
    the judge here had to tread a careful line between adopting the roll of
    the respondent in cross-examining the  appellant  about  her  case  and
    ensuring that all the facts were placed before the tribunal. There  was
    clearly a danger that the judge would be too interventionist as opposed
    to adopting an overly passive roll.

12. Here I am satisfied the judge had a substantial  bundle  of  documents,
    oral argument by the  appellant's  representative  and  she  considered
    fully the detailed contents  of  the  refusal  letter.  The  judge  was
    entitled to look critically at the evidence, and  whilst  some  of  the
    observations seem questionable, her overall conclusions on  credibility
    were sustainable in the light of the  evidence  she  considered.  I  am
    therefore not persuaded this ground is a valid one.

(ii)  Did the judge err in her application of the standard of proof?

13. This is not a ground of appeal raised in the grounds  and  it  was  not
    pursued with any vigour at the hearing before the UT. However, since it
    is raised by Judge Blundell at paragraph 4 of the grant of  permission,
    it is necessary to deal with this ground.

14. The judge referred to the correct  burden  and  standard  of  proof  at
    paragraph 13 of her decision. Read in context, the reference the  words
    "reasonably likely" in paragraph 22 does not indicate a failure to keep
    in mind the burden rested on the appellant to prove  her  claim  a  low
    standard. The judge was simply looking critically at  the  evidence  as
    she was entitled to do. I can find no  inversion  of  the  standard  of
    proof in the paragraphs referred to by Judge Blundell  but  if  any  of
    those paragraphs could have been more felicitously put I  am  satisfied
    that  the  overall  conclusions  were  not  infected  by   a   mistaken
    application of the standard of proof.

(iii) Did the judge's errors, if established, amount to material  errors  of
law?

15. There was credible  evidence  in  the  form  of  the  report  from  the
    appellant's medical expert G 89 (Dr Silvana Unigwe) that the  appellant
    suffered from significant depression, anxiety  and  PTSD.  Dr  Unigwe's
    diagnosis was that the  appellant's  PTSD  and  other  conditions  were
    "consistent with..." "the themes" and discrepancies and the possibility
    of invention were regarded as "unlikely" by the  doctor.  It  was  also
    controversial for the judge to say (in paragraph 39) that the diagnosed
    condition may have been due to her anxiety to stay in the UK.

16. In the circumstances the judge appears to have been over dismissive  of
    Dr Unigwe's report, describing to paragraph 37 as "not  assisting"  her
    and going on to make an assessment of certain aspects  of  the  medical
    evidence supported by Dr Unigwe's report. Nevertheless, as Ms Willocks-
    Briscoe submitted, ultimately credibility  issues  and  the  degree  of
    weight a judge attaches to a  particular  piece  of  evidence,  is  not
    something that normally concern  an  appeal  tribunal.  Overall,  I  am
    satisfied  that  although  the  medical  evidence  was  objective   and
    credible, it did not necessarily overshadow all the other evidence  and
    particularly evidence from the appellant herself.  The  judge  rejected
    that evidence, assessing the credibility of  the  evidence  negatively.
    There were a large number of adverse credibility findings, including  a
    lack of plausible explanation  for  her  departure  from  Mongolia  and
    subsequent delay in advancing the asylum, human rights  and  protection
    claims in the UK. The judge was entitled to make  adverse  findings  of
    credibility under the Asylum (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.

17. Overall, I am not persuaded the judge's failure to properly analyse the
    medical evidence led to  an  incorrect  conclusion.  She  rejected  the
    appellant's case, and even if greater weight were given to the  medical
    evidence, it seems unlikely it would tip the balance in the appellant's
    favour.

18. As far as the materiality of the errors identified are  concerned,  the
    judge made a clear finding that the appellant would not be at  risk  on
    return. I note that  the  respondent  gave  detailed  reasons  for  her
    conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk  and  perhaps  judge
    should have considered these reasons more fully. Nevertheless, it was a
    finding open to the judge on the evidence.

19. I note that even the appellant had established she was at risk  in  her
    home area, there were, and  presumably  are,  substantial  reasons  for
    considering there was a reasonable internal relocation option  open  to
    her, as was explained by the respondent in her refusal letter.

(iv)  Assuming the above is established, how should this matter be  disposed
of?

20. Given the findings above, it is unnecessary to consider  the  means  of
    disposal as they do not arise.

Conclusions


21. Overall, the judge had a  substantial  body  of  evidence  before  her,
    argument by the  appellant's  representative  and  a  detailed  refusal
    letter. The judge was entitled to look critically at  the  entirety  of
    the evidence. I have concluded that she did not err in her  application
    of the Surendran guidelines or overall in her  conclusions,  materially
    err in law.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal to the UT is dismissed.

Decision of the FTT stands. The appeal against the respondent's decision  to
refuse the appellant's  claim  is  dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights
grounds to the FTT  was  correctly  dismissed  by  the  FTT.  The  claim  to
humanitarian protection was also correctly dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FTT  and  in  the  absence  of  any
representations, I have decided to continue that direction. Therefore,  from
now on the appellant they referred to as BB. Unless and until a tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member
of her family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                                       Date 18 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date 18 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

