
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03578/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Vernon Street, Liverpool    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 05 January 2017                   |On 10 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
Appellant:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr G Brown, of Counsel, instructed by Broudie  Jackson  Canter
                    Solicitors

                             ANONYMITY DIRECTION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an Anonymity Order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


                                  DECISION

 1. For the reasons elaborated in my  ex  tempore  judgment  given  at  the
    conclusion of the hearing, I have decided that there is no merit in the
    Secretary of State's appeal and it must be  dismissed  accordingly.  (I
    shall continue to describe KAN as the "Appellant".)

 2. Two grounds of  appeal  were  canvassed.   I  quote  from  the  written
    formula:

         "The FTJ fails to appreciate that the Appellant, when served his
         asylum decision, was given information about seeking help from
         Assistant Voluntary Returns ['AVR'] which can help with the costs
         of travel and tickets."

    It was common case that the Appellant would be returned to Baghdad in
    Iraq, from whence he would have to attempt the journey to the "IKR"
    area.  The Tribunal, in this context, stated at [27]:

         "When considering the practicalities of travel from Baghdad to  the
         IKR, I cannot be satisfied that this can be  achieved  without  the
         Appellant being put  at  risk  of  serious  harm.   The  presenting
         officer accepted he would be at risk in Baghdad.  He has no friends
         or family there to assist him.  The Home Office does not propose to
         make arrangements for his journey from Baghdad to Irbil, by air  or
         otherwise  and  this  would  therefore  presumably  be  up  to  the
         Appellant to organise.  He has no known  funds  and  no  family  to
         assist him with this either in Baghdad or in the IKR."

 3. I conclude that this ground of appeal has no  merit  because,  firstly,
    the availability of the AVR Scheme did  not  feature  anywhere  in  the
    Secretary of State's  decision  and,  in  particular,  in  the  section
    entitled "Internal Relocation".  In  reality  the  Appellant  would  be
    returning to Baghdad destitute and alone and the AVR Scheme  would,  in
    principle at least, have been a factor to consider concerning the issue
    of the reasonableness and viability of internal  relocation.   However,
    it was not raised. tThis analysis is not altered  by  the  cursory  and
    unparticularised mention of  AVR  in  the  pro-forma  served  with  the
    impugned decision.

 4. Secondly, I readily infer that the AVR issue was not canvassed  at  the
    hearing before the FtT.   Thirdly,  and  in  consequence,  it  was  not
    addressed in the decision of the FtT.  Finally, and in any event, there
    is no evidence even at this remove that AVR  could  extend  to  provide
    this Appellant with the practical, financial and other support required
    for his specific needs and purposes.

 5. For this combination of reasons, the first ground of appeal must fail.

 6. The second ground of appeal focuses on the next succeeding  passage  in
    the decision of the FtT:

         "There would also** appear to be no certainty that he would be able
         to go to the IKR.  The background information [CIG]  suggests  only
         that he 'may be able to' .....  and states 'it is worth reiterating
         the point that admission does remain at the discretion  of  Kurdish
         immigration and border officials and  that  temporary  restrictions
         can be imposed and withdrawn without notice'.  Even if he  were  to
         gain temporary entry, it is by no means clear that he would be able
         to remain permanently."

    [** my emphasis]

    The essence of the challenge to this passage is that the Tribunal
    engaged in impermissible speculation.

 7.  I  find  that  this  complaint  has  no  substance.    The   Tribunal,
    appropriately and accurately, quoted from the Secretary of State's CIG.
     The passage quoted identifies two possibilities: first, that admission
    to the IKR is not guaranteed  and,  second,  that  admission  could  be
    followed by "expulsion".  The Tribunal went no  further  than  to  take
    these two possibilities into account.  This did not entail any error of
    law.

 8. Further, and in any event, it is clear from the highlighted word "also"
    that this part of  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  is  severable  from  the
    immediately  preceding  passage  and,  being  free  standing,  has   no
    influence or effects beyond its self-contained boundaries.



Decision

 9. For the reasons elaborated above, I affirm the decision of the FtT  and
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.





                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date:  05 January 2017
