
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03789/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    [M S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, SMA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  2  March  1988.   He
    appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls
    dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal dated  12  April
    2017 to grant him asylum and  humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   The judge decided the appeal on 10 August 2018 in the  absence  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant alleges that he did not receive the notice of
    hearing issued on 17 July 2018 and has made a statement to that effect.
     The grant of permission stated that if this is found to be true,  then
    it is arguable that the appellant has been denied a fair  hearing.   In
    reaching this decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  took  into
    consideration the fact that the appellant has sought to defend his case
    previously before the First-tier and Upper Tribunals and his failure to
    attend the hearing on 10 August 2018 was out of character, particularly
    as he had only recently succeeded in the Upper Tribunal.

3.   Mr  Dhanji  submitted  that  prior  to  the  hearing,  the  appellant's
    solicitors had come off record  on  17  June  2018.   It  is  therefore
    probable that they  would  not  have  had  a  contact  number  for  the
    appellant.   He accepted that the notice of hearing  was  sent  to  the
    appellant's known address, that is [~], London.  The appellant said  in
    court that he moved to this address four years ago.  He maintained that
    he did not receive the notice of hearing.

4.   Mr Dhanji  repeated  what  was  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
    appellant had appeared before the First-tier Tribunal at a  hearing  on
    29 June 2017.  He said the appellant has throughout the last two  years
    participated in the various hearings before the First-tier Tribunal and
    the Upper Tribunal.  Therefore, not appearing  at  the  hearing  before
    First-tier Tribunal Nicholls was out of character.

5.   Ms Fijiwala submitted that there was no procedural  unfairness  in  the
    judge proceeding to hear the appeal in the absence  of  the  appellant.
    She said that the judge had said that when the appellant did not attend
    the  hearing,  a  Tribunal  clerk  telephoned  the  appellant's  former
    representatives to ask if they held any contact  telephone  number  for
    the appellant.  The clerk was informed that they did not.  It  was  not
    possible, therefore for the Tribunal  staff  to  seek  to  contact  the
    appellant directly.

6.   I accept that the judge verified the appellant's  contact  details  and
    was satisfied that the notice  of  hearing  had  been  validly  served.
    Nevertheless, I accept Mr Dhanji's submission that as  the  appellant's
    solicitors had come off record on 17 June, prior to the hearing  on  10
    August 2018, it is probable that they would  not  have  had  a  contact
    number for the appellant.

7.   I accept that the appellant's failure to attend the hearing was out  of
    character in the light of the fact that the  appellant  has  sought  to
    defend his case at various hearings in the last two years.

8.   Accordingly, I find that the appellant has been denied a fair  hearing.



9.   I find that the judge's decision cannot stand.   It  is  set  aside  in
    order to be remade.

10.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 22 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
