

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03219/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 13th September 2017               |On: 26th September 2017              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                                     AD
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Holt, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to be a national of Eritrea, born  in  1991.    He
    appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shergill) to dismiss his protection appeal.




    Anonymity


 2. This case involves a claim for international  protection.   Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3.  The  Appellant's  claim  was  that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for reasons of his religious belief in  his  home  country.
    That required him to establish, to the lower  standard  of  proof,  two
    matters of fact. First, that he was a  Pentecostal  Christian.  Second,
    that he was a national of Eritrea.  In her  refusal  letter  dated  the
    30th September 2015 the Respondent appeared to  implicitly  accept  the
    Appellant's claimed faith (it does not appear to  have  been  in  issue
    before the First-tier Tribunal).  His  nationality  was,  however,  put
    squarely in issue.


 4. It was the Appellant's case that he had been born in Assab in what  was
    then Ethiopia. His  parents  were  of  Tigrayan  origin  and  when  the
    independence referendum took place in 1993  they  voted  in  favour  of
    secession from Ethiopia. They nevertheless remained living in  Ethiopia
    (Addis Ababa) where the Appellant grew up speaking Amharic. In 2000 the
    family were deported to Eritrea, fleeing in 2002 to live in Sudan.   He
    asserted that whatever his nationality might have  been  at  birth,  he
    would not be offered protection by the Ethiopian authorities today  and
    as such his claim cannot be defeated on the grounds that he is entitled
    to a nationality other than Eritrean.


 5. The Respondent's assessment  was  that  the  Appellant  had  not  shown
    himself to be a national of Eritrea. This was because of his  inability
    to speak more than only basic Tigrinya and his lack of knowledge  about
    Eritrean  geography.   The  Respondent  relies  on  the  dicta  in   MA
    (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289 to the effect that in cases of  disputed
    nationality the burden lies on applicants to  produce  'best  evidence'
    that they are not nationals of the  country  in  question.  This  would
    include, in the present context,  visiting  the  Ethiopian  embassy  in
    London and making a bona fide application for nationality documents.


 6. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant
    relied on an expert report by Dr Pool. He further relied on the country
    guidance provided by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  ST  (Ethnic  Eritrean  -
    nationality - return)  Ethiopia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  252  (IAC).  It  was
    submitted that the report and the  caselaw  supported  the  Appellant's
    case in that they established:


    . that ethnic Eritreans who  remained  in  Ethiopia  after  independence
      would have avoided the use of Tigrinya, political expediency  trumping
      linguistic heritage


    . that Ethnic Eritreans were expelled from Ethiopia during the war


    . that those persons were then arbitrarily deprived of  their  Ethiopian
      nationality


    . persons who found themselves in that position would be likely to  face
      "very significant practical difficulties" in establishing a  right  of
      return to Ethiopia


    . a person who left Ethiopia during the war is unlikely to be able to re-
      acquire Ethiopian nationality as a matter of right  by  means  of  the
      2003 Nationality Proclamation


    . that the "slightest hint of Eritrean linkage closes any possibility of
      securing an Ethiopian travel document"


    . that on the  facts  as  presented  by  the  Appellant,  the  Ethiopian
      authorities would very likely view his parents as Eritreans.


 7. The Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant, and from  a  supporting
    witness, who had been recognised as a refugee by the Respondent and  is
    accepted to be from Eritrea. The Appellant further relied on  a  letter
    from Eritrean community elders who confirmed that in their view he  was
    Eritrean.


 8. The Tribunal found that the Appellant speaks limited Tigrinya, but  was
    not satisfied that this evidence was conclusive.   The evidence  of  Dr
    Paul (sic) on that point was also inconclusive.  The witness  had  been
    granted asylum outright by the Home Office and as such his evidence was
    of less significance than if it  had  been  offered  by  someone  whose
    credibility had been tested in court. There was a  discrepancy  between
    the word 'Assar' and 'Assab' on the witness' Home Office  ID  documents
    and no sufficient explanation had been given as to  why.    The  letter
    from the Eritrean community is described as  "self-serving"  and  casts
    doubt on the Appellant's evidence that he had  no  relatives  currently
    living in Eritrea as  it  refers  to  "remnant  relatives"  there.  His
    evidence about his family, and that supplied to the Ethiopian  embassy,
    is vague.  It is not accepted that he is no longer in contact with  his
    family. As to the contact with  the  embassy  the  determination  makes
    reference to the decision  in  MW  (Nationality;  Art  4  QD;  duty  to
    substantiate) Eritrea [2016] UKUT 00453 (IAC).  The  Tribunal  was  not
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  done  everything  he   could   to
    demonstrate his links to Ethiopia.   In their dealings with the embassy
    the Appellant and his solicitor sought to minimise the strength of  his
    connections to that country.






    The Challenge


 9. The Appellant submits that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must
    be set aside for a failure to make findings on material matters  or  to
    give adequate reasons. In particular:


   i) Detailed submissions were made on the expert evidence which  have  not
      been addressed in the determination. The point made, on the  basis  of
      Dr Pool's evidence, was that no matter what documents or evidence  the
      Appellant took to the Ethiopian embassy, it still would not  recognise
      him as an Ethiopian.  There was in this scenario no point in  imposing
      the Bradshaw burden on the Appellant.  The First-tier  Tribunal  erred
      in failing to give reasons why it disagreed with the  expert,  and  in
      failing to address this submission at the  heart  of  the  Appellant's
      case.


  ii) No findings are made on  the  Appellant's  knowledge  of  Eritrea,  in
      particular Assab. The evidence provided by  the  Appellant  about  the
      city had been verified by the expert and no weight is attached to that
      point.


 iii) The determinations  finds  various  pieces  of  evidence  to  be  "not
      conclusive" but then fails to identify what weight if  any  is  to  be
      attached to them, either individually or collectively.  The  reasoning
      is therefore unclear;


  iv) No clear findings are made on the evidence of the supporting witness.




    Discussion and Findings


10. Having heard the submissions of Mr Holt, Ms Pettersen was  prepared  to
    concede on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  that  the  decision  was
    flawed for a lack of clear reasons. She invited me to set the  decision
    aside and, due to the extent of fact finding  required,  to  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for remaking.


11. I agree that the decision must  be  set  aside  for  that  reason.  The
    Tribunal makes no assessment of the Appellant's evidence  about  Assab,
    nor of Dr Pool's analysis  of  his  answers  at  interview.   It  finds
    several pieces of  evidence  to  not  to  be  "conclusive"  (itself  an
    unhelpful term) but fails to spell out what weight if any is  given  to
    the evidence in question.


12. For instance, the evidence of the supporting witness was  that  he  had
    lived in Assab at the same time as the Appellant and his family;  their
    fathers had been close friends. He had met the Appellant at  church  in
    Assab. He had subsequently met with the Appellant in  Sudan.   He  knew
    him well and as far as he was  concerned  he  was  Eritrean.  This  was
    plainly all relevant evidence, but it is neither recorded nor evaluated
    in the determination. There is nothing  intrinsically  wrong  with  the
    observation [at 24] that the weight to be attached to his evidence,  as
    a person granted protection upon application, was less than that to  be
    attached to testimony that had survived the forensic challenge of cross
    examination, but that was not the end of the matter. The  Tribunal  was
    obliged to assess the evidence, and to give  reasons  one  way  or  the
    other about why it was accepted as truthful or it wasn't. It may  still
    have still attracted considerable weight, notwithstanding the  witness'
    outright grant of asylum.  I would add this. The determination  alludes
    to caselaw on the point. The Tribunal may have had in mind AB  (Witness
    corroboration in asylum appeals) Somalia [2004] UKIAT  00125  in  which
    the following guidance was given:

         "11. We would add a comment on the growing practice of appellants
         and/or their representatives adducing letters granting refugee
         status to someone who is (or is said to be) a relative or
         colleague. All too often it is assumed such letters magically prove
         that the person concerned was granted refugee status on the basis
         he says he was. All too rarely are such letters accompanied by
         documents confirming on what basis the person concerned actually
         claimed asylum or, if an appeal was involved, on what basis the
         Adjudicator allowed that person`s appeal. Since such additional
         documentation should often be still available to the person
         concerned or to that person`s solicitors, Adjudicators should
         consider what weight they can attach to refugee grant letters when
         they are not accompanied by confirmatory documents of this kind".

13. In this case there was a bundle produced relating to the witness  which
    established what the basis of his claim had been (Pentecostal Christian
    from Eritrea), including a clear statement in his  screening  interview
    and asylum interview that  he  was  born  in  Assab  (the  Home  Office
    recording of his place of birth as Asar was clearly an error and  I  am
    mystified as to why the Tribunal thought otherwise).  It was  therefore
    wholly  inappropriate  that  the  witness'  testimony  was   apparently
    discounted simply applying the ratio of AB.


14. Before me Mr Holt concentrated his submissions on ground (i).  In  view
    of the Secretary of State's concession (above) I need not address  this
    point in great detail but would sound a note of caution. The  case  for
    the Appellant is that while he  has  done  all  he  can  reasonably  be
    expected to do in establishing that he is not Ethiopian, the real focus
    of the Tribunal should have been on the evidence of  Dr  Pool  and  the
    findings in ST.    This was to the effect that a person in the position
    that the Appellant claims to be in  will  find  it  very  difficult  to
    establish that he is entitled to the protection of the Ethiopian state.
    As I understand Mr Holt's submissions, they are that the weight of this
    evidence was such that the Appellant  need  logically  do  no  more  to
    discharge the Bradshaw burden.  I understand the point, but I am not so
    sure it is one that will  ultimately  bear  fruit  for  the  Appellant.
    That is because  the  point  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  make  in  MA
    (Ethiopia) is that applicants should be expected to  produce  the  best
    evidence that they can in circumstances of  disputed  nationality.  The
    decision in MW does not extend the principle, it just  applies  it.  In
    that case the applicant was found to have relatives to  whom  he  could
    turn  to  seek  information  and  if  necessary,  documents.  Had  such
    information or documentation been supplied to the Ethiopian embassy its
    decision might have been different.   The  Appellant's  representatives
    may wish to consider my observations in their preparation of the appeal
    for the First-tier Tribunal.




    Decision


15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside by consent.


16. The matter is to be heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


17. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         25th September 2017
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 15th May 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Shimmin


