
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/03363/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17th November 2017                      | On 5th December 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         miss natash tariro mubaiwa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Heatherington, promulgated on 17th May 2017.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Zimbabwe, who was born on  13th
    February 1983.  She appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 22nd March 2017, refusing her claim for asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she has supported the MDC,
    opposition party in Zimbabwe, fundraising  for  them  from  2013.   She
    became a member of the MDC in 2015.  She had an arrest  warrant  issued
    against her, but she did not think that the first  arrest  warrant  was
    serious.  She had participated  in  demonstrations  and  protests.  She
    claimed now that her life was in danger  from  the  Zimbabwean  Police,
    which she said was a ZANU-PF political force.

 4. The Appellant's claim was against the background of her having  entered
    the UK in September 2012 on a student  visa,  then  returning  back  to
    Zimbabwe from September 2014 until August  2015,  following  which  she
    returned back to the UK on 29th September 2015.  A further grant  of  a
    student visa expired on 31st July 2016.  A residence  permit  was  then
    issued on 10th May 2016, which was valid until 13th September 2016.

This Application

 5. The essence of this application arises from the fact that, before Judge
    Heatherington, there was an application for an adjournment,  which  was
    rejected by the judge, and it is alleged that, in so doing,  the  judge
    reached the Rules of fairness  set  out  in  the  decision  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418.   The   basis   of   the
    application was the early listing of the appeal, the lack  of  time  to
    obtain an expert report, and the absence of a witness, by the  name  of
    Jaison Matewu.

 6.  In  refusing  the  adjournment  application,  the  judge   gave   full
    consideration to the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  Nwaigwe,  together
    with the principle that a refusal of an adjournment which  deprives  an
    effective party of his right  to  a  fair  hearing,  is  unlawful  (see
    paragraph 2.3), and that the "dominant consideration" was that of  "the
    common law right of every litigant to a fair hearing" (paragraph  2.4).



 7. However, the judge also had regard to the fact that adjournments  waste
    Tribunal's time and resources, impact upon the time taken to hear other
    appeals, and cost  to  the  public  at  large,  and  that  there  is  a
    responsibility on all Appellants to make sure that the appeal therefore
    can be heard when it is listed (see paragraph 2.4).

 8. It was in this context, that the judge had regard  to  the  adjournment
    request by the Appellant's legal representatives, namely, on the  basis
    that the shorter the time allocated, from the making of  an  appeal  to
    the listing of it, deprived the Appellant from all the rights to locate
    an expert to verify the documents submitted (see paragraph  2.5).   The
    judge also  had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  application  for  an
    adjournment, made by Counsel appearing on that day, "has not been  made
    at the first opportunity" and that this was "the first intimation  that
    extra time is needed", even though the Appellant  had  throughout  been
    assisted by specialist immigration solicitors.

 9. Moreover, the Appellant's representatives "were notified of  the  dates
    of the pre-hearing review and today's  hearing".   The  solicitors  had
    actually stated that there will be "no witnesses"  and  under  the  box
    headed "expert witnesses" they had stated that none  was  needed.   The
    judge concluded of the solicitor's representing the Appellant that they
    were "experienced solicitors and did not consider that  an  adjournment
    for any reason  was  needed  and  in  particular  that  an  expert  was
    essential" (paragraph 2.6).

10. The judge then proceeded to hear  the  appeal.   He  observed  how  the
    arrest warrants were "unverified" and that the Appellant had in  cross-
    examination had said that,  "her  father  could  not  post  the  arrest
    warrants to her, fearing action by the authorities",  which  the  judge
    regarded as "inconsistent", because "either the  warrants  point  to  a
    risk or they do not" (see  paragraph  10.8).   The  judge  went  on  to
    conclude that, "the Appellant has provided no plausible explanation  as
    to how the authorities identified her, but did not arrest her and  then
    later identified her and sought to pursue charges" (paragraph 10.8).

11. The appeal was dismissed.

12. Following Counsel's Grounds of Appeal, dated 29th May 2017,  permission
    to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on 19th  September  2017  on  the
    basis that, although both sides had made a reference to  Nwaigwe  there
    was an arguable claim  that  the  Appellant's  case  should  have  been
    adjourned in the interests of fairness.  This was despite the fact that
    "the judge pointed out in the reply notice for the  pre-hearing  review
    the solicitors stated there were to be  no  witnesses  and  no  expert.
    That factor goes against the Appellant ...", although it was  the  case
    that the absence of a key witness, by the name of  Jaison  Matewu,  and
    possible other witnesses, (see paragraph 12 of the grounds) was clearly
    detrimental to the Appellant's claim.

13. A Rule 24 response dated 28th September 2017 stated that the judge  had
    directed himself appropriately.

The Hearing

14. At the hearing before me on 17th November 2017, Mr Azmi,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant relied upon the Grounds of Appeal.  He made the
    following three submissions.  First, that the adjournment  application,
    made by Counsel on the day of the hearing,  was  for  the  purposes  of
    procuring an expert report, and enabling witnesses to attend.  Although
    the judge dealt with the expert report,  not  having  been  highlighted
    earlier, the judge did not deal with the question that  key  witnesses,
    such as Jaison Matewu, were unable to attend, because he had  a  family
    holiday booked and was going to be away.  Page  3  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle sees a statement by Jaison Matewu to this  effect.   Second,  at
    paragraph  2.5,  the  judge  had  stated  that  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives had been unable to find  an  expert,  but  the  witness
    statement (at page 2 of the Appellant's bundle), is more nuanced to the
    effect that, "my solicitors had been trying to locate an  expert",  but
    that "given the shortage of time had been unable to do  so".   It  was,
    submitted Mr Azmi, the "shortage of time" that had led to an expert not
    being located.  Third, with respect to the arrest warrants,  the  judge
    had stated at  paragraph  10.7  and  10.8,  that  these  had  not  been
    verified, but this was  surely  the  entire  purpose  of  procuring  an
    expert, and the Appellant had been deprived the right to do so, by  the
    refusal of an adjournment.

15. Insofar as the judge did go on to deal with the  appeal  substantively,
    Mr Azmi submitted that the judge erred here in law again because he did
    not address the question of "risk on return", as set out at  paragraphs
    15 to 17 of the Grounds of Appeal.

16. For his part,  Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  application  today  was
    unsustainable.

17. First, even if an expert report and witnesses had been able to  attend,
    it would have made  no  material  difference,  because,  as  the  judge
    pointed out, what he was having to deal with in terms  of  his  concern
    that, "the arrest warrants are unverified"  was  that  the  Appellant's
    father had not been able to "post the arrest warrants to  her,  fearing
    action by the authorities", but this  the  judge  found  to  have  been
    "inconsistent" evidence, because "either the warrants point to  a  risk
    or they do not" (see paragraph 10.8).  Mr Bates submitted that  if  the
    original arrest warrants have not been submitted,  it  would  not  have
    been possible for any expert to  have  conclusively  demonstrated  that
    these were arrest warrants that were genuine because they could  be  so
    verified.  The judge was not satisfied why the originals had  not  been
    posted.

18. Second, there had been a  Case  Management  Review  and  it  was  never
    suggested during this review that there was a need for an  adjournment.
    Thereafter, courtroom time had been set a set  aside,  the  appeal  had
    been listed, and Presenting Officers had prepared the  appeal,  and  at
    the eleventh hour the judge was confronted with an application  for  an
    adjournment on grounds which, he had concluded  were  unsustainable  in
    any event even if the witness, in the name of Jaison  Matewu,  had  not
    been able to attend, because he had a holiday booked, ultimately it was
    a credibility of the Appellant, which the judge found  to  be  wanting,
    and even if he had given the evidence that was set out in  the  witness
    statement, the judge was still not persuaded that the Appellant  was  a
    credible witness.  The judge had found the Appellant to be  lacking  in
    credibility (see paragraphs 10.13 and 10.12).  Quite simply, the  error
    was not a material error on the part of the judge, assuming that  there
    had been an error.

19. Finally, the facts of Nwaigwe were  very  different,  and  the  judge's
    meticulous approach to this question was such that he  had  highlighted
    the facts there pointing out that that case involved the Appellant  who
    did not attend the hearing and was not represented (see paragraph 2.8).
      In  these  circumstances,   the   Appellant   had   reputable   legal
    representatives acting for her all along.

20. In reply, Mr Azmi submitted that  if  one  looks  at  the  Respondent's
    bundle (at D1 and D2) there are copies of two arrest warrants and it is
    clear that verification of these arrest warrants would not have had  to
    depend upon the original being provided because they  carried  the  CRB
    numbers, stamps, and the names of the issuing authority.  It would have
    been possible for an expert to come to a firm view about  these  arrest
    warrants.

21. Second, the witness, Jaison Matewu, needed to attend, because he held a
    position of Treasurer General in an MDC province in Zimbabwe, and would
    have been reliably able to state what the involvement of the  Appellant
    was on the risk of attaching to her if she were to be returned.

22. Finally, although a file application for an adjournment ought  to  have
    been made, on the basis of the need for an  expert  report,  the  plain
    fact was that a witness was not today able  to  attend  and  the  judge
    ought to have granted an adjournment for this reason.

No Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

24.  First,  in  what  is  a  careful,   sensitive,   and   well   compiled
    determination, the judge has had regard to all the relevant  case  law,
    its impact, and the duties upon legal  representatives  (see  paragraph
    2.4) ensuring that the overriding objective is adhered  to,  such  that
    there is fairness, not just to one side, but to  both  sides  appearing
    before the Tribunal.

25. Second, the judge properly deals with the requirement for an expert  to
    verify documents.  He states that,

         "an expert  to  verify  documents  is  speculative.   There  is  no
         evidence that funds for legal aid is available for such an  expert.
         The adjournment application does not  show  that  evident  material
         would be achieved by the delay" (paragraph 2.5).

    The judge also states that the Appellant had  been  unable  to  produce
    original arrest warrants to enable proper verification to  take  place.
    In any event, on the substantive issue, the judge  is  clear  that  "no
    plausible explanation as to how the report has identified her" was ever
    provided, and then "did not arrest her" and then "later identified  her
    and so to pursue charges" (paragraph 10.8).

26. Third, the judge rejects any suggestion that there was a  "shortage  of
    time", stating, "there has been enough time to collect the  information
    needed" (paragraph 2.7).

27. Fourth, the vulnerability of Jaison Matewu, a witness who had a holiday
    booked at the time, and could not attend, is not something that goes to
    the materiality of any error.   This  is  because  of  the  Appellant's
    signal failure to make out any plausible  case  showing  that  she  was
    aligned to  the  MDC  as  claimed.   As  the  judge  pointed  out,  the
    Respondent had drawn attention "to the inability of  the  Appellant  to
    provide consistent information about the  core  values  of  the  MDC-T,
    specific dates or detail about the events she claimed  ..."  (paragraph
    10.10).  The judge's own conclusions were that "the Appellant  has  had
    scant political activities in the United Kingdom and she seems  focused
    on activities which support her asylum claim" (paragraph 10.11).

28. He referred to "the Appellant's inability to answer questions in detail
    pertaining to her claimed  activities  and  worked  for  the  MDC-T  in
    Zimbabwe" (paragraph 10.12).

29. He did not accept that the Appellant had shown "a reasonable degree  of
    likelihood that she is such an activist".

30. As far as the arrest warrants were concerned, the judge's view was that
    these "had been provided  to  bolster  an  otherwise  an  unmeritorious
    account"  (paragraph  10.12).   In  short,  "the   Appellant   has   no
    significant  MDC  profile  in  Zimbabwe/or  in  the   United   Kingdom"
    (paragraph 10.12).

31. For all these reasons, the judge did not err in law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 1st December 2017

