
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03858/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |On 29 December 2016          |
|On 28 November 2016                           |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     S J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Heidar, Solicitor of AA Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan who was born  in  May  1999.
    He applied for asylum in this country which application was refused and
    he appealed against that refusal.  His appeal was heard  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul sitting at Taylor  House  on  9  September
    2016 and in a Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  29  September  2016
    Judge Paul dismissed the appeal.

 2. The basis of the appeal is set out at paragraph 30 of his  decision  as
    follows:

         "30. It is important to  note  that  the  appellant's  brother  was
             granted asylum on the basis of being a minor.  The position in
             this case appears to be that the  respondents  have  indicated
             that  they  would  not  seek  to  remove  the   appellant   to
             Afghanistan until contact had been made with his family  -  or
             until he was to turn 18 on  10  May  2017.   The  reality  is,
             therefore, that at the point  at  which  he  will  face  being
             returned to Afghanistan he would not be a minor.  In my  view,
             therefore,  he  does  not  fall  to  be   considered   as   an
             unaccompanied minor  who  could  be  returned  to  Afghanistan
             forthwith.  It follows, in my view therefore, that whilst  the
             principles of LQ still stand, this is not a case in  which  he
             is  at  risk  of  persecution  or  having   his   humanitarian
             protection breached,  because  he  will  not  be  returned  to
             Afghanistan as a minor."

 3. This decision was made notwithstanding the submissions which  had  been
    made to him by Ms Heidar, who represented the appellant at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as she does before this Tribunal today, that the time  at
    which the risk has to be considered was at the date of the hearing.  Mr
    Tarlow does not seek to suggest to the Tribunal that Ms Heidar's First-
    tier submission was wrong and indeed it is trite law that that  was  in
    fact the date at which the risk  to  the  appellant  should  have  been
    assessed.  Mr Tarlow does not seek either to persuade the Tribunal that
    the decision of Judge Paul can be sustained for any other  reason.   It
    follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this case  must
    be set aside for a material error of law, being the failure to consider
    the risk on return to the appellant as at the date of the hearing.   In
    these circumstances, as there will have to be a complete  rehearing  at
    which the risk to him as at the date of the hearing  will  have  to  be
    determined it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to the First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Taylor House for a hearing before any  judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul and I will so order.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul, dismissing  the  appellant's
appeal is set aside and the appeal is remitted back for rehearing at  Taylor
House by any judge other then Judge Paul.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 22 December 2016
