
                                                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/03334/2020 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2021                                |On 20 July 2021               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     EC

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Ms M Cleghorn of Counsel, instructed by Latif Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Albania with date of birth  given  as
   9.5.86, has appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 18.1.21 (Judge  Forster),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 21.5.20, to refuse his claim for  international
   protection as the victim of domestic abuse.

2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  4.2.21.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted  permission  on  all  grounds  on  3.3.21,
   considering that  whilst  the  other  grounds  had  less  merit,  it  was
   nevertheless arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  apply  the
   relevant  country  guidance  when  considering   prospective   risk   and
   relocation in Albania.

3. Although Judge Plimmer observed with regret  that  the  country  guidance
   decisions referred to in the renewal grounds, dated 20.1.21, "contain  no
   citation and no specific references had been drawn to relevant paragraphs
   in support of the propositions relied  on",  the  correct  citations  and
   references, including for AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG  [2010]
   UKUT 80 (IAC) and TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT  92  (IAC),
   were subsequently provided at [2]  of  Ms  Cleghorn's   somewhat  lengthy
   skeleton argument, dated 31.3.21.

4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of  the  written  and  oral  submissions  and  the  grounds  of
   application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5. The relevant background is that the  appellant  fears  her  husband,  who
   raped her when she was 13 and the abuse  continued  after  marriage.  Her
   husband also assaulted her son. She  sought  and  obtained  a  Protection
   Order in 2018  but  her  husband  followed  her.  Afraid  to  go  to  the
   authorities again,  she  fled  Albania.  Her  factual  account  has  been
   accepted by the respondent, who rejected the  claim  as  not  objectively
   well-founded. It follows that the appeal turned  on  issues  of  internal
   relocation and sufficiency of protection by the Albanian authorities.

6. The interrelated grounds first submit that in making adverse  credibility
   findings the judge failed to put the appellant's case in context  and  in
   light of the case authorities,  which  would  have  revealed  the  stigma
   attached to victims of sexual abuse  and  to  single  women  without  the
   support of a husband. More significantly, it is submitted that the  judge
   was simply wrong to disregard the country guidance cases.

7. It is clear that at [41] of the decision the judge entirely dismissed  Ms
   Cleghorn's reliance on TD and AD, and AM and  BM  as  cases  relating  to
   trafficked women and the  difficulties  they  face  in  reintegration  in
   Albania. The judge did not accept that these authorities had any  bearing
   on the appellant's case. It is submitted, however,  that  the  two  cases
   address internal relocation and  sufficiency  of  protection  for  female
   victims of sexual violence  and  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  similar
   situation to the situation discussed in those cases in that it is claimed
   her husband would be able to trace her and has the motivation to  do  so.
   It is also submitted that the judge failed to adequately address the best
   interests of the appellant's child, also a victim of  domestic  violence,
   in the context of the ability to relocate of a single woman with a child.

8. For the reasons cogently set out in the grounds and skeleton argument,  I
   find that there was a material error of law in the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal. The two country guidance cases deal with  the  sufficiency
   of protection and internal relocation options for single women on  return
   to Albania and not just those who have been trafficked. For  example,  at
   [140] of AM and BM suggested that for each individual it was necessary to
   make an assessment taking into account that person's particular  factors,
   including that "If the victim is at real risk  of  persecution  from  her
   family or her husband then there is little evidence that the State  would
   intervene, particularly in the north of the country."  At  [187]  of  the
   same case the Upper Tribunal referred to "the difficulties for  a  single
   woman to reintegrate into a society where the  family  is  the  principle
   unit for welfare and mutual support..."  There  is  also  the  difficulty
   highlighted at [51] of TD and AD that single women who return to  Albania
   are in most cases considered as abandoned by their families because  they
   are 'kurva' (whores), a label which  carries  with  it  a  lot  of  hate,
   discrimination and the risk of exclusion from social groups. It  is  also
   said that there are the additional difficulties that the  police  conform
   to traditional patriarchal norms, where domestic  abuse  is  regarded  as
   private, family matters. Victims of domestic violence are often  returned
   to their families and the perpetrators released without  charge  after  a
   cooling off period. Issues of corruption and bribery in the police  force
   is said to be a serious problem.

9. The above and other concerns raised in the country guidance cases  relied
   on by the appellant would have assisted the judge to form a more  rounded
   assessment of the  difficulties  of  the  appellant's  circumstances.  To
   completely refuse to consider them on the basis that they deal  primarily
   with trafficked women is short-sighted and, I am satisfied, in  error  of
   law.

10. In the circumstances and for the reasons set  out  above,  I  find  such
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that  it  must
   be set aside to be remade in its entirety with no findings preserved.

11. Where the  facts  and  findings  are  unclear  and  need  to  be  remade
   entirely, the appropriate course is to remit this matter  to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal to be remade, on the basis that this is a case which  falls
   squarely within the Senior President's Practice  Statement  at  paragraph
   7.2. The effect of the error has been to deprive the appellant of a  fair
   hearing and that the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which
   is necessary for the decision in  the  appeal  to  be  re-made  makes  it
   appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  determine
   the appeal afresh.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its entirety

      The remaking of the decision in the appeal is remitted to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal at Newcastle.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       5 July 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       5 July 2021





