

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03686/2015
                                                               PA/03689/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 October 2016                       |On 28 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MANSAF HARAM
                                 FATMA HARAM
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Peterson a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Vaughan a Solicitor

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the purpose of continuity with the determination in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal I will hereinafter refer to the Secretary of State  as
       the Respondent and Mr and Mrs Haram as the  Appellants.  I  make  no
       anonymity order it was not applied for and does  not  appear  to  be
       necessary.


    2. The Respondent refused the Appellants' application  for  asylum  and
       ancillary protection on 3 December 2015. The appeal against this was
       allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Atkinson  ("the  Judge")  on
       humanitarian grounds only following a hearing on 8 August 2016.


The Judge's findings

    3. In summary the Judge found that [36] there are numerous incidents of
       indiscriminate shelling in Libya, 2.4 million people are in need  of
       protection, 425,000  people  have  been  internally  displaced,  the
       United Kingdom authorities have stopped returns  to  Tripoli,  there
       are some  flights  to  Benghazi,  [37]  there  has  been  a  serious
       deterioration in the  security  situation  in  Libya,  [40]  if  the
       Appellants returned to Libya they would face a real risk of  serious
       harm, and even if they were able to land in Libya, in  making  their
       way to their home area they would  effectively  be  entering  a  war
       zone.

The grant of permission


    4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted permission to  appeal  (28
       September 2016) purely  on  the  basis  of  whether  the  Judge  had
       addressed the option of internal relocation.


Respondent's position

    5. If returns to Tripoli were not suspended, the  Appellants  could  be
       there safely.


Appellants' position


    6. Reliance was placed on the determination.


Discussion

    7. FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413 (IAC) guides me  to
       the view that the question of whether a person is at art 15(c)  risk
       in Libya should, until further Country Guidance,  be  determined  on
       the basis of the individual evidence in the case.


    8. The Judge did not therefore  err  by  not  reciting  AT  and  Others
       (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 00318  (IAC)  as
       he did indeed determine the  appeal  purely  on  the  basis  of  the
       evidence he had. It  has  not  been  established  that  any  of  the
       findings he made were factually inaccurate.


    9. The Judge noted that the Appellants could not be returned to Tripoli
       because the  Respondent  is  not  returning  people  there.  He  was
       entitled to find that if they were able to land, in  trying  to  get
       their home area they would be entering a war zone.  This  is  not  a
       lone male but a couple including a woman which carries an additional
       risk factor of which the Judge was plainly aware. Whilst  the  Judge
       could have  given  more  detailed  consideration  to  this,  he  was
       entitled to find that there was no internal flight  alternative  and
       that if they returned to Libya  they  would  face  a  real  risk  of
       serious harm.


   10. I am not therefore satisfied that the Judge made a material error of
       law.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.




Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
27 October 2016
