
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03205/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2016                 |On 28 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             MAKA NATSVLISHVILI
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel, instructed by Freedom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Zahed  who  dismissed  her  asylum  appeal,  under
    Section 83 (1) of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 6  November  2015.
    The appellant's case is that she would face a mistreatment by a man  on
    the investigation committee who has been threatening her father and her
    family in Georgia.  The appellant worked as a  director  of  a  theatre
    company and her  problems  began  in  Georgia  in  2012  and  gradually
    increased as the new government took over and conditions worsened.

 2. Her immigration history is  such  that  the  appellant  applied  for  a
    student visa in 2015 and entered the UK on 25 May  2015.   She  claimed
    asylum one month later.

 3. The grounds challenge the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Zahed
    on the basis that he applied too high a standard of proof and failed to
    consider material evidence properly and in the round.

 4. In particular

    (i)  the judge failed to dismiss the appellant's claim at paragraph  27
    and 28 that she received Skype calls and failed to  take  into  account
    that she had explained in her evidence that she had not  mentioned  the
    Skype calls because she lacked evidence to prove the same and that  the
    solicitor had known but had not acted upon  the  information.  In  this
    regard the appellant had produced new evidence  showing  that  she  had
    contacted her previous solicitor.

    (ii) in relation to her mother's  arrest,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's mother did not mention her arrest in her  letter  and  that
    the incident was only mentioned for the first time at the hearing.  The
    judge had failed to take into account the tight timeframe within  which
    documents were posted out to the appellant by her mother and  that  the
    appeal bundle had already  been  filed  and  served  by  the  time  the
    information came to light. Once again the appellant's  mother  had  now
    provided additional evidence about her detention.

    (iii)    that the advocate's information about the bail application for
    the appellant's father was not supported by the evidence, (paragraph 40
    of the decision, and the judge found this  undermined  his  credibility
    such that little weight could be attached to the letter.  The judge had
    failed to consider the  letter  in  the  round  and  that  it  provided
    corroborative evidence of the fact of prosecution.  The judge erred  in
    dismissing the advocate's letter without further consideration.

    (iv) the judge had found at paragraph 42 that it was  implausible  that
    the appellant's father would continue to gain contracts for  two  years
    into the new term if he had been politically connected. The  judge  had
    failed to take into account the appellant's evidence  that  her  father
    was not directly connected to  the  government  but  supported  it  and
    inevitably not  each  and  every  person  who  supported  the  previous
    government  would  be  immediately   persecuted.   However   when   the
    appellant's father clashed with Zakaria Kutsnashvili he was  identified
    and thereafter persecuted.

    (v)  at paragraphs 45 and 46 the judge found that the appellant delayed
    in leaving  Georgia  and  also  in  claiming  asylum.   In  making  the
    assessment the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    evidence that she left Georgia as soon as possible after receiving  the
    visa.  The judge failed to take  into  account  the  fact  that  travel
    arrangements had to be made  and  equally  the  judge  failed  to  take
    account of the appellant's explanation for why she did not claim asylum
    immediately.  She supplied a  full  explanation  of  her  thoughts  and
    beliefs.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis solely that the judge had
    arguably failed to apply the lower appropriate standard of  proof  when
    determining past facts and reference was made to the last  sentence  of
    paragraph 29  and the penultimate sentience of paragraph 35.

 6. Mr Coleman at the hearing before  me  submitted  that  it  was  unclear
    whether the  judge,  when  considering  the  evidence  for  example  at
    paragraph 28, was referring  to  the  evidence  of  not  producing  the
    evidence of Skype or failing to give the evidence prior to  or  at  the
    hearing.  Mr Coleman also stated there was a difference  between  being
    politically connected and supporting the government and the  judge  had
    erred in his reference to political connection.

 7. Mr Bramble defended the decision.  The judge may  have  used  a  looser
    wording when referring to "on  the  lower  standard"  and  should  have
    referred "to the lower standard" but  on  an  overall  reading  of  the
    decision this did not detract from the judge's  finding.   This  was  a
    thorough determination and the judge had given significant reasons  for
    rejecting the applicant's claim.  It was  now  submitted  and  advanced
    that the judge should not have found that the father was connected  but
    rather supported but this did not alter the basis of the claim  or  set
    too high a standard.

 8. I find there is  no  merit  in  the  application.   The  judge  clearly
    directed himself as to the burden and standard of proof at [4]  of  the
    decision and whether there were 'substantial grounds for believing  she
    would face a real risk of suffering serious harm within the meaning  of
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules (as amended)'.  I have reviewed
    the application of that standard of proof in the light of  the  grounds
    above.

 9. The judge at paragraph 20 clearly set out that the appellant had stated
    that

         "she and her family face persecution because of  political  reasons
         as her parents both supported the previous government,  her  father
         had been awarded many contracts by the previous government and that
         the new government is acting against the supporters of the previous
         government."

10.  This could not be clearer in terms of how the case was  set  and  that
    the judge has clearly identified that the claim was based on the family
    supporting the government. There is no merit in Mr Coleman's assertions
    that the judge deviated from the claim and indeed this was not part  of
    the permission grant.

11. Turning to an assessment of the application of the standard of proof  I
    have addressed each of the grounds of complaint as above.

12. In response to (i) the judge made  a  series  of  careful  findings  in
    relation to the clams of her Skype calls from [26] to [29] and  reading
    those findings overall it is clear the judge refers to the evidence  as
    a whole. Not least at paragraph 26 the judge found that  the  appellant
    herself confirmed that a person would be required to know her Skype  ID
    and her Skype ID was not her name and  that  further,  the  authorities
    would put pressure on the appellant through her Skype account in  order
    to contact her father.

13. It was open to the judge to note that the Skype call was mentioned  for
    the first time in oral evidence before him.  As the judge stated

         "Had the Skype call occurred in a manner and was as significant  as
         stated by the appellant, given the fact that the  reason  she  left
         the previous solicitors firm was because they did not  do  anything
         about the Skype call, that the appellant would have mentioned it in
         her witness statement dated 21 April 2016, just a month  after  the
         alleged Skype call".

14. I note, this was entirely inconsistent with the appellant's application
    for permission to appeal on the basis that  the  reasons  she  had  not
    mentioned it was because she could not prove it.

15. Although the judge has referred to the standard of proof as  being  "on
    the lower standard" the  judge  clearly  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant had not submitted any evidence of such a Skype call or indeed
    "attempted to contact Skype to provide such evidence of  a  Skype  call
    given the importance of such a call  to  show  a  continuation  of  the
    threat".   This was a cogent finding and reasoning  on  behalf  of  the
    judge and there is no indication albeit  that  it  may  be  inelegantly
    phrased by the use of 'on' rather than 'to', that the  judge  used  the
    wrong standard of proof.

16. With regards ground (ii), at paragraph 32 the judge gave clear  reasons
    as to why he rejected or placed  no  weight  on  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's mother on the basis that there was no mention of  the  fact
    that she had been arrested.  The permission application makes note that
    the judge failed to take into account the tight timeframe in which  the
    documents were posted but as the judge states, the  documents  were  in
    fact scanned. It is the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    which I must concentrate on, not fresh evidence produced  in  order  to
    bolster the claim.

17. In relation to ground (iii),  the  advocate's  letter,  the  judge  had
    already made a series of credibility findings against the appellant and
    at paragraphs 39 and 40 found that the advocate's letter did not  chime
    with the documents produced in relation to the court papers. The  judge
    clearly states that this damages the credibility of  the  advocate  and
    applying the case of Tanveer Ahmed found this inconsistency damaged the
    credibility of the letter he  had  produced  and  therefore  the  judge
    attached little weight to the letter.  I am not persuaded the  findings
    disclose the application of the wrong standard of proof.  The judge did
    give full consideration to the advocator's letter  and  considered  the
    evidence in the round and in the  light  of  the  credibility  findings
    overall.

18. In relation to ground (iv), on the one hand the appellant  states  that
    the father was a supporter of the government  and  on  the  other  hand
    states that he was  not  connected.  Needless  to  say  the  claim  was
    advanced on the basis of the political associations of the  appellant's
    father and as the judge stated, he did not accept that the  appellant's
    father would be awarded "large contracts by the new government and  the
    local area two years after the new government had taken power given the
    fact it is  claimed  he  was  politically  connected  to  the  previous
    government and was awarded many contracts by them".

19. The judge clearly put this in the context of the background information
    and although he may have  used  "politically  connected"  in  a  rather
    looser fashion than the appellant would prefer, there is no doubt  that
    he was entitled to make this finding and that  it  was  not  consistent
    with the claim that he was being targeted should he have received large
    contracts two years after the new government had  entered  power.   The
    judge also listed his findings at paragraph 43 to criticise  the  claim
    of the appellant, finding that it was inconsistent that she claimed  it
    was a more corrupt system albeit that her father had been awarded large
    contracts after the introduction of that and initiation  of  that  said
    corrupt system.  That was a clear finding open to the judge which  does
    not involve an error in the application of the standard of proof.

20. With regards to ground (v) the judge made further findings in  relation
    to the delay of the appellant's claim and this he  was  obliged  to  do
    under Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants
    etc) Act 2004 and entitled so to do.  The judge recorded

          "47.  I find taking the  many  inconsistencies  into  account  and
             taking the above findings into account that the appellant  has
             not been a credible  witness  and  has  sought  to  embellish,
             bolster  and  fabricate  a  claim  whereby  her   father   was
             investigated and charged with  misuse  of  public  funds  into
             being persecuted  for  political  reasons.  I  find  that  the
             appellant's father is being prosecuted for political  reasons.
             I find that the appellant's father is being prosecuted and not
             persecuted.  I do not find that the appellant  or  her  family
             has been  threatened  as  claimed  by  the  appellant  by  the
             authorities. I have not accepted any part  of  her  claim  and
             find that she faces no risk on return.   I  thus  dismiss  her
             asylum claim."

21. The judge has made it plain that he had not accepted any  part  of  the
    appellant's claim, and based those findings  on  having  carefully  and
    explicitly analysed and rejected the evidence for a variety of  reasons
    to the correct  standard  and  which  included  an  assessment  of  the
    relevant facts.  The judge twice referred to 'on  the  lower  standard'
    but having made the direction that he did at the outset of the decision
    with regard to the standard of proof and having made the findings  that
    he did overall and in the way that he did,  I  am  not  persuaded  that
    there is any misapplication of the  correct  standard  of  proof.   The
    decision shows no error of law and the decision shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 27th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
