

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: PA/03589/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 31 October 2019                            |On 5 November 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

                                   Between

                                RATOKUYA [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms K Dingwall, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Namibia.  She sought  protection  in  the
    UK.  She has been in a relationship with [ZM] since  2009.   They  have
    two children, born on 7 April 2012 and 16 July 2016.  Those three other
    family members are dependants on her claim.

 2. The appellant says that in May 2015 her uncle told  her  to  marry  her
    cousin, [GP]; and when she refused, [GP] sexually assaulted her,  raped
    her, harassed her at work and at home, and pulled a gun on her partner.
     She said that on return she would be at risk of  forced  marriage  and
    she and her partner might be killed.

 3. The respondent refused the claim by letter dated 4 April 2019:

      [30], assault by [GP],  risk  of  forced  marriage,  and  nationality,
      accepted;

      [31], subjective fear accepted;

      [33-53], sufficiency of protection available in  Namibia  -  at  [49],
      appellant's documentary evidence of approaching the Ministry of Safety
      and Security Women and Children Protection Unit  found  defective  and
      given little weight;

      [54-65] relocation available within Namibia;

      [66-67] no Refugee Convention category;

      [68-96] no  basis  for  humanitarian  protection,  or  based  on  ECHR
      articles 2, 3 and 8, discretionary leave, or  best  interests  of  the
      children.

 4. FtT Judge Gillespie heard the appellant's appeal on 31  May  2019.   In
    his decision promulgated on 14 August 2019 (the delay is not explained)
    he said at [48], "I  do  not  find  her  claim  to  be  credible",  and
    dismissed the appeal.

 5. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  her
    application dated 19 August 2019 as:

      (i) failing to give sufficient consideration or weight  to  an  expert
      report; and

      (ii) making an adverse finding on the reliability of a document  which
      was beyond his expertise.

 6. Permission was granted on 9 September 2019.

 7. The appellant since then has changed her  representatives.   By  letter
    dated 21 October 2019 she applies to advance 3 further grounds:

      (iii) going behind the  respondent's  concession  on  credibility  and
      taking into account irrelevant matters; error material, as  inevitably
      colouring the Judge's approach to state protection;

      (iv) in assessing availability of state protection, taking account  of
      an irrelevant matter, the stature of the appellant's partner;

      (v) on state protection, failing  to  assess,  even  if  there  is  in
      general an adequate system, whether the appellant in her circumstances
      would be able to access it; and

      (vi) failing to consider whether internal relocation would  be  unduly
      harsh.

 8. Additional ground (iii) is not quite  accurate,  but  it  identifies  a
    clear error.  A judge is not bound by a concession by  the  respondent,
    but if considering whether to go behind one, he must tell the  parties,
    and give them the opportunity to develop their  cases  and  make  their
    submissions in that light.

 9. The judge does not record any  submission  by  the  presenting  officer
    putting credibility in issue to an  extent  beyond  the  terms  of  the
    refusal letter.

10. An appellant whose  account  has  been  accepted  as  credible  by  the
    respondent and who has no reason to anticipate a contrary finding  from
    the tribunal has not had a fair hearing.

11. There might be merit in some of the criticisms of the reasons  for  the
    adverse credibility findings, such as the apparent  view  that  no  man
    would ever intrude on an  existing  family;  and  the  stature  of  the
    appellant's  partner  could  not  properly  count  for  much.   It   is
    unnecessary to explore those matters further.  The ground of procedural
    unfairness qualifies to be admitted even at this late stage, and it  is
    decisive.

12. The error relates to the  conclusions  on  grounds  of  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal relocation in such  a  way  that  the  decision
    cannot be left standing on those grounds alone.

13. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

14. There is a presumption that the UT will proceed to remake decisions, of
    which parties are reminded in  directions  issued  with  the  grant  of
    permission.  However, the nature  of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate under section 12  of  the  2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

15. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Gillespie.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      31 October 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




