
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03877/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 August 2019                    |On 11 September 2019                |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    W.N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. C. Jaquiss, Counsel, instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Maka ('the Judge'), sent to the parties  on  30  May  2019  by
    which the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  to
    refuse to grant him  leave  on  international  protection  grounds  was
    refused.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission of JFtT Boyle as to ground 3  and
    UTJ Reeds as to grounds 1 and 2.



Anonymity

 3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Though aware that it will
    usually be in the public interest for proceedings to  be  conducted  by
    means of open justice, I am  mindful  that  the  appellant  has  sought
    international protection and I make this order to avoid a likelihood of
    serious harm arising to him from the contents of his  protection  claim
    being publicly known:

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report
         of these proceedings or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings



Background

 4. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia and is presently aged  18.  The
    respondent does not dispute the appellant's claimed date of birth.

 5. He asserts that he left Ethiopia in 2016 and travelled onto  Sudan  and
    then Egypt before travelling by boat to Italy. He then  travelled  onto
    France before arriving in this country on 11 September  2017,  claiming
    asylum the next day.

 6. The appellant states that he was born in Oromia,  Ethiopia  and  is  an
    ethnic Oromo. His brother was arrested in  February  2015  having  been
    alleged  to  have  organised  a  peaceful  demonstration  against   the
    Government. The appellant's brother was killed by  the  authorities  in
    October 2015. The  appellant's  family  gathered  to  mourn  and  offer
    prayers, but the assembly was raided by the authorities and his  father
    was arrested. He was accused of supporting the Oromo  Liberation  Front
    ('OLF'). The appellant states that he  has  had  no  contact  with  his
    father since this  date.  Consequent  to  these  events  the  appellant
    asserts that he started to support the  youth  wing  of  the  OLF,  the
    Qeeroo. He distributed leaflets and provided  financial  contributions.
    He states that he was arrested on 11 January  2016  whilst  at  school,
    being accused of being an agent of the OLF.  He  details  that  he  was
    questioned and beaten during his detention  before  being  released  19
    days later with the aid of a bribe paid by  his  parents  to  a  police
    officer. He then left Ethiopia.

 7. His application for international protection was refused by  way  of  a
    decision dated 7 March 2018. The appellant was aged 17  at  this  time.
    The respondent observed  several  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    claim. In his SEF he stated that his  brother  was  killed  during  the
    course of a demonstration in 2015, whilst in his written statement  and
    interview he detailed that his brother took part in  demonstrations  in
    2014, was arrested in February 2015 and killed in October 2015. He also
    denied in his interview that the authorities made any admissions as  to
    his brother's death, but later in the interview stated that his  father
    was informed that the death was consequent to his support for the  OLF.
    It was also noted that the assertion that the  appellant's  father  was
    arrested whilst mourning for a son was inconsistent with the  reference
    in the appellant's SEF to his father being arrested at a demonstration.



 8. It is appropriate to  observe  at  this  juncture  that  the  appellant
    completed  an  'unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children  statement   of
    evidence (SEF)' on 25 September 2017 when he was aged 16. This form was
    completed by his present  solicitors  on  his  behalf.  The  respondent
    invited the appellant to attend a 'statement  of  evidence  form  (SEF)
    minor asylum interview' on 5 March 2018, when the  appellant  was  aged
    17. The appellant was accompanied by  a  social  worker.  Consequently,
    when preparing his SEF and undertaking his interview the appellant  was
    a minor.



Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hatton Cross  on  30  April
    2019. The appellant was represented by  Ms.  Jaquiss.  The  Judge  made
    adverse credibility  findings  and  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    observing, inter alia, at [53], [55] - [57]:

         'I  noted  the  major  inconsistencies  referred  to   within   the
         appellant's SEF statement (page 35 of  37).  This  was  a  document
         which the appellant completed himself with the  assistance  of  his
         solicitor and their interpreter. I note the appellant said  in  his
         document that his brother was one of the students killed  during  a
         demonstration in 2015 at university. He also said his  father,  who
         also took part in this demonstration was arrested towards  the  end
         of 2015 and detained and  the  appellant  left  shortly  after  his
         father's arrest. The SEF statement was signed by the  appellant  on
         25 September 2017.

         ...

         Pausing there, I accept  in  principle  there  can  be  interpreter
         errors when things are said and translated. I also take note of the
         appellant's  age  at  the  time.  However,  I  do  not  accept  the
         'interpreter error' explanation before me.  This  was  not  a  Home
         Office interpreter but his solicitor's  interpreter.  This  is  not
         just a simple sentence error but aspects which go towards the  core
         of the appellant's account. There is a big difference  between  the
         appellant's  brother  being  killed  during  a   demonstration   at
         university and being killed some considerable time later in October
         2015 by the authorities after a period of detention. There is  also
         a difference between his father taking part in demonstrations being
         arrested and being arrested when he was mourning the death  of  his
         son.

         I have nothing from the appellant's solicitors  on  this.  I  would
         have expected them to at least explain what happened  and  why  and
         how an interpreter they employed seemingly  made  some  fundamental
         mistakes. I find the mere reference to 'interpreter error' in  this
         statement as implausible and a throwaway  submission  to  embellish
         the  account  before  the  substantive  interview.  The  additional
         statement was compiled some five months after the SEF statement and
         some 13  days  prior  to  the  substantive  asylum  interview.  The
         appellant had plenty of time and opportunity to amend his SEF which
         he had completed. I do not accept something as fundamental as  this
         would not have been reasonably noticed  by  the  appellant  or  his
         solicitors for some five months. I have no explanation  about  this
         whatsoever.

         I also note the appellant adds for the first time in this statement
         he was  also  involved  with  the  OLF  and  was  detained  by  the
         authorities. He was asked about this in cross examination. I do not
         accept his explanation he was 'asked to be brief' to be  plausible.
         A detention for 19 days where ill-treatment  is  supposed  to  have
         occurred at the hands of the state is not something  that  will  be
         missed out in a SEF form without any reference at all.  It  is  for
         the appellant  to  explain  what,  why  and  how  these  errors  or
         omissions occurred. I find he has plausibly failed to do so.'

10. The Judge made several  other  adverse  credibility  findings.  I  note
    examples at [60], [62]:

         'I have other concerns about this appellant's evidence. I find  the
         appellant is not a truthful witness. He said  in  cross-examination
         he was not in contact with any family member. This was not what  he
         told his therapist at the Refugee Council (Bundle 3, page 25),  who
         noted he claimed to have called an extended  family  member  before
         Christmas and was told his mother was sick. The family  member  did
         not know where she was or how to reach her. When this  was  put  to
         him in cross examination, he then mentioned an account  of  getting
         in touch with his mother by sending her  a  voice  message  through
         this extended family member (Dabre). I  do  not  accept  this.  The
         therapist noted the extended family member was  unable  to  get  in
         touch with his mother as he did not know where she was  or  how  to
         reach. It is not what the appellant said.'

         ...

         The appellant also said in cross-examination he  suffered  injuries
         in detention. He did not have any medical treatment. He  maintained
         this until Q69 of  his  interview  was  put  to  him  during  cross
         examination. He then seemed to imply he was unconscious and so  did
         not know he was taken to hospital, something which  he  claimed  in
         interview but did not mention in cross examination. He then  seemed
         to imply the hospital treatment was because of the demonstration he
         attended. I am satisfied I am not being given a truthful account.

11. The Judge rejected the entirety of the appellant's claim. He had  never
    been involved with the OLF, nor had any family members. His brother had
    not been detained or killed by the authorities. He further  found  that
    the appellant did not possess a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  by
    being Oromo or that  any  discrimination  encountered  by  being  Oromo
    reached the article 3 threshold. At [73] the Judge reasoned:

         'I have considered the recent changes which were highlighted to  me
         in respect of the OLF. I'm satisfied these are fundamental  changes
         in the country situation allowing me to  depart  from  the  country
         guidance case of [MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007]  UKAIT
         00030]. I find  these  are  not  just  paper  changes  but  durable
         changes, which have been implemented with concrete measures such as
         de-listing the OLF as a terrorist organisation.  I  have  not  been
         referred to anything in the objective evidence or by Dr. Berri what
         shows after these changes that the OLF are still  being  imprisoned
         or persecuted. I do not accept the appellant's evidence on this.'



Appeal

12. The appellant relies upon three grounds of appeal: i) the Judge  failed
    to take account of medical evidence; ii) the Judge failed to apply  the
    relevant guidance when considering the account given by  the  appellant
    as a child; and iii) the Judge failed  to  provide  strong  and  cogent
    reasons for departing from country guidance.

13. In granting permission on ground 3, JFtT Boyes reasoned:

         'Ground 3 is arguable as an error of law. It is arguabale that  the
         Judge's conclusions could have benefitted from greater  detail  and
         more in-depth reasoning as to why one was departing from CG.'

14. In granting permission on grounds 1 and 2 UTJ Reeds observed:

         'I am satisfied that it is arguable as ground 1  asserts  that  the
         failure to consider the medical evidence, which related to his time
         on arrival, was in error as it failed  to  take  into  account  any
         impact that may have had on his ability to have given a  consistent
         and credible account.

         As to ground 2, whilst at the date of the hearing the appellant was
         an adult, it was common ground that he was a child at the  time  of
         the events in question and therefore it was arguable that  on  that
         basis for the reasons  given  in  the  grounds,  the  guidance  was
         applicable  and  should  have  been  taken  into  account  (see  AM
         (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123).'

15. The respondent filed a rule 24 response.



Decision on error of law

16. The primary ground advanced by the appellant is that the Judge erred in
    law by failing to consider the guidance of the Court of  Appeal  in  AM
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123, [2018] 4 WLR 78  when  assessing  any  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's evidence. Ms.  Jaquiss  notes  that  she  referred  to  the
    guidance in her skeleton argument filed with the First-tier Tribunal.

17. I observe that it was not the appellant's stated  position  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that any discrepancies in his evidence prior to the
    hearing was due to his age or maturity, or  due  to  his  inability  to
    construct an account of his  history.  Rather,  being  aware  that  the
    respondent relied upon discrepancies in  his  evidence,  the  appellant
    asserted by way of his witness statement dated 17 April  2019,  at  [1]
    and [3]:

         'Firstly, I would like to  maintain  the  contents  of  my  witness
         statement at paragraph 5 where I sought to clarify the amendment to
         my duly completed SEF  form.  My  witness  statement  is  the  most
         accurate account of  my  claim  for  asylum.  It  was  prepared  by
         solicitors following a read back of  my  duly  completed  SEF.  The
         clarification to my SEF form was submitted prior to the conductance
         of  my  substantive  asylum   interview   and   not   after.   This
         clarification is important to my case and I feel  the  Home  Office
         should have accepted  it.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  interpreting
         problems to occur during the course of preparing asylum claims. The
         fact that the information was clarified in  advance  of  my  asylum
         interview is indicative of my effort to present a genuine claim.  I
         feel that in light of my minority age I should have been given  the
         benefit of the doubt in this instance.'

         ...

         Furthermore, I do not feel that  I  have  not  provided  sufficient
         information about my  father's  arrest  and  detention.  I  clearly
         stated in my SEF form when he was arrested. In my asylum  interview
         I also provided the date of his arrest. My responses may  not  have
         been exact, but I  do  not  feel  that  they  are  inconsistent  or
         discrepant ...'

18. As detailed above, the Judge did not accept the appellant's evidence as
    to his having a problem with an  interpreter  when  preparing  his  SEF
    statement in September 2017. The Judge observed  that  the  interpreter
    had been provided to the appellant by his solicitors  and  no  evidence
    had been presented by the solicitors to seek to explain the  occurrence
    of the asserted negligent interpretation. Further, the Judge reasonably
    observed that it was not one sentence within the statement in which  an
    error was said to have occurred, but  it  was  said  to  be  a  problem
    permeating throughout the statement. The lack of explanation  from  the
    appellant's solicitors is striking in light of the  serious  allegation
    being made by the appellant  as  to  a  professional  interpreter  they
    instructed, and such silence could quite rightly be relied upon by  the
    Judge. Importantly, the appellant  has  not  sought  to  challenge  the
    Judge's decision as to interpretation error and so must  be  deemed  to
    accept that the Judge's decision on this issue was lawful.

19. Ms. Jaquiss contends that though the appellant's own position  is  that
    he was capable of providing clear evidence as to his  history,  and  it
    was  the  failings  of  an  interpreter  that  resulted  in   perceived
    discrepancies, she had further advanced before the First-tier  Tribunal
    that there was an overarching requirement for  the  Judge  to  consider
    evidence presented by the appellant when a minor through the  prism  of
    the Court of Appeal's guidance in AM (Afghanistan). I agree  that  when
    considering evidence presented  by  a  minor  asylum  seeker,  even  in
    circumstances where  post-presentation  of  that  evidence  they  reach
    majority, a judge is required  to  have  in  mind  both  the  Court  of
    Appeal's guidance and relevant Presidential guidance so  as  to  ensure
    that there is a fair determination of the appeal. In  this  matter  the
    Judge expressly took into account the appellant's minority at the  time
    of the preparation and presentation of the evidence at [55].  There  is
    no requirement that a judge detail in full the relevant guidance, it is
    sufficient that they have it in mind and observe that they do so within
    their decision and reasons. The Judge was aware that the appellant  was
    a minor at the time he presented the evidence under  scrutiny  but  was
    entitled to assess the case as advanced before him. The  appellant  was
    aided in the  preparation  of  his  September  2017  statement  by  his
    solicitors, who he continues to instruct.  He  had  time  in  which  to
    present his history  to  his  solicitors  and  had  time  to  read  his
    statement before it was signed. He was  not  presenting  this  evidence
    during the course of a Home Office interview, circumstances  which  may
    be stressful and give rise to anxiety. He cannot rely upon any asserted
    professional  negligence  conducted  by  his   interpreter.   In   such
    circumstances the Judge was entitled to conclude that  the  appellant's
    age was not such as to explain his inconsistency. The  guidance  in  AM
    provides that the Tribunal be aware as to vulnerability,  it  does  not
    establish that such vulnerability,  for  example  due  to  age,  is  an
    insurmountable defence as to inconsistencies, omissions and changes  as
    to personal history. In this matter, the Judge undertook the assessment
    lawfully, being mindful as to the appellant's age, and gave lawful  and
    cogent reasons  for  not  accepting  the  appellant's  stated  personal
    history to the requisite standard.

20. The appellant's second ground of complaint is that the Judge failed  to
    take account of a psychiatric report  authored  by  Dr.  John  Cutting,
    dated 26 April 2019, relied upon by the appellant. Dr.  Cutting  opines
    that the appellant  had  suffered  from  Childhood  Emotional  Disorder
    during the first four months of his arrival in the United Kingdom,  for
    which he received 12 sessions of treatment. Ms. Jaquiss accepts that by
    the time the appellant was interviewed the disorder  had  cleared.  She
    asserts that the Judge failed to consider  the  medical  evidence  when
    assessing the appellant's reticence to  disclose  his  mistreatment  in
    Ethiopia to the Home Office and further failed to assess whether or not
    the disorder had been caused by mistreatment in Ethiopia.

21. I again observe that this medical evidence was not relied upon  by  the
    appellant himself in his witness statement or oral evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal as an explanation for inconsistencies and omissions
    in his evidence. His  witness  statement  confirms  that  he  does  not
    believe he was inconsistent or discrepant either  in  his  SEF  or  his
    interview. Ultimately, a Judge is required  to  consider  the  case  as
    advanced and not to have to root around the evidence trying to identify
    other potential basis of claim. By way of her skeleton argument  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, Ms. Jaquiss relies upon Dr.  Cutting's  report
    as corroborating evidence to the extent that he arrived in this country
    with an emotional disorder. The Judge was lawfully  permitted  to  rely
    upon the many inconsistencies in  evidence  as  establishing  that  the
    appellant was not a  credible  witness.  Whilst  there  is  no  express
    reference to the report of Dr. Cutting, its contents are not such as to
    establish a material error of law in the Judge's decision. It  was  not
    relied upon by the appellant as an explanation  for  discrepancies  and
    when  taking  the  evidence  into  account  as  a  whole,   is   simply
    insufficient to establish the appellant's case that he was severely ill-
    treated by the Ethiopian authorities.

22. Ms. Jaquiss fairly  observed  in  her  submissions  that  if  she  were
    unsuccessful on grounds 1 and 2, she could not succeed on ground 3. Her
    contention is that the Judge failed to give cogent and  strong  reasons
    for finding that there had been a durable change in Ethiopia so  as  to
    not follow the authoritative country guidance provided by this Tribunal
    in MB. A country guidance determination of the Upper  Tribunal  remains
    authoritative unless and until it was set aside on appeal  or  replaced
    by a subsequent country guidance determination: R. (on the  application
    of Qader) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWHC 1765
    (Admin). Ms. Jaquis relied upon the Court of Appeal judgment in  R  (SG
    (Iraq)) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    940; [2013] 1 W.L.R. 41. I note that the Court of Appeal observed  that
    although a country guidance decision  carries  significant  weight,  it
    does not purport to cover every conceivable scenario, and is not to  be
    applied without qualification. Therefore, each case has to be  assessed
    sensibly against it.

23. Though concise the Judge's reasoning is lawful. A country guidance case
    is authoritative in any  subsequent  appeal,  so  far  as  that  appeal
    relates to the country guidance issue in question; and depends upon the
    same  or  similar  evidence.  The  Judge  appropriately  observed  that
    significant changes have occurred in Ethiopia as to the position of the
    authorities  and  the  Oromo  minority  since  the  decision   in   MB,
    promulgated some 12 years  previously.  There  has  been  a  change  in
    leadership and Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed has sought  to  transform  the
    human rights landscape. Parliament lifted the ban on  the  OLF  and  in
    August 2018  a  peace  agreement  was  reached  between  the  Ethiopian
    government and the OLF. In February 2019 over 1000 Oromo fighters  laid
    down their weapons. As  at  the  date  of  decision,  the  Judge  could
    reasonably decide that there had been a fundamental and durable  change
    to the political situation in Ethiopia so  as  to  not  to  regard  the
    decision in MB as authoritative.



Notice of Decision

24. An anonymity order is made.

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law. The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

26. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 6 September 2019
