
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA037252016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14 July 2017                       |On 31 July 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                     HKM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones of Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The appellant is a national of Iraq born in 1999  and  accordingly  still  a
minor.  Because of his age and vulnerability it is appropriate  to  make  an
anonymity direction and I do so.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and   to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

 1. This appeal came before me on 28 April  2017  when  I  found  that  the
    decision made by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Oxlade  had  contained  an
    error of law.  It was as I made plain in  my  decision  following  that
    hearing a relatively minor error, but nonetheless a significant one and
    I repeat in this decision what I have already stated, which is that  it
    is abundantly clear from the very  thorough  way  in  which  the  judge
    considered this claim that she had considered the claim with very great
    care indeed.  I do not propose to do more now than set out a summary of
    what I found in my earlier decision.

 2. The appellant, who is from Kirkuk in Iraq, left with other  members  of
    his family in September 2015 and travelled with them to Turkey.  In the
    course of coming to this country tragically his parents and sister died
    and he was eventually granted discretionary leave to remain in  the  UK
    until  his  18th  birthday,  but  his  claim  for   asylum/humanitarian
    protection was not allowed.

 3. When considering the appellant's appeal  against  this  decision  Judge
    Oxlade found that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  protection  under
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  which  gave  him
    most of the protection that he was seeking, but rejected his claim  for
    asylum under the Refugee Convention, the basis of  her  decision  being
    that although he would be at  risk  on  return,  that  was  not  for  a
    Convention reason.  In the course of  her  decision  Judge  Oxlade  did
    consider very carefully whether  or  not  internal  relocation  was  an
    option  and  gave  very  detailed  reasons  why   in   the   particular
    circumstances of this case it was not.  The only issue which was before
    this Tribunal was  whether  or  not  the  appellant  should  have  been
    recognised as a refugee on the basis that he would be at risk on return
    from two particular families and if he was, whether or not  that  would
    be for a Convention reason, essentially because he was a member of  his
    particular family.

 4. Before the hearing I was provided with an  expert  report  which  deals
    with the tribal issues involved and very helpfully Mr Bramble on behalf
    of the respondent has accepted that in light of that  report  and  also
    the findings which had  previously  been  made  by  Judge  Oxlade,  the
    respondent does not now seek to challenge  that  this  appellant  would
    indeed be at risk in his home area  for  a  Convention  reason,  namely
    because of his membership of his own family, which for the purposes  of
    the Refugee Convention is a "particular social group".  He  points  out
    correctly that in the refusal letter the  challenge  was  made  on  the
    basis not that the appellant was not a member of  a  particular  social
    group, but that internal relocation was an option  which  was  properly
    open to him.  In light of the findings made by Judge Oxlade with regard
    to this particular aspect of the claim which  the  respondent  has  not
    sought to challenge, the objection to the grant of  asylum  on  refugee
    grounds falls away.  He also properly notes that in any event, in light
    of the expert evidence which has now been adduced, the respondent could
    not properly sustain an objection on the basis that his claim  that  he
    would be at risk of persecution in  his  home  area  for  a  Convention
    reason could be maintained.

 5. I entirely agree; the evidence which was accepted  within  the  refusal
    letter was that there was  an  ongoing  feud  between  the  appellant's
    family and the two other families, and in light of the expert  evidence
    which  is  now  before  the  Tribunal,  I  find  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities (which is a higher standard of proof than  is  necessary)
    that there was a tribal aspect to this matter.  However, even if  there
    was not, the reason why this appellant would be at risk  on  return  to
    his home area (whether or not the members of the other  families  would
    be "honour bound" to continue this feud against him) would be by reason
    of his membership of his family which is a particular social group.  In
    these circumstances, the risk he would face on return to his home area,
    which is not a matter in dispute, would be for a Convention reason.

 6. It follows that as it is  now  accepted  in  light  of  Judge  Oxlade's
    findings that the appellant cannot properly  be  expected  to  relocate
    internally within Iraq, for the very clear reasons which she  gave,  he
    is entitled to asylum under the Refugee Convention.

 7. Accordingly, I will so order.

Decision

The  finding  by  Judge  Oxlade  that  the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to
protection on asylum grounds is set aside by reason of  error  of  law,  and
the following decision is substituted:

The appellant's appeal is also allowed on asylum grounds.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2017


