
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03170/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal (IAC) |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th November 2017                         |On 18th December 2017        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     SA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, instructed by Central England Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as SA. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


      1. On 20th June 2017, I found an error of law in the decision  by  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the   appellant's   international
         protection appeal, in the following terms:


              1. Having  heard  submissions  from  both  parties,  it  being
                 conceded by the respondent that there was a material  error
                 of law by the First-tier Tribunal  judge  in  reaching  his
                 decision on the issue of feasibility of return to  Iraq,  I
                 set aside the decision to be re-made.


              2. Although Ms Aboni submitted that there was no error of  law
                 as such by the First-tier Tribunal judge in his decision on
                 internal  relocation,  she  confirmed  that  the  issue  of
                 internal relocation was itself dependant on the feasibility
                 of return.


              3. In these circumstances, I confirm that the decision of  the
                 First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  on  the  two  issues  of
                 feasibility of return  and  internal  relocation.  For  the
                 avoidance of doubt, no findings of fact by the judge as  to
                 internal relocation are preserved.


      2. On 29th August 2017, I made the following directions:


              1. SSHD to state within four weeks of today


                 a) Whether she considers Kirkuk to be a contested  area  or
                    not.


                 b) Is it reasonable for this appellant, a Kurd from Kirkuk,
                    to internally relocate to the IKR.


              2. The appellant to file and serve any evidence he intends  to
                 rely upon 7 days before the resumed hearing


      3. Both parties complied with the directions and I received:


              a) Submission from the respondent dated 22nd September 2017;


              b) Country Policy and Information Notes on Iraq: Security  and
                 Humanitarian Situation (March 2017);


              c) Iraq: return/Internal Relocation (September 2017);


              d) The Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI). Access, Possibility  of
                 Protection, Security  and  Humanitarian  Situation.  Danish
                 Refugee Council Report April 2016;


              e) Expert  Report  prepared  by  Alison  Pargeter  dated  28th
                 November 2017;


              f) Humanitarian Response Plan dated  February  2017  for  2017
                 produced on behalf of the  Humanitarian  Country  team  and
                 partners, United Nations Office  for  the  Coordination  of
                 Humanitarian Affairs;


              g) Skeleton argument on behalf of  the  appellant  dated  30th
                 November 2017.


      4. I heard submissions from both representatives, it being agreed that
         neither party required oral evidence to be given.


      5. The two  issues  before  me  are,  firstly,  is  the  evidence  now
         available such as to require me to depart from the Country Guidance
         in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) as  amended  by
         AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 that there is at present a  state  of
         internal armed conflict in Kirkuk such that, as a  general  matter,
         there are substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any  civilian
         returned there, solely on account of his  presence,  faces  a  real
         risk of being subjected to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to
         serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification
         Directive ("Article 15(c) risk");  secondly  if  return  to  Kirkuk
         remains an Article 15(c) risk, is internal relocation to the IKR  a
         safe and reasonable  option  such  as  to  defeat  the  appellant's
         protection claim.

      Article 15(c) risk

      6. Ms Aboni, relying on the Danish  report  and  the  March  2017  and
         September 2017 reports, submits that there is  sufficient  evidence
         to demand a departure from the Country Guidance. In particular, she
         submits the March 2017 report asserts  that  the  changed  security
         situation in Kirkuk including the significant territorial losses by
         Daesh, that the number  of  security  incidents  has  declined  and
         Kirkuk has amongst the lowest levels of violence of all areas; that
         families were returning to Kirkuk; the area was under  the  control
         by the Kurdish Peshmerga and the number of  violent  incidents  was
         significantly lower  than  during  the  period  considered  by  the
         Country Guidance. She referred to a judicial review  (CO/2508/2017)
         where the respondent's successful position was that Kirkuk  was  no
         longer an Article 15(c) risk. I was not provided  with  a  copy  of
         that decision and do not know the date  of  the  decision  or  what
         evidence was before the respondent when she  reached  her  decision
         the subject of challenge and I have therefore not taken  that  into
         account in reaching my decision.


      7. Ms Aboni only received Ms Pargeter's report on the morning  of  the
         hearing. I offered her time to consider the  report  prior  to  her
         making her submissions but, having looked through  it  briefly  she
         said she did not require any time. On conclusion of her submissions
         I asked her if she had anything particular she wished to  say  with
         regard to Ms Pargeter's report but she did not. She relied upon the
         respondent's opinion that Kirkuk was no longer a contested area and
         the appellant could return there.


      8. As submitted by  Mr  Bradshaw,  the  reports  relied  upon  by  the
         respondent all pre-date the Kurdish referendum which  was  held  on
         25th  September  2017.  Thereafter  Iraqi  forces  moved  into  the
         'disputed' areas and took over the key facilities including the oil
         fields and military bases;  the  Kurdish  Peshmerga  withdrew.  The
         report by Ms Pargeter (who is  an  acknowledged  expert  and  whose
         report Ms Aboni did not challenge at all) states, inter alia,  that
         the Iraqi troops are unable to maintain security  in  Kirkuk,  that
         there is significantly less security in the  Governate  than  there
         was under Kurdish rule, that there was a report that  armed  groups
         operating in  Kirkuk  were  carrying  out  kidnapping  and  revenge
         attacks.


      9. To depart from country guidance requires evidence to  be  presented
         that reliably enables a conclusion to be  reached  that  conditions
         have either deteriorated or improved  to  such  an  extent  that  a
         different conclusion as to risk can  be  drawn.  Small  changes  or
         change that is not of reasonable durability will be insufficient to
         justify a departure from the country guidance. What is required  is
         evidence of a durable and sustainable change to country conditions.


     10. In this case, the situation in the  Kirkuk  Governate  did  appear,
         prior to the referendum, to have stabilised  if  not  significantly
         improved to the extent that families and individuals were returning
         to their previously abandoned homes and the level of  violence  had
         significantly reduced. The situation since the referendum  has  now
         reversed that. Ms Aboni did not seek to challenge  the  conclusions
         of Ms Pargeter about  the  decline  in  security  in  Kirkuk,  such
         opinion being adequately referenced by Ms Pargeter; Ms Aboni simply
         relied upon the earlier reports she had submitted.


     11. The evidence before me, of very recent provenance, is  more  up  to
         date and reliable  as  to  the  current  situation  in  the  Kirkuk
         Governate than that which was before the respondent when the  March
         2017 and September 2017 reports were produced.  I am satisfied that
         there has been no change  of  sufficient  significance  to  justify
         departure from the Country Guidance that Kirkuk remains an  Article
         15(c) risk.


     12. It is established, therefore, that the appellant is, if returned to
         Kirkuk, at real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence
         amounting to serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c) of  the
         Qualification Directive


     13. The issue of internal relocation therefore arises.

      Internal relocation


     14. During the hearing, I canvassed with the parties the possibility of
         the appellant being able to return to Kirkuk for a short period  of
         time to obtain his CSID, the country evidence indicating  that  the
         administrative  records  of  the  Kirkuk  Governate  had  not  been
         transferred to Baghdad. As submitted by Mr Bradshaw,  the  fact  of
         Article  15(c)  risk  renders  such  a  possibility   unreasonable.
         Although Ms Pargeter in her report confirms that the  civil  status
         directorate in Kirkuk is functioning normally,  it  cannot  be  the
         case that, if there is an Article 15(c)risk, it is either  feasible
         or reasonable for the appellant to travel there to obtain his CSID.


     15. Ms Pargeter states categorically that


             "As an ethnic Kurd, [SA] would be able to relocate to the KRI,
             which is largely stable and free from  violence,  without  any
             problems and without requiring a sponsor."


        This is contrary to the position described in the Country  Guidance
        which states, inter alia, that a sponsor is required.  I accept  Ms
        Pargeter's statement, it being of recent  provenance  and  relating
        specifically to the appellant - a Kurd from Kirkuk.


     16.  Ms  Pargeter  describes  in  considerable  detail  the  acute  and
         crippling financial crisis in the KRI, and says that the  continued
         inflow of refugees and IDPs has placed considerable stresses on the
         economy, that public services are deteriorating  considerably,  the
         delivery of health, education and social protection programmes  had
         been severely constrained (from a World Bank report 2015), and that
         a report in October 2016 warned that the


             "Ministry of Health had announced  that  capacity  to  provide
             health services had exhausted to the level where it could only
             meet 455 of the health needs of the  population  inclusive  of
             IDPs and refugees".


        There are IDP camps; in September 2016, the Kurdish regions foreign
        minister said that without increased resources the region could  no
        longer sustain its  current  level  of  support  to  those  already
        displaced. In paragraph 4.18 of her report Ms Pargeter says:


             It is clear that as a young male who has no family in the IKR,
             [SA] would be very likely to face real difficulties supporting
             himself were he to relocate to the region. He is very unlikely
             to find work or proper accommodation, and although the KRI has
             a social protection network, this remains  undeveloped.  Under
             the existing system, benefit payments are made  to  vulnerable
             individuals including the  disabled,  widows,  and  divorcees.
             Indeed the system is skewered very much towards females rather
             than males. Benefits are also afforded to unemployed graduates
             who have not been able to find work in either  the  public  or
             private sectors, while some of the  most  vulnerable  families
             receive a monthly family allowance. As  a  single  male,  [SA]
             would  not  receive  benefit   payments   from   the   Kurdish
             authorities.


        She goes on to say:


             5.1  [SA] is from the Balak tribe.....


             5.2  There is little information in the  public  domain  about
             this tribe, given that it is not a particularly  important  or
             influential tribe. As a member of this tribe,  [SA}  would  be
             likely to receive hospitality from the tribe were he to go  to
             the area where its members reside. However  this  is  not  the
             same thing as receiving proper long term financial support  or
             assistance. While the tribe may  be  able  to  help  him  with
             getting a job,  given  the  current  economic  crisis  in  the
             region, this is still likely to be extremely  challenging.  To
             the best of my knowledge, therefore, the  help  he  could  get
             from the tribe would not be sufficient  to  sustain  him  long
             term.


             6.1  ...


             6.2  However as far as I am aware, the embassy  could  provide
             [SA] with a laissez passer,  providing  the  can  confirm  his
             nationality  and  personal   details.   ....Once   the   Iraqi
             authorities have retrieved his details, [SA] should be able to
             to obtain a laissez passer that would enable him to travel  to
             Erbil or  Baghdad,  although  given  there  are  currently  no
             international flights going in and out of Erbil, he would need
             to go back via Baghdad. Once in Iraq, [SA] could apply  for  a
             replacement CSID from Kirkuk. The civil status directorate  in
             Kirkuk is functioning normally.


     17. AA (Iraq) states in the headnote that a CSID is generally  required
         to access financial assistance from  the  authorities,  employment,
         education, housing and medical  treatment.  Ms  Pargeter  does  not
         address whether a CSID is necessary in the IKR, her report  dealing
         with the economic infrastructure. She does not state that a CSID is
         required to be able to access what little support there  is  or  to
         access employment. She does not state that a CSID  is  required  in
         order to obtain admission to an IDP camp or  assistance  through  a
         camp. She states that a  replacement  CSID  can  be  obtained  from
         Kirkuk but does not state whether it is necessary to go  to  Kirkuk
         in order to obtain this  document.  AA  (Iraq)  suggests  that  the
         evidence then before the Tribunal  did  not  demonstrate  that  the
         Central Archive in Baghdad was in practice able to provide  a  CSID
         for those in need; but in any event, this does not seem to apply to
         those from Kirkuk. AA (Iraq) refers to a National Status  Court  to
         which an individual can apply for formal  recognition  of  identity
         but states that the operation of the court is unclear. This is  not
         addressed by the Court of Appeal. In [39] of the  Court  of  Appeal
         judgment the Court states


             "... [A CSID] is for practical purposes  necessary  for  those
             without private resources to access food and  basic  services.
             In addition, it is feasible that an individual could acquire a
             passport or a laissez-passer, without possessing or being able
             to obtain a CSID. In such a case, an enquiry would  be  needed
             to establish whether the individual would have other means  of
             support in Iraq, in the absence of which they might be at risk
             of breach of Article 3 rights."


     18. The evidence before me and relied upon  by  SA,  is  Ms  Pargeter's
         report. When writing that report she was aware that Kirkuk  was  an
         area subject to Article 15(c) risk, that SA was a Kurd from  Kirkuk
         without a CSID and with no family links to the IKR. She  was  aware
         there was no direct travel to Erbil  and  that  SA  would  have  to
         travel from Baghdad to the IKR. She does not state that a  CSID  is
         required for internal travel in Iraq. In the light of her knowledge
         of the specific characteristics of SA and  her  statement  that  SA
         would have no difficulty relocating to the IKR, on the evidence the
         parties have put before me I conclude that SA does  not  require  a
         CSID to access employment, rent accommodation, access  health  care
         etc in the IKR.


     19. The issue therefore to be determined is whether it is unduly  harsh
         for SA to relocate.


     20. The consideration of relocation was considered in Januzi [2006] 2AC
         426 and, at [21] Lord Bingham of Carlisle  summarised  the  correct
         position as


             "The decision-maker, taking account of all relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his country of
             origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to expect the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to
             expect him to do so . . . There is, as Simon Brown LJ aptly
             observed in Svazas v Secretary of State for the Home
             Department, [2002] 1WLR 1891 para 55, a spectrum of cases. The
             decision-maker must do his best to decide, on such material as
             is available, where on the spectrum the particular case falls.
             . . . All must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant
             facts."


     21. At [5] of AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 Lord  Carlisle  confirmed  this
         and said


             "...Although specifically directed to a secondary issue in the
             case, these observations are plainly of general application.
             It is not easy to see how the rule could be more simply or
             clearly expressed. It is, or should be, evident that the
             enquiry must be directed to the situation of the particular
             applicant, whose age, gender, experience, health, skills and
             family ties may all be very relevant. There is no warrant for
             excluding, or giving priority to, consideration of the
             applicant's way of life in the place of persecution. There is
             no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to, consideration
             of conditions generally prevailing in the home country. I do
             not underestimate the difficulty of making decisions in some
             cases. But the difficulty lies in applying the test, not in
             expressing it. The humanitarian object of the Refugee
             Convention is to secure a reasonable measure of protection for
             those with a well-founded fear of persecution in their home
             country or some part of it; it is not to procure a general
             levelling-up of living standards around the world, desirable
             though of course that is."


         As Lady Hale said [22]


             "Further, although the test of reasonableness is a stringent
             one - whether it would be "unduly harsh" to expect the
             claimant to return - it is not to be equated with a real risk
             that the claimant would be subjected to inhuman or degrading
             treatment or punishment so serious as to meet the high
             threshold set by article 3 of the European Convention on Human
             Rights. As Lord Bingham points out, this is not what was meant
             by the references to article 3 in Januzi, including what was
             said by my noble and learned friend, Lord Hope of Craighead,
             when he referred to "the most basic of human rights that are
             universally recognised" at para 54. Obviously, if there were a
             real risk of such ill-treatment, return would be precluded by
             article 3 itself as well as being unreasonable in Refugee
             Convention terms. But internal relocation is a different
             question."


     22. It was not suggested by Mr Bradshaw or Ms Aboni that  the  economic
         circumstances in the IKR amounted, for SA, to an Article 3 risk. If
         SA had been able to remain in Kirkuk, he would have  been  expected
         to seek employment, find accommodation  and  generally  generate  a
         livelihood for himself. In assessing  internal  relocation,  taking
         full account of SA's personal characteristics, can he reasonably be
         expected to go to the IKR where those  Article  15(c)  risks  don't
         exist? This assessment has to take into account, not as  a  primary
         comparator but as one element in the assessment, what his situation
         would have been had he remained in Kirkuk, absent the  Article15(c)
         risk. He would still have had to get a job, start a business or  do
         what  he  could  to  generate  a  livelihood.   It  may   be   that
         unemployment is higher in  the  IKR  and  that  there  are  serious
         housing and medical treatment shortages but the  evidence  was  not
         that he would be disqualified from  competing  equally  with  other
         citizens in obtaining such employment or services just as he  would
         if he were able to return to his home area of Kirkuk,  or  that  he
         would be prevented from obtaining such employment or  services  for
         reasons that singled him out because he was  a  Kurd  from  Kirkuk.
         There was no cogent evidence before me to reach a finding  that  SA
         would be  in  some  way  disqualified  from  obtaining  assistance.
         Essentially the evidence is that 'things are grim' in  the  IKR.The
         fact that conditions will be extremely challenging  does  not  mean
         that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to face  them
         in re-establishing himself in a safe place of relocation within his
         country of nationality.


     23. On this basis, I conclude that for SA, on the basis of the evidence
         relied upon by him in this case, that internal  relocation  to  the
         IKR is not unreasonable or unduly harsh.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it


[pic]

                                    Date 12th December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
