
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03389/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 October 2019                    |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     LV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1984 and is a male citizen of Sri  Lanka.  He
    appealed against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  3  April
    2019 refusing his application for international protection. The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 20 May 2019, dismissed  his
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant and his solicitors, MTC & Co, were given  notice  of  the
    hearing at Field House on 3 October 2019 by  first  class  post  on  11
    September 2019. There is nothing on the Tribunal file to indicate  that
    the  notice  of  hearing  failed  to  reach  either  of  the   intended
    recipients. Neither the appellant nor his solicitors have provided  any
    or any satisfactory excuse or explanation for  failing  to  attend  the
    hearing on 3 October 2019. I am satisfied that both the  appellant  and
    the solicitors were served with the notice of  hearing  and  that  they
    have, without explanation or excuse, chosen not to attend  the  initial
    hearing on 3 October 2019. Accordingly, I have proceeded with a hearing
    in the absence of the appellant/his representatives.

 3. There are three grounds of appeal. First, the  appellant  asserts  that
    the judge failed to consider country guidance  and  objective  evidence
    relating to his ability to exit Sri Lanka legally. The judge  concluded
    that would not have been possible for the appellant easily to leave Sri
    Lanka through the main airport without being detected or apprehended by
    the Sri Lankan authorities had he  been  wanted  by  those  authorities
    [46]. The appellant seeks to rely on the country  guidance  of  GJ  and
    others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319  (IAC).
    The Upper Tribunal found that, given the prevalence of bribery, it  may
    be possible to leave the airport even when one is being actively sought
    by the Sri Lankan authorities. However, the  appellant  did  not  claim
    that he had used bribery to leave the airport. Instead, he claimed that
    he his wife had been accompanied by a Buddhist monk whose presence  had
    enabled them to leave without being apprehended. There  is  nothing  in
    the country guidance which contradicts the judge's finding that it  was
    not reasonably likely that the appellant would be  able  to  leave  the
    airport simply because he was accompanied by a Buddhist monk. It was  a
    finding available to the judge on the evidence.

 4. Secondly, the appellant asserts that  the  judge  has  given  too  much
    weight to the answers which he gave at  the  screening  interview.  The
    judge found a number of discrepancies between the evidence given by the
    appellant at the screening interview and elsewhere in the course of the
    application for asylum and appeal. The grounds  [10]  submit  that  the
    judge should have allowed for 'mistakes and  misunderstandings  in  the
    screening interview record.' The ground has no  merit.  The  judge  has
    produced a detailed and thorough decision which has clearly been  based
    upon an assessment of the totality of the evidence. It is not the  case
    that the judge has given excessive weight to the screening interview or
    any other particular item of evidence. The judge was  well  aware  that
    the screening interview is not intended  to  be  'detailed  but  should
    provide a platform  for  the  appellant's  subsequent  evidence.'  That
    statement is not at odds  with  the  law.  The  particular  discrepancy
    referred to by the judge at  [40]  concerns  a  photograph  of  a  work
    colleague wearing LTTE uniform. The judge noted that in  his  screening
    interview the appellant claimed that his interrogators had  'wanted  to
    know if [the colleague] belonged to the LTTE.' As the judge noted,  the
    appellant's other evidence indicated that his interrogators  knew  that
    the colleague was a member of the LTTE so the question would have  been
    pointless. The judge's  analysis  has  exposed  a  discrepancy  in  the
    appellant's evidence which the judge was entitled  to  find  undermined
    the appellant's credibility.

 5. Thirdly,  the  appellant  asserts  that  the  judge  did  not  consider
    Presidential Guidance concerning his  'claimed  vulnerabilities'  as  a
    witness. The appellant claimed to be  suffering  from  depression.  The
    grounds assert that, had the judge had proper regard to the appellant's
    medical condition,  this  'may  have  resulted  in  less  weight  being
    attached to certain discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  account.'  The
    ground is wholly without merit. The judge recorded [53] that there  was
    no diagnosis of PTSD and that the  medical  evidence  showed  that  the
    appellant had  been  suffering  from  a  mild  to  moderate  depressive
    episode. The judge considered the submission  that  the  appellant  had
    been prevented by reason of his mental condition from  claiming  asylum
    earlier [54]. He rejected that submission.  Most  significantly,  there
    was  no  medical  evidence  before  the  judge  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant's memory had been affected by his mental condition such  that
    the discrepancies in his evidence might be explained. Indeed, the judge
    notes [60] that the appellant's symptoms had improved significantly and
    that he did not require ongoing specialist  mental  health  input.  The
    judge did certainly not fall  into  legal  error  by  failing  to  make
    explicit  reference  to  Presidential  Guidance  concerning  vulnerable
    witnesses; his analysis of the appellant's credibility is detailed  and
    even-handed and I find that he has had regard to all relevant evidence,
    including the appellant's mental  health  condition,  in  reaching  his
    findings of fact.

 6. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 3 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

