
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA032692015
                                                                 aa077982015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 May 2016                        |On 9 June 2016                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [j p]
                                    [m p]
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A. Burrett, Counsel instructed by Ozoran Turkan
Solicitors


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rowlands promulgated on 4 March 2016 following a hearing
    at Harmondsworth on 5 February 2016.  He made two written decisions and
    they were in respect of [JP] and his wife.  It was probably unnecessary
    to have made two decisions but he did so and  it  clearly  demonstrates
    that he was looking at each case separately.

 2. The husband was born on [ ] 1982, his wife on [ ] 1996.  She is aged 20
    and  the  immigration  history  is  set  out  in  paragraph  2  of  the
    determination.  He was removed from, or at any rate  left,  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2013 and he and his  wife  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom using a false Italian identity card and it was  at  that  point
    that they claimed asylum.  They are (it appears to be accepted) Muslims
    and Gorani from the Kukes district.  Their claim was that,  as  far  as
    the husband is concerned, he had been terrorised by  a  hoodlum  called
    [S] who had both threatened him and used violence against  him.   As  a
    result of that, he claimed that he had left Albania.

 3. The evidence apparently from Christine Enfield  who  was  a  specialist
    foster carer for Solihull Social Services, who had had the wife in  her
    care, was that:

         "Its fair to say that she constantly demonstrated the  most  severe
         distress I have ever encountered in any young person  in  my  care.
         It was quickly apparent that this was due to  her  separation  from
         the man she considered her husband".

    Eventually funds were made available to buy a phone and she was able to
    contact her family who put her in touch with her husband and they  were
    reunited.  It was said by Ms Enfield that the wife was not mentally ill
    but traumatised at the separation from [JP].

 4. So when the claim was considered  by  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    husband the judge concluded:

         "So far as this Appellant is concerned I do not believe that if his
         claim was to be considered simply in its own right, he  would  have
         been able to establish that he had a genuine claim  for  asylum  or
         humanitarian protection.  I have dealt  in  some  detail  with  his
         wife's claim and her own mental health state and having reached the
         conclusion that I am satisfied she is entitled  to  asylum  on  the
         basis of being the victim of a sexual assault and  that  she  would
         suffer unduly if she were to be returned, then I am satisfied  that
         it is also appropriate for this Appellant to be allowed  to  remain
         with her and his daughter."

 5. By no stretch of the imagination could that  be  a  claim  in  which  a
    Convention reason has been identified and the judge then went on to say
    it was not necessary  either  to  make  any  findings  in  relation  to
    humanitarian protection or in relation to human rights.  It is  plainly
    a decision that is wrong in law and  I  set  it  aside.   It  does  not
    provide any proper reasoning for  the  finding  that  the  husband  has
    established that he is at risk of harm or at risk of persecution for  a
    Convention reason.

 6. As far as  the  wife's  decision  is  concerned,  very  much  the  same
    considerations apply.  The Judge said,

         "I  cannot   ignore   the   overwhelming   evidence   from   health
         professionals that she is suffering a significant amount of  trauma
         from her past experiences".

    I doubt whether that was an adequate gloss on the evidence  bearing  in
    mind what the judge  had  recorded  in  relation  to  the  evidence  of
    Christine Enfield.  What Christine Enfield had said  is  that  she  had
    been traumatised because of her separation from her husband,  not  that
    she was currently traumatised.  Nevertheless,  on  the  basis  of  that
    finding, he was satisfied that her psychiatric condition was pivotal as
    far as the claim was concerned.  In paragraph 42 the judge said:

         "I am satisfied that, were it not for her psychiatric condition, it
         would be reasonable to expect them to return to Albania".

    In those circumstances it seems to me the asylum  claim  was  bound  to
    fail.  The Article 3 claim, which  is  not  otherwise  identified,  was
    allowed in the wife's appeal although it is not properly reasoned out.

 7. I considered whether or not this was a case where in view of  what  the
    findings of fact that the judge had apparently  made,  there  being  no
    counter notice, it was simply a case where the claim should be  re-made
    by me but bearing in mind the paucity of reasons  that  have  been  put
    forward for any of the findings that were made by the judge and bearing
    in mind what Mr Burret on behalf of the applicant says, namely that  he
    was advancing a claim which the judge did not properly address  in  the
    decision, I have come to the conclusion that the correct approach is to
    have the case re-made from scratch with no findings of fact  preserved.
    In those circumstances I direct the decision is re-made in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal made an error on a point of law and I set aside
    the decision.

    The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.  No  findings
    of fact are preserved.

    No anonymity direction is made.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                  5 May 2016

