
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/03646/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |             Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15 November 2017                   |             On 28 November 2017      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     T M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, Counsel, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and his date  of  birth  is  25
    July 1978.  The Respondent made a deportation order against him  on  26
    November 2015 pursuant to Section 32(5) of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.
    The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  claim  for  protection  on  27
    November 2015.

2.   There is a long history.  The Appellant arrived in the UK  in  a  lorry
    on 1 April 2002.  On 2 April 2002, he made a claim  for  asylum.   This
    was refused by the Respondent on 17 May 2002.  His appeal was dismissed
    by the then Adjudicator Mr M B Hussain.  The Appellant met  SS.   Their
    first child was born on 31 March 2007.  There is a second child of  the
    family born on 12 September 2008 and a third on 25 September 2010.  All
    children are British citizens.

3.    The  Appellant's  brother  was  granted  refugee  status  following  a
    successful appeal in July 2001.  On 17  November  2008,  the  Appellant
    submitted further submissions and these were treated as a  fresh  claim
    under paragraph 353, but refused.  The Appellant did not appeal against
    this decision.  He made an  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  17
    February 2009 and was granted indefinite leave to remain based on  long
    residency on 28 May 2010.

4.    The  Appellant  left  his  family  in  2011.   He  was  cautioned  for
    shoplifting on 20 August 2011.  In August  2011,  he  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka to marry a Sri Lankan woman.  They married on 13  September  2011
    in Colombo.  The Appellant returned to the UK on 21 September 2011  and
    was joined here by his wife in February 2013.   On  4  July  2013,  the
    Appellant  was  convicted  of  conspiring  to  dishonestly  make  false
    representations and on 4 September 2013 sentenced  to  imprisonment  of
    fifteen months.  The sentencing judge commented as follows;

         "I have to sentence you both for your part in  a  very  substantial
         fraud.  This involved using specially converted  lorries  to  steal
         large quantities  of  Diesel  which  were  then  siphoned  off  and
         doubtless sold, Diesel being a highly sought after  property  these
         days because of the price.  This was quite  a  sophisticated  fraud
         involving cloned cars and this particular  fraud  appears  to  have
         netted over �100,000 over a period of about six months.


         ...


         I bear in mind what was said by the judge on the last occasion.   I
         have to sentence you for your role in this fraud.  It  was  similar
         to that of the co-defendant.  You  were  caught  red-handed  having
         fraudulently obtained a large amount of petrol as a driver and were
         busy siphoning it off into drums.  However in your case I  bear  in
         mind the basis of plea,  that  you  were  involved  for  a  limited
         period, a more limited period than your co-defendant.  Some of  the
         aggravating features of his case were not present in yours.  It  is
         not said that you committed offences on  bail.   You  do  not  have
         serious  convictions  for  dishonesty,  as  far  as  I  am   aware.
         Nevertheless there has to be a custodial sentence for your part  in
         such a serious and premeditated fraud.


         In your case the sentence is one of fifteen  months'  imprisonment.
         You are not a  British  national.   You  should  be  subject  to  a
         deportation order und current provisions but for the  same  reasons
         that I have just given to your co-defendant I am going  to  make  a
         recommendation.  It is plain to me that your continued presence  in
         this country is not consistent with the public good.  I trust  that
         the Home Office will on this  occasion  perform,  carry  out  their
         duty.


         ..."


5.   The Appellant  responded  to  the  Notice  of  Liability  to  Automatic
    Deportation dated 23 September 2013 by  on  16  December  2013  raising
    asylum and human rights.  The Appellant appealed against  the  decision
    to deport him and the refusal of his  asylum  claim.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed on 13 June 2016 on asylum grounds and allowed on human rights
    grounds.  The Respondent was granted permission  to  appeal  and  at  a
    hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson  on  28  November  2016  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside in relation  to  both
    the asylum and human rights  claim.   Following  a  fresh  hearing  the
    appeal was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Agnew  and
    dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.  Permission  was  granted
    by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer  in  a  decision  of  14
    September 2017.  Thus, the matter came before me.

6.   The Appellant's relationship with his wife broke down.  In April  2015,
    the Appellant was reconciled with his former partner, SS.

The Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal

7.   The Appellant's claim can be summarised.  In 1989  his  brother  joined
    the LTTE.  He was injured and he left the LTTE in  1994,  returning  to
    live with his family.  In the middle of 1998 he was ordered  to  rejoin
    which he did.  He  then  deserted  in  February  1999.   LTTE  fighters
    visited the Appellant's home looking for his brother and  arrested  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant was detained.

8.   In the meantime, the Appellant's brother was found and arrested but  he
    escaped and fled Sri Lanka, arriving in the UK on 11 June 1999.  On  10
    November 1999,  the  Appellant  escaped  from  LTTE  custody.   He  was
    subsequently arrested by the authorities and detained in JOSFH camp  in
    Vavuniya where he was accused of being an  LTTE  member  and  tortured.
    The Appellant's uncle bribed an officer to secure his release.  He  was
    taken to hospital where his wounds were treated. He  then  returned  to
    the camp.  He was released subject to monthly reporting  on  3  October
    2000.   The  Appellant  lived  with  his  parents  in  Vavuniya  whilst
    reporting to JOSFH camp.  The LTTE sent a  letter  to  the  Appellant's
    parents' address demanding that the Appellant return and  stating  that
    if he did not do so he would be shot.  The Appellant went to live  with
    his uncle in a camp which belonged to PLOTE. He continued to report  to
    JOSFH camp.

9.   In February 2001, the Sri Lankan authorities cancelled the  Appellant's
    reporting conditions on the basis that he  continued  to  live  in  the
    PLOTE camp.  The Appellant feared he would be abducted by the LTTE  and
    his father arranged for an agent to take him to a  safe  country.   The
    Appellant's uncle, who was acting  as  surety  for  him,  informed  the
    Appellant's mother that he had told the Sri Lankan authorities that the
    Appellant had escaped from the PLOTE camp and that he must have  joined
    the LTTE.

10.  When the Appellant returned to Sri Lanka in 2011 the  Sri  Lankan  Army
    visited his home looking for him.  They interrogated  his  father.   An
    agent was arranged to send him to the UK.  The Appellant's father, when
    reporting to the police station  in  December  2012,  was  interrogated
    about the Appellant's activities in the UK.  He was shown a  photograph
    of  the  Appellant  participating  in  political  activities.   He  was
    released after two days and continues to report.

11.  The Appellant attended the Mullivaikkal Genocide Remembrance Day  rally
    on 8 May where he was urged to join  the  Transnational  Government  of
    Tamil Eelam (TGTE).  He now works  with  that  organisation,  attending
    meetings and helping them mobilise British  Tamils  towards  the  Tamil
    cause.  On  20  December  2015,  the  Appellant  attended  a  rally  at
    Westminster demanding that the government release all  Tamil  political
    prisoners.   On  24  December  2015,  the  authorities   arrested   the
    Appellant's father from his home and  he  was  interrogated  about  the
    Appellant's political activities in  the  UK.   He  was  shown  several
    photographs  of  the  Appellant  participating   in   anti-Sri   Lankan
    activities in the UK.  His father was detained for four days  and  made
    subject to more onerous reporting.  The Appellant continues to work for
    TGTE.   The  Appellant  suffers  from  depression.   He  is  on   anti-
    depressants.

12.  The appeal was listed on 27 April 2017 before the First-tier  Tribunal.
     My understanding  is  that  this  hearing  was  converted  to  a  case
    management hearing  at  the  request  of  the  parties.   A  number  of
    directions were made including that the Respondent file and  serve  the
    determination relating to the Appellant's brother dating back  to  July
    2001.  As a matter of fact, that direction was not complied  with.   It
    may be that there  have  been  more  adjournments  than  one,  but  the
    position is not entirely clear to me  from  the  documents  before  me.
    What is clear is that the parties  made  a  joint  application  at  the
    hearing  before  Judge  Agnew  for  an  adjournment  because   of   the
    Respondent's failure to serve the Appellant's brother's  determination.
    The judge engaged with that application in the following way;

         "11. At the outset it was noted that previous  directions  made  by
             the Tribunal had not been followed.   In  particular,  it  was
             noted that the file in relation to the  appellant's  brother's
             claim for asylum which included a decision  by  this  Tribunal
             had still not been provided by the respondent.  Mr O'Callaghan
             submitted that the Tribunal needed to know what  the  previous
             findings of fact were in relation to the  appellant's  brother
             and he referred to the case of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702.
             He insisted  that  it  was  necessary  to  have  the  previous
             Tribunal decision and then a statement could be taken from the
             appellant's brother on the findings of facts.  I was  informed
             by Mr Briant that the file could be obtained,  albeit  it  had
             not been obtained despite requests for it to date.


         12.   I  took  a  short  break  to  consider  the  request  for  an
             adjournment whilst noting that on first  consideration  I  was
             inclined, bearing in mind  the  overriding  objective  of  the
             Tribunal Procedure Rules, to refuse the request.


         13.  In relation to the request to adjourn because it was essential
             in  Mr  O'Callaghan's  submissions,  bearing   in   mind   the
             Devaseelan point, that I see the decision of the  Tribunal  in
             the appellant's brother's case,  I  was  not  referred  by  Mr
             O'Callaghan to other cases which have  suggested  the  limited
             applicability of Devaseelan to other parties' cases,  in  this
             case  the  appellant's  brother  rather  than  the   appellant
             himself.  I am aware, for example, of AA (Somalia) v SSHD  and
             AH (Iran) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 in which  the  Court  of
             Appeal said that the Devaseelan guidelines extended  to  cases
             where the earlier  decision  involved  different  parties  and
             where there was a 'material overlap of evidence' in the  sense
             of matters arising out of the same factual  matrix.   In  that
             case it was said that that there must be a material overlap of
             evidence,  rather  than  just  an  overlap;  that  the  second
             Tribunal should have regard to the factual conclusions of  the
             first Tribunal; but that the  second  Tribunal  still  had  to
             evaluate the evidence as  it  would  in  any  other  case  and
             independently decide the second case on its own merits.


         14.  In this case it did not appear to  me  there  was  a  material
             overlap in evidence.  There is some  overlap  regarding  their
             arrests as there are also credibility  issues  raised  by  the
             appellant's evidence in this regard and noted  by  Adjudicator
             Hussain in his decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
             heard on 22 October 2002.  I consider it has been  established
             that the appellant's brother was found credible  in  at  least
             some aspects of his claim, given that he was  granted  asylum.
             I  noted  from  the  copy  of  representations  made  by   the
             appellant's former legal representatives on 17  November  2008
             in the respondent's bundle that an Adjudicator had  found  the
             appellant's  brother  had  been  tortured  on  more  than  one
             occasion and he had a well-founded fear of persecution because
             of scars he had on his body and the amputation  of  his  lower
             left leg.  I drew the attention of the representatives to this
             extract of the Adjudicator's decision.


         15.  Nevertheless, that the appellant's brother was found  credible
             does not establish that what is claimed went on to happen with
             the appellant was true.  It is at most  a  starting  point  to
             consider the evidence before me.  I note below why  I  do  not
             consider the absence of the decision of a previous Adjudicator
             in relation to the appellant's brother's appeal precluded  his
             brother himself giving  written  and  oral  evidence  in  this
             appeal.


         16.  Both parties have failed to comply  with  directions  in  this
             appeal.  For example, I note the matter was adjourned  at  the
             request of both  parties  on  27  April  2017  and  both  were
             directed on 12 May, in order to assist the Tribunal,  to  file
             and serve new evidence bundles containing all of the  material
             upon which they intended  to  rely  by  22  June  2017.   This
             direction was no doubt given because of the  large  amount  of
             documentary evidence submitted over a period of  time  and  to
             ensure all that was relevant was contained in one  bundle  for
             each party.  As this direction was not complied with by either
             party considerable time had to be spent by me both before  the
             hearing and at its commencement with the  representatives,  in
             particular Mr O'Callaghan given the bulk of the documents were
             those lodged on behalf of the appellant, going through all the
             documents to ascertain  what  was  intended  should  still  be
             relied upon.


         17.  On 12 May separate directions were made adjourning the  matter
             to a date after 29 June.  The respondent was directed to  make
             enquiries regarding the letter from a lawyer in Sri Lanka,  to
             lodge the result of such enquiries, a decision relating to the
             appellant's brother and any other documents relating  to  that
             case and the OASys report.  Regarding this I should note  that
             Mr Briant submitted at the outset  of  the  hearing  that  the
             Court  were  no  long  willing  to  disclose  reports  to  the
             respondent, and the resources of the offices in Sri Lanka  had
             been reduced so that entry clearance officers were  no  longer
             able to provide  a  facility  of  verification  of  documents.
             Regarding  the  direction  that  the  respondent  lodged   the
             determination relating to the appellant's brother's  case,  Mr
             Briant was unable to ascertain if the Home Office had received
             the file from storage or not.  He said he either  expected  to
             receive it or, if not, he could 'read the Riot  Act'  and  say
             the file was needed.


         18.  Directions for the appellant's representatives on 12 May  were
             to lodge photographs of his sur place activities upon which he
             intended to rely, a statement from  the  appellant's  brother,
             and the decision of the Tribunal in relation to his  brother's
             appeal and related evidence including details of his grant  of
             asylum status.  I take  it  from  this  that  the  appellant's
             representatives were also directed by the Judge to attempt  to
             obtain the papers relating to the appellant's brother's  claim
             for asylum and appeal.  The directions have not been  complied
             with by the appellant's legal representatives.  Mr O'Callaghan
             appeared to submit that this was because they were waiting for
             the respondent to provide the appellant's brother's  file  and
             decision of the Tribunal but  that  is  not  how  I  read  the
             Directions of 12 May.


         19.  I considered the adjournment request made bearing in mind  the
             Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, in particular rule 2.  This matter
             was first listed for a full hearing on 27  April  and  several
             directions made to the parties with which they have failed  to
             comply.  Whilst I was reassured that the  papers  relating  to
             the appellant's brother's appeal would be shortly  forthcoming
             some way or another, a considerable period has  elapsed  since
             the appellant's brother was  granted  asylum  and  I  was  not
             confident of the most recent assurances that his papers  could
             be obtained or that this justified a further adjournment.


         20.  I noted that the papers had not been produced  before,  either
             when the appellant had his first appeal or apparently when  it
             might have been expected they would in July 2015,  given  that
             the  fresh  representations  centred  around  the  appellant's
             brother's case.  Both parties had had ample  time  to  produce
             the papers yet they had still not  been  produced  despite  it
             must  having  been  obvious  to  at  least   the   appellant's
             representatives from  the  outset  that  it  could  have  been
             helpful to the appellant to have sight of  them.   I  was  not
             provided with evidence of the efforts they had made to  obtain
             them since instructed by the appellant in his asylum appeal.


         21.  There was no claim that the appellant had been  involved  with
             any activities for the LTTE or  otherwise  with  his  brother.
             The evidence related to what happened to the  appellant  after
             his brother had escaped.  On the information  and  evidence  I
             had before me I  did  not  consider  the  appellant  would  be
             deprived of a fair hearing  if  the  adjournment  request  was
             refused.  I decided to  refuse  the  adjournment  request  for
             these reasons.


         22.   Regarding  the  evidence  before  me,  I  went  through   the
             voluminous documentary evidence with Mr O'Callaghan to  ensure
             I had all before me on which the appellant wished to rely.   I
             also had the respondent's bundle.


         23.  A contemporaneous typed record of proceedings was made by  me.
             I heard evidence from the appellant and his wife using a Tamil
             interpreter whom they confirmed they understood.  I  refer  to
             the evidence and submissions as relevant below.  I reserved my
             decision."

13.  The judge again referred to the brother later in the decision;

         "76. The appellant relies on the fact that his brother was  granted
             refugee status in 2001.  The background regarding  this  claim
             has not been provided as he did not provide a statement.  This
             was justified by Mr O'Callaghan on the basis  that  they  were
             awaiting a copy of the decision of the Tribunal in relation to
             the appellant's brother's appeal before preparing a  statement
             for him.  However, I do not see why this justifies him  either
             not providing a statement to describe what happened to him and
             his knowledge of the appellant's  and  other  family  members'
             problems, as well as appearing as a witness.  The decision was
             made in 2001.  From that date and the arrival of the appellant
             in 2002 when he first claimed asylum, based on  his  brother's
             activities which caused  in  turn,  it  is  claimed,  his  own
             detention by the LTTE, there  has  been  ample  time  for  the
             appellant's  brother   to   request   from   his   own   legal
             representatives, if he did not keep a copy himself, a copy  of
             the decision of the Tribunal and other papers relating to  his
             claim.  It was noted in the skeleton argument  that  when  the
             appellant made a fresh asylum claim on  17  November  2008  he
             relied, in part, upon the  grant  of  refugee  status  to  his
             brother.  I  have  noted  above  that  it  is  quoted  in  the
             representations made.  So that whilst the papers may no longer
             be available from the  Tribunal  and  the  appellant's  former
             legal representatives  now,  they  could  have  been  obtained
             previously, when he made his first claim for asylum or  since.
             There has been ample time to obtain them.


         77.  As I noted above I do not consider the absence of the decision
             of a previous  Adjudicator  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
             brother's appeal precluded his brother himself giving  written
             and oral evidence in this appeal.  Nor do I do find  that  the
             lack of material in relation to the  brother's  claim  can  be
             laid at the feet of the respondent.  I do not  agree  with  Mr
             O'Callaghan's submission that because the respondent  did  not
             produce the decision for  the  hearing  of  this  appeal,  the
             credibility must be taken at  its  highest  and  this  is  the
             danger of the  respondent  not  abiding  by  directions.   The
             appellant bears the burden, albeit low,  on  establishing  the
             credibility of his claims and as I  have  noted,  he  has  had
             ample opportunity from 2002 to obtain this  document  relating
             to his brother's case as well as  produce  his  brother  as  a
             witness for his own appeal."


14.  The Appellant relied on expert evidence from three witnesses; Dr  Saleh
    Dhumad (a consultant  psychiatrist),  Dr  Andres  Izquierdo-Martin  (in
    respect of scarring) and Dr Chris Smith (his evidence  related  to  the
    country situation in Sri Lanka).  In respect of  the  medical  evidence
    the judge made findings at paragraphs 25 to 46:

         "25. I must assess whether I find the appellant's claims  regarding
             his current reasons for fearing to return to Sri Lanka  to  be
             well-founded.   The  appellant's  account  and  the  fears  he
             expresses must be assessed in the context  of  the  background
             material, case law and other evidence before  me.   The  whole
             evidence must be looked at in the round bearing  in  mind  the
             low standard of proof.  I consider  it  appropriate  to  begin
             with consideration of the psychiatric  evidence  produced  for
             the appellant.  I say this for 2  reasons.   Firstly,  because
             the conclusions of the medical expert in asylum  cases  should
             be borne in mind when considering all the evidence.  Secondly,
             the  appellant's  reasons  for  the  various   inconsistencies
             highlighted in  the  decision  of  the  Adjudicator,  Mr  M  B
             Hussain, on 22 October 2002 were essentially that  he  claimed
             he became confused because of his mental health.  Despite this
             I should note that for this appeal the appellant has explained
             at length and is specific regarding various matters  where  he
             has previously been found to be inconsistent.


         26.  I have 3 reports from Dr Saleh Dhumad, who  works  as  a  full
             time substantive consultant psychiatrist in  central  &  North
             West London Foundation NHS Trust, according  to  his  CV.   In
             this he states he has assessed more than 400 individuals  with
             PTSD from Iraq,  Syria  and  Sri  Lanka  and  provided  expert
             opinion and oral evidence to Tribunals.  He does not cite  any
             cases in which he  was  expert  or  any  adverse  or  positive
             comments made by the Tribunal regarding his role as an  expert
             in such cases.  I cannot  see  that  Dr  Dhumad  has  had  any
             specific post graduate training or obtained qualifications  in
             the diagnosis or treatment of PTSD since qualification in Iraq
             in 1994 albeit he must, as a psychiatrist, have experience  in
             this condition and he states that he has a special interest in
             it.  I note Dr Dhumad has received Medico-legal  training  and
             that his lists of 'Specialities' amount to some 15 areas.


         27.  The first report of Dr Dhumad can be found in Bundle 'A', item
             6, pages 46 to 60 followed by a CV and Appendices.  Of the  11
             questions  posed  to  Dr  Dhumad  by  the  appellant's   legal
             representatives,  none  asked  him  to  comment  on  how   the
             appellant's  current  mental  state  may  have  affected   the
             appellant's ability to recall events and provide contradictory
             evidence I his previous claim for asylum in 2002.   Dr  Dhumad
             sets out his 'Interview Method' at section 5 but he  does  not
             state how long he spent with the appellant.


         28.  The appellant claimed to  Dr  Dhumad  that  he  had  been  ill
             treated by the LTTE, beaten with wooden  rods  and  forced  to
             clean  the  camps.   During  detention  by  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities he  was  tortured,  kicked  with  military  boots,
             burned with a coil heater used to boil water and beaten with a
             cricket wicket pole.  They also used  water  torture,  pouring
             water on his face until he  felt  suffocated.   The  appellant
             reported that his mental health deteriorated after torture  in
             2000, feeling  scared  and  worried,  lack  of  sleep  due  to
             nightmares.  He said he felt safe in the UK and  his  symptoms
             gradually settled.  He told Dr Dhumad that he did not feel  he
             needed treatment.  The appellant also said, however, that  his
             mental health had deteriorated over the past  6  months  after
             the deportation order was served on him.  He felt low in  mood
             and was not sleeping well due to nightmares.   He  is  worried
             about  the  separation  from  his  partner  and  children  and
             frightened he might be arrested and tortured by the Sri Lankan
             authorities.  Dr Dhumad notes  that  the  appellant's  general
             practitioner 'started him on  antidepressant  medication'  but
             does not state when this was prescribed.  He does  not  appear
             to have seen the appellant's GP notes.  The appellant told  Dr
             Dhumad he was thinking of ending his life  and  he  could  not
             live without his partner  and  children.   I  note  Dr  Dhumad
             states at  paragraph  16.4  that  'There  is  no  evidence  of
             delusions  (false   unshakeable   beliefs).    He   has   been
             experiencing PTSD  symptoms  nightmares,  but  no  flashbacks,
             avoidance, or hyper vigilance.  His  concentration  was  poor;
             this is mainly due to anxiety and depression.   There  was  no
             evidence of cognitive impairment'.  Dr Dhumad noted  that  the
             appellant was willing to engage in therapy.


         29.  At paragraph 17 b) Dr Dhumad states that whilst the  appellant
             suffers from Post-traumatic symptoms such as  nightmares,  his
             symptoms do not meet the criteria for  Post  Traumatic  Stress
             Disorder.  The diagnosis is of 'Moderate  Depressive  Episode,
             with psychotic symptoms - this is explained as  the  appellant
             'feeling low in mood, he feels lethargic; suicidal;  hopeless;
             unable to sleep with poor appetite and  concentration;  he  is
             hearing voices' (a).  Also, it is the  opinion  of  Dr  Dhumad
             that the appellant is suffering from 'an adjustment  disorder'
             (c).  The current risk of suicide was assessed by Dr Dhumad to
             be  moderate.   The  main  risk  factors  are  depression  and
             hopelessness.  His  main  concerns  are  separation  from  his
             family and fear  of  deportation.   Dr  Dhumad  expresses  the
             opinion that if  the  appellant  were  deported  his  risk  of
             suicide would reach a much higher level and much damage caused
             to his mental state by being separated from  his  family.   Dr
             Dhumad noted the recommended  treatment  for  the  appellant's
             condition was antidepressants  and  trauma  focused  Cognitive
             Behavioural  Therapy.   He  noted  he  had   recommended   the
             appellant  sees  his  GP  and  asks   for   a   referral   for
             psychological therapy.


         30.  Although according to the questions he reported  were  put  to
             him by the appellant's legal representatives  a  question  was
             not raised about previous evidence given by the appellant,  Dr
             Dhumad did give  his  opinion  on  this.   He  said  that  the
             appellant was fit to  attend  a  hearing  now  and  give  oral
             evidence although  because  his  concentration  was  poor  and
             likely to worsen if cross-examined about traumatic events.  He
             recommended that the appellant was not questioned  about  past
             traumatic events.  Dr Dhumad  then  went  on  to  report,  'As
             regards the difficulties he faced in providing a coherent  and
             consistent account at the appeal  hearing  before  Judge  M  B
             Hussain in October 2002, I would like to  point  out  that  he
             found it difficult to give information to me clearly, even  in
             the  relatively  relaxed  and  unthreatening  setting  of   my
             consulting rooms.  Therefore, in my  opinion,  he  would  have
             found it difficult to give a  clear  account  of  himself  and
             answer questions in  the  court  setting,  as  he  might  have
             experienced  such  a  setting   as   threatening,   stressful,
             adversarial and fear provoking'.


         31.  Later on in noting that he has considered the possibility that
             the appellant may  be  feigning  or  exaggerating  his  mental
             illness, Dr Dhumad states that 'It is my clinical opinion that
             his clinical presentation is consistent with  a  diagnoses  of
             depression and adjustment Disorder'.


         32.  The Addendum report of Dr Dhumad is dated 23 April 2017 so  is
             just under a year from the previous report (item 1, bundle C).
              Dr Dhumad saw the appellant on this date.  At this point  the
             appellant  told  Dr  Dhumad  that  he  remains   anxious   and
             depressed.  He feels lethargic.  Not sleeping or eating  well.
             He has not been out alone.  His partner  accompanies  him  all
             the time.  He remains on anti-medication Sertraline 50mg'  and
             has not been referred for psychological therapies as yet'.


         33.  The appellant told Dr Dhumad that  he  had  frequent  suicidal
             thoughts, had not acted on them, but would  if  he  were  sent
             back to Sri Lanka.  The opinion  of  Dr  Dhumad  is  that  the
             appellant  'remains  moderately  depressed  and  continues  to
             suffer from PTSD symptoms due to the incident  of  torture  in
             Sri Lanka'.  Dr Dhumad had still not seen  the  notes  of  the
             appellant's GP.  He makes no reference to asking the appellant
             if he asked to  be  referred  for  psychological  therapy,  as
             recommended by him almost a year previously.  Rather he simply
             states  that  the  medication  should  be  increased  and  the
             appellant 'referred urgently for psychological therapy'.


         34.  I am unclear why a further report was considered necessary but
             Dr Dhumad saw the appellant again on 6 August 2017.  There  is
             no reference to any instructions or  questions  posed  by  the
             representatives of the appellant.  Dr Dhumad reports that  the
             appellant stated his mental health had deteriorated  since  he
             saw  him  in  April.   He  is  more  anxious  and   depressed.
             Basically, the symptoms are repeated including the position of
             the appellant that he would commit suicide if returned to  Sri
             Lanka.  Dr Dhumad repeated  his  opinion  that  the  appellant
             remains moderately depressed and continues to suffer from PTSD
             symptoms which he attributes to 'the incident  of  torture  in
             Sri Lanka'.  His conclusions, he reports, are overall  similar
             to the ones he arrived at in his previous reports.  Dr  Dhumad
             makes no mention of psychological  therapy  recommendation  in
             this report despite the previous recommendation in  the  first
             report of May 2016, and the  urgent  recommendation  in  April
             2017.


         35.  In submissions, Mr Briant  commented  that  the  appellant  is
             likely to be suffering from anxiety at the prospect  of  being
             returned to Sri Lanka after such a long time in the UK as well
             as being potentially separated from his family.   However,  he
             submitted this as a result of his own criminal  activities  in
             the UK and not because of a fear to his life in Sri Lanka.


         36.   Mr  O'Callaghan  concentrated  more  on  the  scars  on   the
             appellant's body which he submitted the  evidence  established
             was a result of torture.  He submitted in  that  regard  there
             was a simple point.  If the appellant had not  been  tortured,
             why did he have scars.  If he had, it is not  surprising  that
             the appellant has  got  PTSD.   He  noted  that  part  of  the
             difficulties the appellant may have  had  in  giving  evidence
             flowed from untreated PTSD.


         37.  In his skeleton argument Mr O'Callaghan makes brief  reference
             to the reports of Dr Dhumad of 22 May 2016 and 23  April  2017
             which, he writes, confirms that  the  appellant  is  suffering
             from PTSD and Moderate Depressive Episode as  well  as  taking
             antidepressant medications (paragraphs 27 to 30).   I  do  not
             agree with this argument based on what Dr Dhumad has stated in
             his reports.  He has not made a  diagnosis  of  PTSD  for  the
             appellant.  Dr Dhumad concluded in his first report  that  the
             appellant suffered  from  Post-traumatic  'symptoms'  such  as
             nightmares, but that his symptoms did not  meet  the  criteria
             for PTSD.  This conclusion did not change over the  period  Dr
             Dhumad provided his  reports.   He  provides  a  diagnosis  of
             depression and 'adjustment disorder'.  There was  no  evidence
             before me that the appellant has ever requested a referral for
             psychological therapy either urgent or otherwise.


         38.   Mr  O'Callaghan  referred  me  to  paragraph  339K   of   the
             Immigration Rules as quoted at paragraph 48  of  his  skeleton
             argument.  This provides that 'The  fact  that  a  person  has
             already been subject to persecution or serious harm  ...  will
             be regarded as a serious  indication  of  the  person's  well-
             founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering  serious
             harm, unless there are good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
             persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be  repeated'.   He
             submitted that the medical evidence established the  appellant
             had been tortured.  Mr Briant submitted that the  scars  could
             have had any number of causes.  He noted that none were on the
             appellant's back, an area where scars are  commonly  found  in
             those seeking asylum from  Sri  Lanka  and  claiming  torture.
             Also the areas of scars were on areas often uncovered in  warm
             weather, that is, on the appellant's legs  and  arms,  so  may
             have been caused otherwise than by deliberate torture.


         39.  I have a medical report of Dr Andres Izquierdo-Martin at pages
             26 to 45 of Bundle A.  I note that at the outset of his report
             whilst Dr Izquierdo-Martin states  he  has  become  proficient
             over the years in recognising and considering the causation of
             scars, 'there is no way scientifically one  could  confidently
             establish how an injury occurred to cause a scar'.  Much later
             in the report Dr Izquierdo-Martin notes that  determining  the
             age of scars by  just  visual  inspection  is  not  a  precise
             science and often it is just possible to say that the injuries
             are mature or immature, enough  to  give  a  very  approximate
             range of time when the injuries could have  been  caused.   He
             notes  that  the  appellant's  cars  are  matures   which   is
             consistent with injuries that are more than  6  to  12  months
             old.  Dr Izeuierdo-Martin examined  the  appellant  on  5  May
             2016.


         40.  In his report, Dr Izquierdo-Martin concluded that scars 1,  2,
             4, 5 and 6 (1 and 2 on the arms, 4, 5 and 6 of the  lower  leg
             going down to just above the foot) were highly consistent with
             the events described by the appellant of being unwillingly and
             intentionally burned.  The rest of the scars on the legs  were
             less specific and the appellant was not sure which  ones  were
             caused by childhood injuries or by beatings and kickings.   It
             was possible that all  of  them  could  have  been  caused  by
             accidental injuries although the significant number  of  scars
             was in a number possibly greater than  would  be  expected  in
             ordinary life.


         41.  I note  that  in  the  appellant's  first  substantive  asylum
             interview on 19 April 2002 the appellant showed scars  to  the
             interviewing officer.  He said he had  burn  injuries  on  his
             arms and a scar (question 30).  He also  had  a  scar  on  his
             right leg by his foot.  The appellant is noted to  have  shown
             the interviewing officer a scar, approximately measuring 4  to
             5 centimetres wide and 5 cm in length by  his  foot.   He  was
             asked if he had any other injuries and said 'No other  visible
             scars'.  He was asked how he sustained the scar  on  his  foot
             and said it was caused by an electric heater, 'the coil type',
             (question 33).  He said the injury to his foot was caused  one
             month after his arrest by the army.


         42.  The amount of scars the appellant had  when  examined  by  the
             doctor appears to have increased significantly by the time  Dr
             Izquierdo-Martin examined the appellant.  From a reference  to
             one scar on his foot caused by burning in  2002,  now  he  has
             numerous scars on his lower legs and told Dr  Izquierdo-Martin
             that the various scars on both legs (4,  5  and  6)  were  all
             caused by burning by a hot coil element in 2000.


         43.  The appellant was not asked why he appeared  to  have  by  the
             examination in 2016 far more scars than  he  had  claimed  and
             shown to the interviewing officer in 2002.   The  interviewing
             officer is not medically trained and cannot be  expected,  nor
             should they, to note down every scar shown to them or  examine
             them in detail, but having acknowledged both these  things,  I
             still consider it relevant to note that the  appellant  seemed
             clear in the interview as to the specific scarring he bore  as
             a result of his injuries in 2002 (on his arms and one  on  his
             right leg near his foot) yet there seemed  significantly  more
             by 2016, most of which he claims were from deliberate burning.


         44.  I accept that these scars as described are  reasonably  likely
             to have been caused by the application of  a  hot  instrument.
             However,  Dr   Izquierdo-Martin   did   note   that   'it   is
             scientifically  impossible  to  differentiate  self-infliction
             injuries by proxy (SIBP) from injuries caused by torture'.  He
             went on to say that there were not presenting  facts  to  make
             SIBP more than another possibility but did  not  explain  what
             such facts might be.


         45.  There is information contained within  case  guidance  on  Sri
             Lanka that certain persons will inflict injuries to themselves
             or, for example, enlist the help of family members to do so in
             order to assist in their asylum claims, the most  recent  case
             guidance being KV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 119.   It
             cannot be wholly ignored that the appellant  appears  to  have
             incurred a number of scars since he arrived  in  the  UK,  and
             that could have been inflicted by himself and/or possibly with
             the assistance of another with  his  consent  to  improve  his
             claim for asylum.  I bear  in  mind  that  the  appellant  was
             examined by a medical expert some 14 years after he arrived in
             the UK as well as his first interview in 2002 when he  claimed
             to have less scars than have now been identified by a  medical
             expert.  It is not possible to  say  when  the  injuries  were
             inflicted other than it is unlikely that they  were  inflicted
             in the last 6 to 12 months.  I note  that  other  explanations
             for the scarring cannot be excluded because the submissions of
             Mr O'Callaghan appeared  to  be  that  as  the  appellant  has
             several scars, not caused accidentally, they  must  have  been
             caused by torture in the manner and at the  time  he  claimed.
             My point is that this is not always so.  Not  only  could  the
             injuries have been inflicted deliberately in the UK since  the
             appellant's arrival in 2002 but also, even if he had them  all
             on his arrival, the appellant could have been the victim of an
             attack by persons in Sri Lanka or detained and tortured by the
             authorities under other circumstances than those he claimed.


         46.  Having taken full cognisance of the  medical  evidence  albeit
             with some reservations which I have included above, I turn now
             to consider what I regard as a crucial issue  with  regard  to
             the appellant's claim that he arrived in the  UK  fearing  for
             his life and that in 2017 he continues to have that fear."


15.  The judge directed herself in respect of Devaseelan in relation to  the
    2002 decision.  The then Adjudicator found the Appellant to be  lacking
    in credibility and rejected his evidence.  The judge found that it  was
    damaging to the Appellant's credibility that, despite  claiming  asylum
    in 2002 and 2008, once he had obtained leave to remain he  returned  to
    Sri Lanka in August 2011, having  obtained  a  passport  from  the  Sri
    Lankan Embassy in London.

16.  The judge considered the Appellant's own  evidence  that  he  was  been
    questioned and he did not experience any problems at the airport on his
    arrival in Sri Lanka in 2011.  Despite the claim that  the  authorities
    were looking for him, he could travel  from  Vavuniya  to  Colombo  and
    leave from the airport using the same ticket that he had  purchased  to
    enter Sri Lanka.

17.  The judge found that the evidence that the Appellant  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka believing the situation to have improved to the  extent  that  he
    felt safe, lacking in credibility considering his  claim  that  he  had
    been detained by the LTTE and government authorities and  tortured  and
    that he had been involved in political activity since  his  arrival  in
    the UK in 2002.  The  judge  had  regard  to  the  country  information
    relating to 2011, regarding returned asylum seekers with  scarring  who
    had been engaged in political activities  or  suspected  of  supporting
    LTTE.  The judge found that none of  the  background  country  evidence
    provided by the Appellant, including Dr Smith's  evidence,  established
    the Appellant, if his circumstances were as he claimed in  2011,  could
    have considered the country situation improved to the  extent  that  he
    would be able to safely return to Sri Lanka.

18.  The judge concluded in respect of  Dr  Smith's  evidence  that  he  had
    failed to address the crucial issue of how the Appellant could consider
    that she could safely return  to  Sri  Lanka  in  2011  if  his  claims
    regarding earlier events were true.  Dr Smith's opinion  was  that  the
    Sri Lankan authorities continued to be adversely  interested  in  those
    suspected of past LTTE connections and that LTTE suspects  continue  to
    be detained and ill-treated and many cases were documented between 2009
    and 2014.

19.  The judge also considered that  the  Appellant  claimed  to  have  been
    involved in Tamil groups in the UK at this time.  The  judge  concluded
    at paragraph 67 as follows:

         "67. Bearing in mind the Appellant's claims  regarding  events  and
             ill treatment he received before leaving  Sri  Lanka  and  his
             claimed continued interest and involvement in  Tamil  politics
             after his arrival in the UK, I find the appellant returning to
             Sri Lanka in 2011 in light of the background information as to
             the political climate at  the  time  seriously  and  crucially
             damaging to his claims of what had occurred before he left  or
             that he had any fear of the authorities in Sri Lanka  when  he
             left."


20.  The judge considered the evidence of the Appellant about what  happened
    once he returned to Sri Lanka and concluded, at paragraph 71,  that  he
    had  given  two  very  different  scenarios.    Mr   O'Callaghan,   who
    represented the Appellant before Judge Agnew, in submissions  accounted
    for  the  inconsistencies  on  the  basis  that   the   Appellant   has
    posttraumatic stress disorder.  However, the judge found  at  paragraph
    72 as follows:

         "72. Whilst bearing in mind that this was some time ago,  and  that
             the appellant has been diagnosed with  depression,  some  PTSD
             symptoms (although not from the condition of PTSD itself)  and
             an 'adjustment disorder', I decline to accept that he would be
             inconsistent with the sequence of events  at  such  a  crucial
             time."


21.  The judge found that the Appellant had  given  an  account  lacking  in
    credibility in respect of what had happened to him  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka in 2011.  The judge considered that there were inconsistencies in
    respect of the timing of the marriage and the circumstances generally.

22.  The judge  considered  a  letter  from  an  attorney-at-law  which  the
    Appellant sought to rely on  to  support  his  claim.   The  attorney's
    asserted that he was contacted by the Appellant's mother and  asked  to
    make representations to secure the release of her husband  from  police
    custody.  The judge did not accept this document as being reliable  for
    reasons that she gave at paragraphs 78 and 79.

23.  The judge considered sur place  activities  at  paragraphs  80  to  88,
    considering evidence that  he  was  involved  in  political  activities
    against the government in support of Tamils.  The judge considered that
    the Appellant did not  refer  to  having  been  engaged  in  sur  place
    activities at the hearing in 2002 or when he made fresh submissions  in
    2008.  In addition, there was no reference to sur place  activities  in
    the submissions made by the Appellant's legal representatives  in  2013
    in response to the Respondent's intention to deport the Appellant.

24.  The judge noted at paragraph 81  that  the  first  time  the  Appellant
    raised  sur  place  activities  was  in  a  letter   from   his   legal
    representative on 3 July  2015,  in  which  it  is  asserted  that  the
    Appellant  "should  have  a  full  asylum  interview  focusing  on  his
    activities in the UK amongst  the  Sri  Lankan  Tamil  Diaspora".   The
    Appellant was interviewed on 10 September 2015 and the  judge  recorded
    what the Appellant said in respect of sur place activities, namely that
    since 2002 he had taken part  every  year  in  Heroes  Day  remembrance
    activities.

25.  The Appellant's evidence was that during  2009  when  the  Mullivaikkal
    incidents were taking place he took part in demonstrations every day at
    Parliament Square and continued to do so annually.  The judge concluded
    that such involvement since 2002 as the Appellant now  claims  did  not
    sit well with the Appellant claim to have anticipated  no  problems  in
    returning to Sri Lanka in 2011.

26.  The judge at paragraph 84 considered a letter from the TGTE of 10  June
    2016 and the judge stated as follows:

         "84. I have before me a letter from  'Transnational  Government  of
             Tamil Eelam' dated 10 June  2016.   Although  provided  as  an
             original and the signature  of  the  writer  (Mr  Sockalingham
             Yogalingam) is in pen, the document is a photocopy.  That  is,
             the letter heading has been copied and thereafter  the  typing
             inserted.   The  first  page  relates  to  the  TGTE  and  its
             activities in general and it is only on  page  2  that  it  is
             written that  the  appellant  joined  the  organisation  as  a
             volunteer.  It is not stated when he joined.   It  is  written
             that the appellant volunteered in organising  'several  public
             events in the UK' and that he not only attends  many  meetings
             but also takes an active role in organising events and  public
             demonstrations' but no details are provided  of  any  specific
             events he has organised or  demonstrations  attended.   It  is
             unfortunate that in the penultimate sentence reference is made
             to  the  appellant  continuing  'to  express   her   political
             aspiration publicly'.  Mr  Yogalingam  did  not  appear  as  a
             witness to be asked details  of  the  appellant's  activities.
             This  is  in  the  main  a  standard  letter,  printed  on   a
             photocopied letter headed paper, with no specific  details  of
             the appellant's activities for the organisation  and  when  he
             performed them.  I attach no weight to it as supportive of the
             appellant's claims that he is extensively involved and  active
             in this group.


         85.  In his submissions Mr Briant noted that the evidence  of  such
             activities as the appellant had been involved in the  UK  were
             limited to meetings involving large numbers of people.   There
             was a photograph showing him at a hunger strike with others in
             London and another of a tree planting  in  Wales.   Mr  Briant
             submitted that these hardly showed the appellant  was  in  the
             main public eye involved in extensive activities in support of
             a Tamil homeland and likely to disturb the Sri  Lankan  public
             authorities.  The appellant  had  admitted  he  had  given  no
             speeches so it was unlikely his activities had come  to  their
             attention.  He noted that  despite  directions  given  to  the
             appellant's representatives that photographs be lodged of  the
             appellant's activities these had not been complied with."

27.  The judge considered photographic evidence and made  conclusions  about
    this at paragraph 86.  The judge concluded  in  respect  of  sur  place
    activities the following:

         "87. I decline to find on the very limited evidence  provided  that
             the appellant has established he has had extensive involvement
             with the diaspora Tamil organisations in the UK.   He  can  no
             way be perceived as a prolific  activist.   Having  considered
             the risk factors as set out in GJ and Others (post-civil  war:
             returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 I find the appellant
             has failed to establish with the low burden of  proof  resting
             with him that what extremely limited activities he has engaged
             in whilst living in the UK  has  come  or  will  come  to  the
             adverse attention of the authorities or that he falls  into  a
             category of persons at real risk  of  persecution  or  serious
             harm on return to Sri Lanka.


         88.  Applying the burden and  standard  of  proof  as  set  out  in
             paragraph 24 above in considering the evidence in the round  I
             do not find the discrepancies and implausibilities which go to
             the  crux  of  the  appellant's  claim  have  been   addressed
             satisfactorily in the appellant's  statement,  oral  evidence,
             submissions or with  the  assistance  of  the  expert  reports
             lodged.  I have been led to conclude,  having  considered  all
             the evidence before me, and bearing in mind the  low  standard
             of proof, that the evidence of the appellant is not  plausible
             and I did not find him to be a credible witness.   My  reasons
             are set out above.  The appellant has failed to establish that
             his account of events in Sri Lanka before he left in 2002  and
             on return in 2011 are true or that he has a well-founded  fear
             of persecution if returned to Sri Lanka  now.   This  in  turn
             leads me to the finding that whilst I accept the appellant has
             some anxiety issues regarding his prospective deportation  and
             separation from his  family,  he  has  falsely  presented  the
             reasons for and exaggerated his symptoms including the suicide
             risk to Dr Dhumad.  I find he does not  pose  a  high  suicide
             risk or suffer from the  serious  mental  health  problems  he
             claimed as a result of alleged ill  treatment  in  Sri  Lanka.
             The Refugee Convention is not engaged."

28.  The judge went  on  to  consider  Article  8  in  the  context  of  the
    Appellant's family life here with his partner and their children.   The
    Appellant has been here 2002.  The judge heard evidence from  both  the
    Appellant  and  his  partner.   In  relation  to  credibility  of   the
    Appellant's partner the judge stated as follows:

         "93. I find there is an issue in relation  to  the  credibility  of
             [SS] with regard to her claimed  responsibility  as  the  sole
             owner of a significant business with employees  compared  with
             the  earlier  description  of  her  on  the  children's  birth
             certificates as either not in occupation  or  as  a  full-time
             mother.  Her oral evidence and  response  to  the  question  I
             asked her about the business indicated to me that she was  not
             capable of running a business as claimed.  It is  likely  that
             her name is being used as the owner in name only when it is in
             fact being run by others, presumably relatives.


         94.  I note from the refusal letter that the date the  relationship
             between the appellant and [SS] began is very confused for  the
             eldest child she had with the appellant was born on  31  March
             2007 whereas in February 2007 the Home  Office  records  noted
             that she was in a relationship with a  British  citizen  which
             was how she obtained ILR in the UK.


         95.  According to the statement of [SS] she fell in love  with  the
             appellant in 2005 after she was estranged  from  her  husband.
             They lived together, and after prolonged  divorce  proceedings
             she finally got a divorce from her husband in 2007.  After the
             birth of their 3rd child, the appellant apparently  left  [SS]
             and their children and married a woman in Sri  Lanka  although
             the oral evidence was that this relationship lasted  only  one
             year.


         96.  The reason I make these comments is to highlight that I  found
             the evidence from [SS] lacking in credibility and her  claimed
             circumstances   both   historically   and   current   somewhat
             questionable."

29.  The judge considered the Appellant's children, recording  at  paragraph
    97 that  Mr  O'Callaghan  submitted  that  the  children  "are  at  the
    forefront of this appeal".  The judge noted  that  all  three  children
    were born here and considered copies  of  an  annual  report  from  the
    school relating to the eldest child.  The judge noted that there was no
    full school report, which he expected to see considering that the child
    was now aged 10.  The judge noted  that  there  were  no  letters  from
    schools and no statements from friends or relatives and  that  although
    the Appellant mentioned his children in his statement  he  did  not  go
    into any detail regarding how he is involved in  their  lives  or  what
    they do together or anything about  the  children  themselves  such  as
    their interests and needs and that the same applied to the statement of
    his partner (see paragraph 99).

30.   The  Respondent  accepted  that  the  relationship  was  genuine   and
    subsisting and the judge did not seek to go behind this, but  concluded
    that the evidence relating to the children was extremely limited.   The
    judge noted that the children are now aged 10, 8 and 6  and  there  was
    evidence that Tamil  is  spoken  by  the  family  at  home.  The  judge
    considered that the relationship between the Appellant and his  partner
    broke down in 2011.  He then  returned  to  the  family  in  2015.   He
    committed various offences and spent time in prison

31.  The judge acknowledged that the children were British citizens and  she
    stated as follows in relation to their best interests:

         "103.    Given the length of time they have been here and that they
             are British citizens I find  it  is  in  the  children's  best
             interests  to  remain  with   their   parents   in   the   UK.
             Nevertheless, it has not been established  that  it  would  be
             unreasonable for them to accompany their parents to Sri Lanka.
              They are not, as British citizens, required to accompany him.
              This is a question of choice.  The evidence of  their  mother
             appeared to be that if the appellant went to  Sri  Lanka  this
             was an irreversible and permanent split of  the  family.   But
             this is to ignore that the children and  she  could  accompany
             him to a country where the couple were both born,  have  spent
             most of their lives and have extended families.  Many families
             uproot from one country for economic  and  employment  reasons
             taking their children with them.  I find that the children are
             of a sufficiently young age that with  the  support  of  their
             parents and extended family members in Sri Lanka it would  not
             be unreasonable for them to accompany  their  father  to  that
             country albeit it is marginally in their  best  interests,  as
             British citizens, that he remains in the  UK  with  them.   Of
             course, if SS with her children chooses to remain  in  the  UK
             without the appellant then this is indeed a  split  in  family
             life.  But that is a matter of choice.  The appellant  is  not
             automatically entitled to remain in the UK simply because  his
             children's interests, marginally,  are  likely  to  be  better
             served by him remaining with  them  here.   It  has  not  been
             established SS and the children could  not  live  without  the
             support of the appellant in the UK, as  they  did  during  the
             period of his imprisonment."

32.  The judge found that the children are  young  and  not  at  a  critical
    stage in their education but as British citizens they have  rights  and
    privileges (see paragraph 108) but she concluded that it would  not  be
    unduly harsh for the children to live in Sri Lanka.  The  judge  stated
    as follows at paragraph 108:

         "108.    The children are young, and not at  a  critical  stage  in
             their education.  Of course as British citizens they have  the
             rights and privileges attached thereto.  But I have not  found
             in considering the children's best interests that it would  be
             unduly harsh for them to live in Sri Lanka.


         109. As to remaining in the UK with  their  mother,  as  noted  the
             children have been able to live in the UK not supported by the
             appellant given his committal of a  serious  criminal  offence
             which rendered him imprisoned for a period of 15  months.   It
             appears that his partner was able to work and support  herself
             and her children.  I was not  provided  with  any  independent
             evidence other than that from the parents as to the effect any
             separation from their  father  would  have  on  the  children.
             Without speculating  as  to  what  evidence  could  have  been
             provided it would have been helpful to have had, for example ,
             full school reports, letters or statements from the  head  and
             teachers at their school, their doctor, any social  worker  or
             other  professional  involved.   I  am  not  suggesting   this
             evidence as an opportunity for the  appellant  now  to  obtain
             further   evidence.    He   has,   with   experienced    legal
             representatives, had that opportunity and the evidence is  not
             before me.


              ...


         125. Despite  the  lack  of  independent  evidence  or  indeed  any
             evidence regarding the children save the brief  evidence  from
             their parents, on  the  assumption  that  they  have  a  close
             relationship with their father  and  would  find  his  absence
             difficult and disruptive,  nothing  has  been  established  to
             demonstrate  that  in  the  appellant's  case,  when  balanced
             against the  public  interests  considerations,  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the children to either join him in Sri  Lanka
             or if their parents choose otherwise, that they remain in  the
             UK with their mother after he is removed.   In  terms  of  the
             appellant's mental health whilst I accept he is depressed  and
             anxious regarding the prospect of being deported to Sri  Lanka
             because his intention since arrival has been to remain in  the
             UK and his family are here, I have not found the  evidence  of
             the medical expert establishes that he  is  at  real  risk  of
             suicide if he is deported or that his mental health is such as
             to amount to compelling circumstances."


    Ground 1

33.  It is asserted that the judge erred in refusing to  adjourn  the  case.
    It impacted unfairly upon the Appellant.  It is asserted that the judge
    failed to lawfully explain why the failure by the Respondent to  comply
    with the direction to produce the decision  relating  to  his  brother,
    would not deprive the Appellant of a fair hearing, particularly in  the
    light of the acceptance by the Respondent that unfairness existed.   Mr
    Halim relied on the case of SH (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1284 with specific reference to paragraph 15 of SH.  He submitted  that
    the question for me was whether  it  can  be  concluded  that  had  the
    evidence, namely the brother's determination, been  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge he would have reached  the  same  conclusion.   The
    salient paragraphs of SH are as follows;

         "13. In relation to both the two issues I have identified,  whether
             the Immigration judge erred in law in refusing an  adjournment
             and as to whether he would have reached the  same  conclusion,
             in my judgement Judge King fell into  serious  error.   First,
             when considering whether the immigration judge ought  to  have
             granted an adjournment, the test was not  irrationality.   The
             test was not whether his decision was properly open to him  or
             was Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse.  The  test  and  sole
             test was whether it was unfair.  In R v Secretary of State for
             the Home Department ex-parte the Kingdom of Belgium and Others
             [CO/236/2000  15  February  2000]  the  issue  was  whether  a
             requesting state and Human Rights organisations were  entitled
             to see a medical report relevant  to  Pinochet's  extradition.
             Simon Brown LJ took  the  view  that  the  sole  question  was
             whether fairness required disclosure of the report (page  24).
             He concluded that the procedure  was  not  a  matter  for  the
             Secretary of State but for the court.  He endorsed  a  passage
             in the fifth edition of Smith Woolf and Jowell at pages 406-7:-



                  'Whether fairness is required  and  what  is  involved  in
                  order to achieve fairness  is  for  the  decision  of  the
                  courts as a matter of law.  The issue is not one  for  the
                  discretion of the decision-maker.  The test is not whether
                  no  reasonable  body  would  have  thought  it  proper  to
                  dispense with a fair hearing.  The Wednesbury reserve  has
                  no place in relation to procedural propriety.' (page 24)

         14.  The question for Judge King  was  whether  it  was  unfair  to
             refuse the appellant the opportunity to obtain an  independent
             assessment of his age; the question was  not  whether  it  was
             reasonably open to the Immigration judge to take the view that
             no such opportunity  should  be  afforded  to  the  appellant.
             Where an  appellant  seeks  to  be  allowed  to  establish  by
             contrary evidence that the case  against  him  is  wrong,  the
             question will always be, whatever stage the  proceedings  have
             reached, what does fairness demand?  It is plain from  reading
             his decision as a whole that that was not the test applied  by
             Judge King.  His failure to apply that test was a  significant
             error.

         15.  The next question which Judge King resolved  was  whether  the
             report which had been obtained by  the  time  of  the  hearing
             before  him  dated  22  October  2010  would  have  made   any
             difference.  The judge, on that issue, concluded that even  if
             that report had been obtained, 'it is reasonably likely'  that
             Immigration Judge Froom would have reached the same  decision.
             This was not the correct test.  Judge King was, of course, not
             in the same position as Immigration Judge Froom.  He  had  the
             advantage of considering the very report which,  in  my  view,
             Immigration Judge Froom should have allowed the  appellant  to
             obtain.  If that report had not been obtained the question for
             the Upper Tribunal on appeal from the First Tier Tribunal  was
             whether it would have  been  pointless  to  wait  for  further
             independent evidence as to age.  Tribunals, like courts,  must
             set aside a determination reached by the adoption of an unfair
             procedure unless they are satisfied that it would be pointless
             to do so because the result  would  inevitably  be  the  same.
             Both Simon Brown LJ and Dyson LJ reminded themselves,  as  all
             faced with the argument that the result  would  inevitably  be
             the same must remind themselves, of Megarry J's  evocation  of
             the essence of justice in John v Rees [1970] Ch 345,402:-

                  'It may be  that  there  are  some  who  would  decry  the
                  importance which the courts attach to  the  observance  of
                  the  rules  of  natural  justice.   'When   something   is
                  obvious,' they may say, 'why force everyone to go  through
                  the tiresome waste of time involved in framing charges and
                  giving an opportunity to be heard?  The result is  obvious
                  from the start.'  Those who  take  this  view  do  not,  I
                  think,  do  themselves  justice.   As  everybody  who  has
                  anything to do with the law well knows, the  path  of  the
                  law is strewn with examples of open and shut cases  which,
                  somehow, were not;  unanswerable  charges  which,  in  the
                  event, were completely answered; of  inexplicable  conduct
                  which  was  fully  explained;  of  fixed  and  unalterable
                  determinations that, by  discussion,  suffered  a  change.
                  Nor are those with any knowledge of human nature who pause
                  to think for a moment likely to underestimate the feelings
                  of resentment of those who find that  a  decision  against
                  them has  been  made  without  their  being  afforded  any
                  opportunity to influence the course  of  events.   In  the
                  instant appeal it was impossible to say, at the  stage  an
                  adjournment was requested, that any report obtained by the
                  appellant could make no difference.'"


34.  Mr Halim did not refer to AA (Somalia) [2007] EWCA  Civ  1040  in  oral
    submission, but the judgement is of relevance. I refer to the following
    paragraphs;


         '20. Absent any further authority, I find the reasoning of the  AIT
             in AA's  case  very  persuasive.   Restrictions  of  the  kind
             suggested by Mr Scannell are not necessary or  desirable.   If
             Mr Scannell were right, the second tribunal would not be doing
             that which it has to do: examine the evidence  before  it  and
             reach the appropriate  conclusions  of  fact.   Mr  Scannell's
             approach would lead to numerous appeals in which the reviewing
             or appellate court  would  be  asking  itself:  'Was  there  a
             sufficient good reason here to  justify  departure?'   Another
             layer of complexity would be  added  to  an  already  far  too
             complicated area of law.  There would be numerous  appeals  in
             which the issue to be  litigated  would  be:  Was  the  second
             tribunal 'bound by' the decision of the first tribunal?  There
             is a tension between the need for consistency  in  public  law
             and the need to ensure that the right to stay in  the  country
             and not be deported is only granted to applicants who show (to
             a low standard of proof) that they are entitled to do so.   In
             my view in this field the need  for  consistency  should  take
             second  place.   I  bear  in  mind  the  variable  quality  of
             advocates  before   immigration   tribunals   (indeed   in   a
             significant number of cases the  Secretary  of  State  is  not
             represented) and the inevitable effect this  has  on  decision
             making.  I therefore agree with the position  adopted  by  the
             respondent: there are no principles here.  The second tribunal
             should have regard to the  earlier  decision  but  only  as  a
             starting point.


         ...


         29.  In my judgment it is time for the Court of Appeal to adopt the
             submissions made by Mr Kovats.  In cases where the parties are
             different, the second  tribunal  should  have  regard  to  the
             factual conclusions of the first tribunal  but  must  evaluate
             the evidence and submissions as it would in  any  other  case.
             If, having considered the factual  conclusions  of  the  first
             tribunal, the second  tribunal  rationally  reaches  different
             factual conclusions, then it is  those  conclusions  which  it
             must apply and not those of the first tribunal.   In  my  view
             Ocampo and LD do not stand in the way of this simple approach.
              Both cases make it clear the first decision  is  not  binding
             and that  it  is  the  fundamental  obligation  of  the  judge
             independently to decide the second case on its own  individual
             merits.  All that I am doing is simplifying and clarifying the
             law.  Simplification and clarification have the advantages  of
             making it easier for immigration judges for whom  the  law  is
             already far more complicated than it should be and  of  making
             it less likely that there  will  be  appeals  on  whether  the
             second tribunal was, or was not, bound by the decision of  the
             first.  It also has the advantage that the same  rule  applies
             whether the previous decision was in  favour  or  against  the
             Secretary of State.


35.  In AA case the Appellant called his sister to give evidence in  support
    of his appeal.  It became clear that she had been granted asylum  after
    an appeal.  The judge did not have that decision  before  him  (neither
    party had produced it), but in any event rejected her  credibility  and
    that of the Appellant and dismissed the appeal.  There  was,  in  AA  a
    material overlap in their cases; namely, clan membership.   In  respect
    of the previous decision which was not before the Tribunal the court of
    appeal stated;


         "33. The AIT said:


                  75.  In AA's case, there  had  been  a  previous  judicial
                      determination.  We reject the suggestion that it  was
                      for the  Home  Office  to  produce  it,  or  for  the
                      Adjudicator to enquire for it.  The case  before  the
                      Adjudicator  was  that  of  the  Appellant  and   the
                      Adjudicator was  to  determine  it  on  the  material
                      before  him.   The  position   is   simply   that   a
                      determination in Ouma's case was not before  him  and
                      in those circumstances he  did  not  err  in  law  by
                      failing to take account of its contents.  Whether  he
                      had the determination or  not,  we  also  reject  the
                      submission that it was binding on him  in  the  sense
                      that it regulated, or ought to  have  regulated,  his
                      determination of the appeal of the  Appellant  before
                      him.  He was  bound  to  determine  that  Appellant's
                      appeal on the whole of the evidence before him, as an
                      independent judge of fact and law.   He  did  exactly
                      that.


         34.  I agree.


         35.  The AIT then went on to consider whether  the  position  would
             have been materially different if the appellant had decided to
             place before Mr Hulme the decision in the sister's case.


                  76.  For the avoidance of doubt, we do not  consider  that
                      the position would have been materially different  if
                      he had had the determination in  Ouma's  case  before
                      him.  He would have seen from it that the Adjudicator
                      had decided that Ouma was a member of  the  clan  she
                      claimed, but that that conclusion  had  been  reached
                      from  a  starting  point  that,  in  her  case,   the
                      Secretary  of  State  chose  not  to   question   it.
                      Although in those  circumstances  he  ought  to  have
                      treated the  determination  in  Ouma's  case  as  the
                      starting point, there  was  so  much  extra  evidence
                      before him that he would have been bound to move away
                      from the starting point.  When he had done that,  the
                      mere fact that on other evidence (or the lack of  it)
                      another Adjudicator had found that Ouma  was  of  the
                      clan she claimed could have no conceivable impact  on
                      his own task.


         36.  The AIT concluded that Mr Hulme did not make made  a  material
             error of law and so dismissed the appeal."

36.  The Appellant was not seeking an  expert  report  in  order  to  answer
    adverse material.  He wanted to adduce a previous determination made by
    a judge who allowed his brother's asylum appeal so that he  could  rely
    on the findings of fact.  He had been aware of the appeal  since  2001.
    He made further submissions in 2008 relying on it.

37.   Whilst  the  Appellant  may  not  have  been  able   to   obtain   the
    determination for good reasons, the decision to refuse the  adjournment
    application is fair.  The judge unarguably considered the fact that the
    brother's appeal had been allowed and he was a refugee as the  starting
    point.  The judge at no time went behind this.  The  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal does not undermine the brother's position.  However,
    there was no evidence from the brother (I do not  accept  that  a  good
    reason has been advanced for this).  It can be reasonably inferred that
    he can remember the basis of his asylum claim.  Mr Halim asserted  that
    there may be findings  of  fact  that  would  have  an  impact  on  the
    Appellant's case.  This is entirely speculative.  The Appellant  claims
    the LTTE were interested in  him  because  of  the  activities  of  his
    brother.  His brother fled Sri Lanka in 1999.  The Appellant claims  he
    was arrested in  1999.   That  is  the  extent  of  the  overlap.   The
    Appellant's evidence relating to his claim from this time up until  the
    time of his appeal is entirely independent of his brother asylum claim.
     The brother's appeal was determined in 2001 and the decision can  have
    no evidential value post 2001.  At best, he may be able to give  direct
    evidence of the Appellant's arrest in 1999, if  he  had  not  fled  Sri
    Lanka by then.  However, as he was not a  witness  in  the  Appellant's
    appeal,  it  can  be  reasonably  inferred  that  he  is  not  able  to
    corroborate the Appellant's evidence in a material way.

38.  Fairness did not demand the judge adjourned in the vain hope  that  the
    Respondent would produce the decision.  Whilst I accept that Mr  Briant
    gave the impression that it could be obtained, that it had not been  by
    the time of the hearing very much suggested that a further  adjournment
    would not be  fruitful.  In  any  event,  the  application  was  wholly
    speculative.

39.  In contrast to the position of the UT in SH, there is no  evidence  now
    before me that was not before the FtT.  Essentially the position  I  am
    in is the same as that of the FtT.  I take the same view.  I  have  not
    seen the decision relating to the Appellant's brother, but based on the
    Appellant's evidence (and the lack of evidence from  his  brother)  and
    the absence of material overlap, it can be reasonably inferred that  it
    can be of no material assistance to the Appellant.  There were so  many
    significant problems with this Appellant's evidence.  The disclosure of
    judge's decision in respect of his brother, would make  no  conceivable
    impact on the Appellant's appeal, had it been before the judge.

    Ground 2

40.  It is asserted in ground 2 that the  judge  erred  in  considering  the
    medical evidence prior to the consideration of  the  oral  and  written
    evidence.  I do not accept that  this  is  the  case.   The  judge  was
    mindful that the evidence had  to  be  considered  in  the  round  (see
    paragraph 25) and it is a matter of fact that the judge  had  to  start
    her assessment of the evidence at some point and the order in which she
    chose to engage with it was a matter for her.

41.  That the judge  attached  some  weight  to  the  amount  of  scars  the
    Appellant had when he was examined by the doctor in comparison to those
    which he highlighted during his interview in 2002 does not give rise to
    an error of law.  The Appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel  at  the
    hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  can  be  reasonably
    inferred that Counsel was aware of what the Appellant said  during  his
    interview in 2002.  It is not a matter of  the  Appellant  having  been
    ambushed.  The inconsistencies arose from what he said  on  a  previous
    occasion.  It was a matter for his legal team whether  they  wished  to
    address this in evidence.

42.  Dr Izquierdo-Martin concluded that the  scars  were  highly  consistent
    with the ill-treatment as explained by the Appellant.  It  is  asserted
    that the judge erred in respect of SIBP.  It is asserted that this  was
    not an issue raised  by  the  Home  Office  or  indeed  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Appellant was not given the opportunity to address the
    issue.

43.  The Secretary of State did not raise  SIBP.   This  was  raised  by  Dr
    Izquierdo-Martin in his report (see [44] of the decision).  A number of
    scars were found to be highly consistent with the  Appellant's  account
    and  others  were  "less  specific".   Dr  Izquierdo-  Martin   overall
    conclusion was that it was possible that all of them  could  have  been
    caused accidental injuries.

44.  The judge did not conclude that the injuries were SIBP.  The judge  set
    out the possibilities at [45] including SIBP.  What the judge  says  at
    [45] is in response to Mr O'Callaghan's argument that as the  Appellant
    has several scars, not caused accidentally, they must have been  caused
    by torture in the way the Appellant claims.  The  judge  rejected  this
    proposition because the injuries could be SIBP  since  his  arrival  in
    2002 or because of an attack or torture.  What is clear from  a  proper
    reading  of  the  decision  is  that  the   judge   did   not   accept,
    notwithstanding Dr Izquierdo-Martin's evidence, that the  injuries  had
    been caused in the way described  by  the  Appellant  and  this  was  a
    conclusion that she was entitled to reach, bearing in mind the evidence
    as a whole and  indeed  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin's  evidence  that  it  was
    possible that the scars could have been caused by  accidental  injuries
    (see paragraph 40).  The conclusions were open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence.  He rejected the Appellant's evidence of causation.  However,
    it was not for the judge to give an  account  or  find  an  alternative
    scenario explaining causation of the scarring.  There was no unfairness
    arising from the judge's assessment of the medical evidence.


    Ground 3


45.  It is asserted in ground 3 that the judge's findings, at paragraphs  84
    to 88, are flawed because  the  judge  adopted  a  test  of  "extensive
    involvement" with Diaspora Tamil organisations in the UK so  as  to  be
    identified as a "prolific activist" whilst this was not the test.

46.  It is clear from paragraph 84 that the judge did not attach any  weight
    to the letter submitted from the  organisation  and  her  reference  to
    extensive involvement or being a prolific activist at paragraph 87,  is
    a reference to how the Appellant's case was put rather than  the  judge
    having  applied  the  wrong  test.   The  judge  concluded   that   the
    Appellant's  activities  in  respect  of  sur  place  activities   were
    extremely limited and as such he would not come to the attention of the
    authorities.

47.  Despite Mr Halim's submissions to  the  contrary,  the  judge  did  not
    accept the Appellant was a member of the TGTE.  The judge accepted  the
    position was  as  advanced  by  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant's
    activities were limited to meetings involving large numbers of  people.
    This was the extent of the evidence that was accepted by the judge  and
    unarguably does not put this Appellant at risk, with  reference  to  GJ
    and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319.
    I have also considered the case of MP [2014] EWCA Civ 829, on which  Mr
    Halim also relied, specifically paragraphs 43 and 50, but as the  judge
    did not find the Appellant was a member of a proscribed organisation it
    does not advance his argument.

    Ground 4

48.  Ground 4 asserts that the judge's finding at paragraph  93  in  respect
    of the evidence of the Appellant's partner gives rise to  an  error  of
    law because the concern raised by the judge was not directly  addressed
    to the witness and she was not given the  opportunity  to  address  it.
    There is no substance in the argument.  In any event, the conclusion at
    paragraph 93 is not in any way determinative of  the  outcome  of  this
    decision.  The judge found the Appellant  and  his  partner's  evidence
    problematic for  many  reasons.   The  findings  are  grounded  in  the
    evidence and adequately reasoned.  There is no unfairness.

    Ground 5

49.  Ground 5 asserts that the judge's assessment of the best  interests  is
    confused and not in accordance with ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2011] 2 WLR 148.  It  is  challenged  for  two
    reasons; first, the judge did  not  factor  into  the  best  interest's
    assessment that the children will lose benefits enjoyed  through  their
    British  citizenship  and  secondly;  the  judge  (at  paragraph   103)
    concluded that it would be "marginally" in the best  interests  of  the
    children for their father to remain in the UK and there  should  be  no
    grading of the best interests.  Deportation is either in a child's best
    interests or it is not.  The assessment is flawed and therefore  so  is
    the assessment of unduly harsh.

50.  The judge made a clear finding at paragraph 103 that  it  would  be  in
    the children's best interests to remain with their parents in  the  UK.
    She then went on to say that it would not be unreasonable for  them  to
    accompany their father to Sri Lanka albeit it is  marginally  in  their
    best interests, as British citizens, that he remains  in  the  UK  with
    them,  and  she  again  makes  reference  their  best  interests  being
    marginally likely served by him remaining with them here.

51.   The  judge  made  an  unequivocal,  child  centred  finding  that  the
    children's best interests would be to remain here in the UK  with  both
    parents.  The subsequent reference to marginal  is  in  terms  of  them
    remaining in the UK.  It is unarguable that the judge did not  properly
    consider that the  children  are  British  citizens  and  the  loss  of
    citizenship and  benefits  should  they  have  to  leave  the  UK  (see
    paragraph 108).  Mr Halim, referred to the judgment of ZH  specifically
    paragraphs 41,  46  and  47,  but  the  argument  he  advanced  has  no
    substance.  There is no flaw in the assessment of the  children's  best
    interests.  It is not  asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
    relevant material.  The reference to marginal reflects the realities of
    the assessment which is fact sensitive.  There was very little evidence
    relating to the children  as  found  by  the  judge  and  this  is  not
    challenged.

 52. The judge assessed  unduly  harsh,  having  made  the  uncontroversial,
    inevitable and lawful  finding  that  it  is  in  the  children's  best
    interests to remain with their parents here in the  UK.   There  is  no
    challenge to  the  unduly  harsh  assessment  or  Article  8  generally
    independently of the  challenge  to  the  best  interest's  assessment.
    There is therefore no need for  me  to  consider  this  aspect  of  the
    decision which in any event was properly conducted in  accordance  with
    MM Uganda [2016] EWCA Civ 617.

Notice of Decision

For the above reasons there is no arguable error of law.   The  decision  of
the judge to dismiss the appeal is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
