
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber
Appeal Number: PA037402016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Stoke                           |Decision  and Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 13 July 2017                          |On: 28 July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     CL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tetley (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have  made  an  anonymity  order  because  this  decision  refers  to
    sensitive material relating to the appellant's medical condition.

Procedural history

 2. The appellant, a 74-year-old citizen of the Philippines,  has  appealed
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 7 December 2016  in
    which it dismissed an appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 17 May 2016 refusing her asylum and leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom ('UK').  At the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant withdrew her  asylum  claim  and  relied  entirely  upon  the
    submission that her removal to the Philippines would lead to  a  breach
    of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of  the  ECHR.   She  relied  upon  her  medical
    condition and her relationship in the UK with her daughter. The  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


 3. In grounds of appeal  prepared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  it  was
    submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  relevant
    matters, failed to make any factual findings on the family life between
    the appellant and her daughter in  the  UK  and  failed  to  apply  the
    guidance in Paposhvili v Belgium 41738/10 [2016] ECHR 1113, 13 December
    2016 (Grand Chamber).  Permission to appeal on all grounds was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 12 April 2017.

Hearing

 4. Mr Tetley relied upon the grounds of appeal, in particular  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's failure to direct itself in accordance with  Paposhvili
    (supra).  Mr Bates relied upon the rule 24 notice dated 26  April  2017
    and invited me to find that any  errors  are  not  material.   This  is
    because, he submitted, the First-tier Tribunal  has  made  findings  of
    fact regarding the medical evidence open to  it  and  has  applied  the
    relevant principles in Paposhvili even if it has not been referred to.


 5. After hearing from both representatives I indicated that the appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds was to be allowed, and  I  reserved  my  decision  in
    relation to Article 3.  I now give my decision, with reasons.

Legal framework

Article 3 in medical cases

 6. In Paposhvili (supra) the Grand Chamber clarified the  approach  to  be
    adopted to Article 3 medical cases as follows:

           "The Court considers that the  "other  very  exceptional  cases"
           within the meaning of the judgment in N which may raise an issue
           under Article 3 should be  understood  to  refer  to  situations
           involving the  removal  of  a  seriously  ill  person  in  which
           substantial grounds have been shown for  believing  that  he  or
           she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would face  a  real
           risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in  the
           receiving country or the lack of access to  such  treatment,  of
           being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in
           his or her state of health resulting in intense suffering or  to
           a significant reduction in life expectancy. The court points out
           that these situations correspond to a  high  threshold  for  the
           application of Article 3." [183]


 7. The Court set out  a  range  of  procedural  duties  for  the  domestic
    authorities requiring a rigorous assessment of the risk as required  by
    the absolute nature of the Article  3  prohibition  and  said  this  at
    [186].

           "It  is  for  applicants   to   adduce   evidence   capable   of
           demonstrating that there are substantial grounds  for  believing
           that, if the measure complained of were to be implemented,  they
           would be exposed to a real risk of being subjected to  treatment
           contrary  to  Article  3....In  this  connection  it  should  be
           observed that a certain degree of speculation is inherent in the
           preventive purpose of Article 3 and that it is not a  matter  of
           requiring the persons concerned to provide clear proof of  their
           claim that they would be exposed to proscribed treatment".


 8. Where such evidence is adduced,  it  is  for  the  authorities  of  the
    returning state to:

   i) dispel any doubts raised by it [187];
  ii) "consider the foreseeable consequences of removal for  the  individual
      concerned in  the  receiving  State,  in  the  light  of  the  general
      situation there and the individual's personal circumstances" [187];
 iii) assess the impact of removal "by comparing his or her state of  health
      prior to removal and  how  it  would  evolve  after  transfer  to  the
      receiving State" [188];
  iv)  verify  whether  the  care  available  in  the  receiving  state   is
      "sufficient and appropriate in practice for the treatment  of  the
      applicant's illness so as to prevent  him  or  her  being  exposed  to
      treatment contrary to Article 3" [189];
   v)   consider    "the    extent    to    which the    individual    in
      question will actually have access to this care and these facilities
      in the receiving State" given the "cost of medication  and  treatment,
      the existence of a social and family network, and the distance  to  be
      travelled in order to have access to the required care" [190];
  vi) obtain individual and sufficient assurances from the  receiving  state
      as to access to appropriate  treatment  where  serious  doubts  remain
      [191].


 9. The Court concluded as follows at [205]:


        "...in the absence of any assessment by the domestic authorities of
        the risk facing the applicant  in  the  light  of  the  information
        concerning his state of health and  the  existence  of  appropriate
        treatment  in  Georgia,  the   information   available   to   those
        authorities  was  insufficient  for  them  to  conclude  that   the
        applicant, if returned to Georgia, would not have run  a  real  and
        concrete risk of treatment contrary to Article 3".


  Article 8


10. It is now uncontroversial that in Article 8 jurisprudence, the  meaning
    of 'family life' can extend in certain circumstances to include,  inter
    alia, relationships between adults: see  AA  v  UK  [2012]  INLR  1,  R
    (Gurung) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 2546 and Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  630
    in which Sir Stanley Burnton said this at [24]:


           "I do not think that the judgments to which I have referred lead
           to any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article
           8 in cases involving adult children. In the case of  adults,  in
           the context of immigration control, there is no legal or factual
           presumption as to the existence or absence of  family  life  for
           the purposes of Article 8. I point out that the approach of  the
           European  Commission  for  Human  Rights  cited  approvingly  in
           Kugathas did not include any requirement of  exceptionality.  It
           all depends on the facts. The  love  and  affection  between  an
           adult and his parents or siblings will not of itself  justify  a
           finding of a family life. There has  to  be  something  more.  A
           young adult living with his parents or  siblings  will  normally
           have a family life to be respected  under  Article  8.  A  child
           enjoying a family life with his parents does not suddenly  cease
           to have a family life at midnight as he turns 18 years  of  age.
           On the other hand, a young adult  living  independently  of  his
           parents may well not have a family  life  for  the  purposes  of
           Article 8."


11. In the recent Court of Appeal decision of Raiv v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    330 the above principles were noted to be uncontroversial.

Error of law discussion

Article 3

12. The First-tier Tribunal made clear findings of fact that treatment  for
    the  appellant's  illnesses,  including  her  renal  failure  and   the
    corresponding  requirement  for  dialysis  three  times  per  week,  is
    available in the Philippines - see [39] and [42]. However,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to make any findings on the appellant's ability to
    access such treatment.  If there was any doubt that this is a  relevant
    part of the assessment in Article 3 medical cases, that  has  now  been
    clarified by Paposhvili (supra).


13. It was clearly argued that the appellant would not be  able  to  access
    treatment in the Philippines - see [31].  Both the  appellant  and  her
    daughter set out why in the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (witness   statements,   interview   record,   medical   evidence   and
    representations from solicitors).  In summary, it  was  submitted  that
    the appellant had no family to turn  to  in  the  Philippines  and  the
    distances involved combined with the impact of her illness and  absence
    of income meant that she would not be able to  practically  access  the
    dialysis available in the Philippines.  That evidence is summarised  at
    [8] to [18] of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   As  set  out  in
    Paposhvili, the First-tier Tribunal was obliged but failed to  consider
    the extent  to  which the  appellant  will actually have access to
    treatment given the cost of medication and treatment, the absence of  a
    social and family network, and the distance to be travelled in order to
    have access to the required care.


14. In these circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal was obliged  to  assess
    whether the appellant adduced evidence capable  of  demonstrating  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing that her removal would lead
    to a real risk of being subjected to treatment contrary to  Article  3,
    whilst bearing in mind that a certain degree of speculation is inherent
    in the preventive purpose of Article 3 and that it is not a  matter  of
    requiring the persons concerned to provide clear proof of  their  claim
    that they would be exposed to  proscribed  treatment.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that no evidence was provided by the appellant  to  show
    the travel distances involved [40] and there was no evidence  that  the
    appellant would not be able to obtain dialysis within a short period of
    her flight landing in the Philippines, the First-tier Tribunal has also
    erred in law [42].  This indicates a flawed approach for  two  reasons:
    first, there was some evidence emanating from  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter; second, the First-tier Tribunal has  not  considered  whether
    that evidence was sufficient to require the SSHD to dispel  any  doubts
    about the evidence, in  accordance  with  the  principles  set  out  in
    Paposhvili.

15. In addition,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    conclusions of the appellant's  treating  consultant  nephrologist  and
    treating consultant cardiologist that the appellant is not fit  to  fly
    are inadequate.  The reasoning provided  for  this  is  limited  to  an
    absence of a formal assessment and "in  particular,  no  evidence  from
    either clinician has been provided to explain why  she  was  previously
    fit to fly but now apparently is not" - see [43].  It is  difficult  to
    understand what is meant by  a  "formal  assessment",  although  it  is
    correct to observe that the clinicians have not provided  any  detailed
    explanation for the conclusions reached.  In any  event,  there  is  an
    obvious explanation for the failure to address the appellant's  ability
    to fly to the UK in May 2015 - this was never an issue in dispute.   As
    recorded in the witness statements and the GP's letter dated 1 February
    2016, the appellant's condition deteriorated  very  shortly  after  her
    arrival and she has not flown since.  Indeed, this is recorded  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal at [15].


16.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
    assessment of Article 3 contains errors of law and should be set aside.

Article 8

17. This is a case that potentially involves the family and private life of
    the appellant, who is not a foreign national offender, but in  relation
    to whom it  is  now  accepted  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  As such the test to be applied  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is that of  compelling  circumstances  -  see  Treebhawon  and
    Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017]  UKUT
    13 (IAC) at [44].  In order to  assess  whether  there  are  compelling
    circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal should  have  applied  the  five
    stage  Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]  2  AC  368  questions.   Of  particular
    importance in this case are the  following:  identifying  the  relevant
    family and private life to be respected, determining the weight  to  be
    attached to these in accordance with Article 8 jurisprudence  and  Part
    5A of Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; taking into account
    the public interest considerations; conducting the  relevant  balancing
    exercise.


18. The First-tier Tribunal has properly addressed the appellant's  private
    life at [45]-[46] but there has been no assessment of  the  nature  and
    extent of family life between the  appellant  and  her  daughter.   The
    appellant has been completely reliant upon her daughter and lived  with
    her since May 2015.  Whilst it is true to observe,  as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did at [47] that contact could be maintained, this  is  not  a
    viable substitute for an assessment of the nature and extent of  family
    life.  The fact that contact might be maintained is a  relevant  factor
    when conducting the balancing exercise.  Where, as here, the  appellant
    relies upon the family life she has with her daughter in  the  UK,  the
    First-tier Tribunal should begin the Article 8 assessment by  assessing
    the nature and extent of family life and whether there is the requisite
    "something more" to enable the relationship between  mother  and  adult
    daughter to constitute family life for Article 8 purposes.   This  step
    has been omitted.


19. In addition, the balancing exercise appears  to  have  been  undertaken
    only in relation to private life at [48] with no clear reasoning as  to
    why family life has been  left  out.   In  so  far  as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision is to be interpreted as  suggesting  that  even  if
    there is family life, there would be no breach because contact  can  be
    maintained,  such  a  finding  fails  to  take  into  account  relevant
    considerations: (i) the nature and extent of family  life  dramatically
    changed when the appellant became ill and  entirely  dependent  on  her
    daughter after she left the Philippines; (ii) the appellant's  evidence
    that she has no family in the Philippines willing to assist her.


20.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
    assessment of Article 8 family life contains errors of law  and  should
    be set aside.

Conclusion

21. When the decision is read as a whole I am satisfied that the First-tier
    Tribunal decision contains material errors of law in relation  to  both
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  For the reasons set out above  important
    findings of fact are either infected by errors of law  or  missing  and
    findings of fact therefore need  to  be  remade  entirely.   Given  the
    extent of the factual findings required, I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  It shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 28 July 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
