

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/03748/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23 November 2018,                |On 19 November 2019                   |
|17 January, 3 October               |                                      |
|and 8 November 2019                 |                                      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                    A M A
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    and Dryer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd born on 25 May 1996 who  claims  to
          have entered the UK on 23 October 2007.  His  appeal  against  the
          respondent's refusal of his protection claim on 26  February  2018
          was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll  by  way  of  a
          determination promulgated on 11 June 2018 following a  hearing  at
          Taylor House on 23 April  2018.  An  earlier  appeal  against  the
          refusal of his asylum application was dismissed  in  May  2008  by
          First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes. The more recent claim was  based
          on the deteriorating conditions in Iraq and the risk to him as  an
          undocumented Kurd who would be unable  to  obtain  a  CSID  and/or
          relocate.  Judge Carroll's judgment was partially set aside by  my
          decision issued on 10 September 2018.


       2. For the reasons set out in that determination, two issues need  to
          be re-considered. These are: (1) whether  the  available  evidence
          merits a departure from country guidance and it would be safe  for
          the appellant to return to Kirkuk, and (2)  whether  he  would  be
          able to  obtain  a  CSID.  The  judge's  article  8  findings  are
          preserved.


          The Hearing


       3. The hearing on 23 November 2018 had to  be  adjourned  because  no
          interpreter had been booked and it was plain  that  the  appellant
          was having problems  expressing  himself  and  even  understanding
          questions put to him in English.  It  was  then  relisted  for  17
          January 2019 when I heard evidence in Sorani from the appellant.


       4. He confirmed his name and address, agreed  he  was  aware  of  the
          contents of his  witness  statement  and  that  it  was  true  and
          accurate as were all his previous witness statements.  He  adopted
          them  as  his  evidence  in  chief  and  was  tendered  for  cross
          examination.


       5. In response to questions put by Mr Melvin, the appellant confirmed
          that he had been in contact with his family - his  mother,  sister
          and brother - until 2012. He said that after  that  date,  he  was
          unable to make contact because his  mother's  phone  was  switched
          off. Previously they would call each other. He still had the  same
          number.


       6. The appellant was asked what attempts he had  made  to  trace  his
          family. He replied that he had approached the Federation of  Iraqi
          Refugees in 2014 to ask for help. He had no documents with him but
          had sent a document from the Red Cross to his solicitors  when  he
          made his asylum claim.   Then in  2018  he  approached  the  Iraqi
          Consulate in order to obtain an ID card. He was unable to  provide
          them with documents as he had none.      The appellant  was  asked
          why in the five years he had had contact with his family,  he  had
          not asked them to send his Iraqi ID documents to him.  He  replied
          it was because he had not had any need of them and  had  not  been
          asked by anyone to provide them. He had not made contact with  any
          friends or  relatives  in  Kirkuk  in  order  to  try  and  obtain
          documents because he had not been in contact with them and did not
          know where they were. He had not had  any  contact  with  extended
          family members since leaving Iraq. He had not been in  touch  with
          the authorities  in  Kirkuk  and  questioned  how  he  could  have
          contacted them.


       7. The appellant was asked whether it was true that Kirkuk  city  had
          never been overrun by ISIS forces. The appellant replied that ISIS
          had come to the city and infiltrated it. He said it had  now  been
          taken over by a Shia militant group - Hash al Shaabi -  which  was
          pro-Iranian and even worse towards the Kurds than ISIS  had  been.
          Mr Melvin put it to the appellant  that  Kurdish  authorities  had
          taken over Kirkuk in 2014 and returned the city to Iraqi forces in
          November 2017. He was asked why he could not have  approached  the
          Kurdish authorities between  2014  and  2017  for  documents.  The
          appellant replied that he was living here  and  had  not  been  in
          contact with anyone in Iraq. He said that in  2017  when  Hash  al
          Shaabi took over the city, about 100,000 Kurdish families fled the
          area. He had been unable to contact a lawyer for assistance as  he
          had no money and lawyers did not work for free. When asked  if  it
          was only financial reasons that  had  prevented  him  form  making
          contact, it replied it was also because he was here and  so  could
          not do so.


       8. Mr Melvin asked the appellant if he was  deliberately  not  making
          contact in order to frustrate his removal. He replied that he  was
          not. He said he had been twice to the Iraqi Consulate in 2014  and
          in 2018 and nothing had been done.


       9. The appellant was asked what he feared if  returned  to  Iraq.  He
          replied that Kirkuk was not safe for him. He had lost contact with
          his family. He had no ID card. He had left 11 years ago and  would
          be like a stranger. The situation there was very bad.  An  extreme
          Arab militia group had taken over the area.


      10. When asked whether he had any personal fears, the  appellant  said
          that he would be unable to survive in Baghdad without an ID  card.
          He needed one to go through checkpoints and to move around.  There
          was no one to help him and he had nowhere to live.  He  was  asked
          whether he feared the Iraqi authorities. He replied: "What do  you
          mean?" He was asked whether he feared the authorities would arrest
          and persecute him. He replied he did; they would treat him  badly.
          The appellant was asked whether he would return if he had  a  CSID
          card. He replied he had no family and asked where he would go. The
          question was repeated. He said that he had  nowhere  to  live  and
          would be a stranger there. He was asked whether it was the lack of
          an ID card or the absence of a place to live  that  prevented  his
          return. He replied it was both factors. Even if he had an ID card,
          he could not live in another city because it would be dangerous to
          live somewhere without any family. he would have no one to support
          him. He said that he had been working prior to his  departure.  He
          had a shop. He could not return to that work because he  would  be
          on is own and had no ID card. That completed cross examination.


      11. In re-examination, the appellant  was  asked  where  his  extended
          family members lived. He replied they only lived in Kirkuk.


      12.  In  reply  to  questions  I  then  put  to  the   appellant   for
          clarification, the appellant said that he first went to the  Iraqi
          Federation in 2014 but could not recall the month. He  thought  it
          was after April and after he had been to the Embassy. I asked  how
          he had found out about them. He said his  solicitors  had  advised
          him. I asked whether he had any Kurdish friends in the UK. He said
          he did but their families were not from Kirkuk. He  did  not  know
          where they came from as he did not ask detailed questions. He then
          said they were from Tuz Khurmati, a mixed area, and from Khanauin.
          He had also met Kurds from Iran. He agreed he knew where they were
          from and said that he had forgotten before when asked. One of them
          had lost touch with his family. He did not know if they  had  been
          to the  Federation.  They  had  leave  to  remain.   He  said  the
          Federation office had been in Kings Cross in 2014 but he  did  not
          know whether it was still there now. They asked him for his  name,
          UK address, names of family members, their place of residence  and
          their neighbourhood. He said that they had sent an  email  to  his
          solicitors. He had lost the copy he had, if he had had one.


      13. The appellant said that he  had  left  behind  a  mother,  sister,
          brother, one maternal uncle, grandparents who died  in  2009-2010,
          cousins and friends. He was not in touch with is  father's  sister
          and her family because of a dispute. When he  came  here,  he  had
          just one phone number. His friends had phones, but he did not have
          their numbers.


      14. He knew the news about Hash al Shaabi  from  television,  internet
          and media channels.


      15. The appellant was unable to remember whether the issue  of  an  ID
          card was raised at the time of his appeal in 2008. He said he  was
          first asked about his ID card in 2014.


      16. Those were my questions.


      17. Mr Melvin had questions arising. He asked the appellant why he had
          not asked his mother for the numbers of his friends. The appellant
          said there was no reason to contact them. He said they were casual
          friends from the streets.


      18. Mr Spurling asked  the  appellant  whether  he  had  his  friends'
          numbers when he was in Iraq. He said he did for one or  two.  They
          were stored in his mobile phone. He did not know what happened  to
          it as he left it at home in Iraq.
      19. That completed the oral evidence.


      20. I then  raised  a  query  over  the  determination  of  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Heynes. There was no copy in any  of  the  evidence
          adduced by either side and I considered it would  be  relevant  to
          the issue of documents and whether the matter had been  raised  at
          that hearing, given Mr Melvin's line of questioning. Both  parties
          agreed that it was a relevant document. It was  also  agreed  that
          the opportunity would be taken to obtain a copy of the  Federation
          of Refugees letter  which  was  referred  to  in  the  appellant's
          witness statement as being part  of  a  previous  judicial  review
          claim. The appeal was then adjourned until 28 March 2019.


      21. On that date, due to my  indisposition,  the  appeal  came  before
          Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly. All the parties agreed  that
          it would have been preferable to have  the  appeal  determined  by
          myself and so  although  a  transfer  order  had  been  signed  by
          Principal Resident Judge O'Connor on 18 March 2019, the appeal was
          adjourned, and it then came before me on 3 October 2019. I had, in
          the meantime, received the determination of Judge Heynes (the file
          itself had been destroyed) and the Federation of Refugees  letter.
          The appellant's judicial review file had also been located.


      22.   On  3  October  2019,  Mr  Melvin  asked  for  a  stay  on   the
          determination of this appeal pending the  delivery  of  a  pending
          country guidance case on Iraq. He submitted that it  was  expected
          shortly  and  he  asked  that  submissions  be  made   after   its
          promulgation. He submitted that the issues of  Article  15(c)  and
          identity documents would be covered by the new country guidance.


      23. Mr Spurling  resisted  the  application.  He  submitted  that  the
          appellant wanted to proceed. He pointed out  that  events  changed
          all the time and there had t be a  need  for  realism.  A  pending
          decision was not a good reason to  stay  a  determination  and  he
          cited AB Sudan [2013] EWCA Civ 921 (at 28-32). He  submitted  that
          the appeal had been ongoing for a long time and that the appellant
          was very stressed by the delays.


      24. As a compromise, I suggested that I  heard  submissions  and  then
          postponed my determination for two weeks to await country guidance
          at which time further submissions could be made, if required.  The
          submissions then proceeded.


      25. As no further evidence was called,  Mr  Spurling  went  first.  He
          submitted that the  two  issues  for  consideration  were  whether
          Kirkuk would be safe and secondly whether the appellant  would  be
          able to obtain  identity  documents.  He  pointed  out  that  oral
          evidence had focused on contacts the appellant had  in  Iraq.  His
          evidence was that he had none. It had been accepted  that  he  was
          from Kirkuk. He had left there in 2007 when he was 21  years  old.
          That was a long time ago. He had  remained  in  contact  with  his
          family until 2012. He had the telephone numbers for friends in his
          mobile phone but had not brought it here.  Mr  Spurling  submitted
          that given the chaotic situation in Iraq, it was unsurprising that
          he had lost contact with his family. He submitted that there  were
          high levels of sectarian violence and the war with Isis which  had
          caused population displacement. In that context  his  account  was
          wholly plausible.


      26. The appellant had been asked about his lack of  documents  and  he
          had said that he  had  tried  to  obtain  some.  In  2014  he  had
          contacted  the  Federation  of  Iraqi  Refugees   and   they   had
          unsuccessfully tried to find his family. That letter  was  now  on
          file.  The  determination  of  Judge  Heynes  also  confirmed  the
          appellant's account that he had not been asked about documents  at
          that time. His account had been shown to be true. He had also been
          twice to the Iraqi Embassy but had not received any help. That was
          consistent with  the  evidence  in  country  guidance  as  to  the
          documents  required  before  assistance  was  given.  Mr  Spurling
          submitted that if the appellant could not  document  himself  then
          any location in Iraq would be unjustifiably harsh. He relied on Dr
          Fateh's expert report and on his skeleton argument which  set  out
          all the steps that had to be followed. He pointed out  that  there
          were stringent requirements for identity documents and that was to
          be expected as most countries would  require  a  lot  of  evidence
          before issuing identity documents.


      27. Mr Spurling submitted that the appellant was not returnable if  he
          could not get an identity card, A laissez passer would at best get
          him to Baghdad but would then be confiscated on  arrival  (as  per
          country guidance, Dr Fateh's report and the February  2019  CPIN).
          The document was  for  single  use  travel  only.  In  any  event,
          international documents could not be used at internal checkpoints.
          The letter from the  Iraqi  Ambassador  gave  no  source  for  the
          contention that they could. Without a CSID the appellant would  be
          unlikely to get through check points within Iraq.


      28. Mr Spurling submitted that Kirkuk was still a contested  area.  Dr
          Fateh confirmed this in his report. The Foreign  and  Commonwealth
          Office still advised against all travel  to  Kirkuk.  The  pending
          country guidance case was heard in June 2019, so this evidence was
          still current. Control over Kirkuk had not  been  established  and
          there was still a battle between government troops, the peshmerger
          and ISIS. The UNHCR in May 2019, just  weeks  before  the  country
          guidance case was heard, reported that  internal  flight  was  not
          reasonable in  the  IKR  unless  an  individual  had  shelter  and
          livelihood options. There had been an increase in ISIS attacks and
          the CPIN report confirmed that problems were on going.  There  had
          been no durable change. The appellant could not return safely.


      29. Mr Melvin relied on his skeleton argument and the refusal  letter.
          He maintained that the appellant was not  credible  and  had  been
          deliberately withholding documents. He argued that there had  been
          a marked improvement in Iraq particularly in Kirkuk and he  relied
          on the letter from the Iraqi Ambassador as good evidence  that  he
          would be able to obtain  identity  documents.  He  submitted  that
          displaced persons had returned to Kirkuk. The Danish report relied
          on was from 2015. No part of Iraq had article 15(c) problems.  The
          majority of Iraqis would  have  access  to  documents;  they  just
          refused to obtain them. There  would  be  a  central  register  in
          Baghdad. Dr Fateh's report was not accepted. There were no  longer
          as many checkpoints as there had been. The appellant would be able
          to return home and access documents. The evidence  relied  on  was
          very out of date. The situation had changed.


      30. Mr Spurling replied.  He  submitted  that  there  was  nothing  to
          suggest  that  the  appellant  was  withholding   information   or
          documents; indeed, the evidence was that he had made  attempts  to
          obtain them. This was a point of general cynicism. The same  could
          be said of the Ambassador's letter and there was no  evidence  for
          such a claim in any event. He submitted that UNHCR disagreed  that
          the situation had improved in their May 2019 report. The  evidence
          did not suggest that ISIS had been eliminated but rather that they
          moved about freely in Kirkuk. He relied on his skeleton  arguments
          and written submissions.


      31. That completed submissions. The matter  was  then  set  down  "for
          mention" on 8 November 2019  at  which  time  further  submissions
          could be made  on  country  guidance  if  the  decision  had  been
          promulgated or, if not, arguments could be  made  as  to  how  the
          matter should proceed.


      32. On 8 November 2018 the matter came before me as a  "for  mention".
          There was no sign of the expected country guidance at  that  stage
          and therefore having had regard to the  views  expressed  by  both
          sides, I now proceed to give my determination.


      33. In so doing I have had regard to Mr  Melvin's  wish  to  stay  the
          matter until the promulgation of the expected country guidance  on
          Iraq. I also have regard to the strong resistance to  that  course
          of action expressed by Mr  Spurling  on  the  appellant's  behalf,
          given the history of this case. I take note of what the  Court  of
          Appeal said in AB (Sudan) [2013] EWCA Civ  921  at  paragraph  30:
          "In the world of immigration it is a fact of  life  that  the  law
          which the judge applies is liable to change in the  future,  quite
          possibly in the near future.  This cannot usually be a reason  for
          staying proceedings.  I started  dealing  with  immigration  cases
          some fourteen years ago. I cannot  remember  any  occasion  during
          that period when important decisions on one  or  more  aspects  of
          immigration law  were  not  eagerly  awaited  from  the  appellate
          courts". Given the lengthy delays in this  case,  the  appellant's
          strong wish to have this matter resolved, and the  fact  that  the
          matter has already been delayed awaiting  country  guidance  which
          may not be promulgated for several more weeks, I  consider  it  in
          the interests of justice to proceed  to  a  determination  on  the
          basis of all the evidence before me.


      34. Discussion and Conclusions


      35. I have considered the submissions, the grounds, the  determination
          and all the other evidence with care.


      36. It is the respondent's case that the security  situation  in  Iraq
          and Kirkuk has significantly changed  since  the  decision  of  AA
          (article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)  which  held  that
          Kirkuk was a  contested  area  which  reached  the  article  15(c)
          threshold. Before I come to the question of the safety of  Kirkuk,
          however, I propose to deal with what I consider to be the  primary
          issue in this appeal and that is whether the  appellant  would  be
          able to obtain identity documents to return to and live in Iraq.


      37. The most recent country guidance case on the return of Iraqi Kurds
          is AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT
          00212 (IAC) which  concerned  an  ethnic  Kurd  from  Kirkuk.  The
          redocumentation question was not  an  issue  for  that  particular
          appellant, however, as he was in possession of  his  Civil  Status
          Identity Document (CSID). Nevertheless, the issue  was  considered
          with the Tribunal recognising that the  Iraqi  civil  registration
          system was in disarray and that the possibility of an applicant to
          obtain a new CSID had to be assessed against that  background  and
          on various factors which required specific consideration (at  104-
          107).


      38. According to the February 2019 CPIN, two  of  the  most  important
          documents used in Iraq are the Iraqi Nationality Certificate (INC)
          and the Iraqi Civil Status ID (CSID). These documents are required
          for any kind of interaction with the authorities  and  are  needed
          when relocating, getting married, buying a car and so  on  (5.2.2,
          5.2.3 and 5.4.6). The  challenges  faced  by  IDPs  without  their
          documents are set out at 5.3.2 and 5.3.3. They face  the  risk  of
          not being admitted to the IKR, to risks in travelling by land, the
          risk  of  arrest   and   detention   without   access   to   legal
          representation and many more difficulties. The long and  stringent
          process of applying for documents in Iraq is  set  out  at  5.4  -
          6.4.6. the entry requirements for the KRI are set out at s. 7.  S.
          7.1.5 specifically deals with ethnic Kurds  from  Kirkuk  and  the
          uncertainty they face in obtaining residency. The contents of  the
          CPIN accord with the report of Dr Fateh.


      39. In AAH, when considering the issue of  redocumentation  for  Kurds
          from the IKR, the Tribunal found that  factors  to  be  considered
          included: "i) Whether he has any other form of  documentation,  or
          information about the location of his entry in the civil register.
          An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or an  expired  CSID
          would all be of substantial assistance. For someone in  possession
          of  one  or  more  of  these  documents  the  process  should   be
          straightforward. A laissez-passer should not be counted for  these
          purposes: 39 these can be issued without  any  other  form  of  ID
          being available, are not of any assistance in  'tracing  back'  to
          the family record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad.
          ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it  is
          in an area held, or formerly held, by ISIL, is it operational?
          iii) Are there male family members who would be able  and  willing
          to attend the  civil  registry  with  the  returnee?  Because  the
          registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant to consider
          whether the relative is  from  the  mother  or  father's  side.  A
          maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would be able  to  assist
          in locating the original place of registration of the individual's
          mother, and from there the trail would need to be followed to  the
          place that her records were transferred  upon  marriage.  It  must
          also be borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
          are themselves undocumented; if that is the case  it  is  unlikely
          that they could be of assistance. A woman without a male  relative
          to assist with the process  of  redocumentation  would  face  very
          significant obstacles in that officials may refuse  to  deal  with
          her case at all" (at 106 and headnote).  It  was  considered  that
          "these questions are significant not just  to  the  assessment  of
          whether the returnee might be able to live  a  'relatively  normal
          life' once he or she gets to the IKR; they are  also  relevant  to
          whether he can get there at all" (at 107).


      40. I would state at the outset that I found the  appellant  to  be  a
          credible witness.  I  accept  his  evidence  in  is  entirety.  He
          answered the questions asked of him without hesitation and  indeed
          several relies he gave have since been confirmed  by  subsequently
          obtained documents, such as the letter from the Refugee Federation
          and the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heynes.  His
          account in both respects has  been  shown  to  be  true  and  this
          reinforces my impression of the appellant as an honest witness. It
          has already been accepted that the appellant is a Kurd from Kirkuk
          who left Iraq in 2007, aged 21.


      41. The appellant has tried to trace his family. There is evidence  of
          that. He has tried to find them through  the  Red  Cross  and  the
          Federation of  Iraqi  Refugees  but  to  no  avail.  That  is  not
          surprising given the turmoil in that part of the  world  over  the
          last few years and the population displacement. In that context it
          is wholly plausible that  the  appellant  lost  contact  with  his
          family in 2012.


      42. The appellant has also tried to obtain ID documents from the Iraqi
          Embassy on two occasions but given that he had no evidence of  his
          own identity it is not surprising that they were unable to  assist
          him. I take note of the stringent requirements and the  procedures
          followed by the Embassy before identity documents  can  be  issued
          (CPIN February 2019; and the expert report pp.  19-23).  I  accept
          his evidence on both these matters. The appellant was asked by  Mr
          Melvin why he had not  asked  his  family  to  send  his  identity
          documents to him  several  years  ago  when  they  were  still  in
          contact. He stated that he had not known he  had  needed  them  at
          that stage and that he had never been asked  for  them  and  never
          been given to understand that these were necessary. That has  been
          confirmed by the determination in his previous hearing before  the
          Tribunal. It is plain from that determination  that  no  questions
          were put  to  him  about  a  CSID  card  and  indeed  it  was  the
          respondent's policy at that time to return failed  asylum  seekers
          on  European  Travel  Documents  (as  confirmed  in  Mr   Melvin's
          submissions and in MK (documents -relocation) Iraq CG [2012]  UKUT
          00126 (IAC). At best, at the current time, a laissez passer issued
          by the Iraqi Embassy would get him to Baghdad but  would  then  be
          confiscated (CPIN February 2019; expert report pp. 23-24).


      43. I also consider whether the appellant would be able to instruct  a
          lawyer in Kirkuk to obtain documents on his behalf. This could  be
          possible following AA. However, this is subject to the caveat that
          a current or expired  passport  and/or  the  book  number  for  an
          applicant's family registration details could be provided. This is
          confirmed by Dr Fateh who points out that in order for a lawyer to
          be instructed, the appellant  would  need  to  know  his  ID  card
          number. Even if he could instruct a lawyer without those  details,
          the lawyer would not be physically able to search through all  the
          ledgers to find the appellant's details without knowledge  of  his
          ID number. Moreover, power of attorney could not be given  without
          evidence of identity (at pp. 22-23). There  was  no  challenge  to
          this by the respondent at the hearing.  As  I  have  accepted  the
          appellant's claim that he is not in touch with anyone in Iraq  and
          has not been for some seven years, does  not  have  a  current  or
          expired passport, and does not know the page and book  number  for
          his family registration details, I can only conclude that he would
          be unable to obtain a CSID using a lawyer or indeed by  any  other
          means.


      44. I take note of the letter from the Iraqi Ambassador to the UK of 5
          September 2018 (CPIN October 2018) but his observations are  based
          on a belief that most asylum seekers have identity  documents  and
          so would be able to  re-document  themselves  after  arrival.  The
          source of that belief is  not  stated.  It  is  unclear  what  the
          situation would be for those without such documents.


      45. It follows that in circumstances where the appellant is unable  to
          make contact and has no contact with family of friends in Iraq who
          might have been able to assist him, he is not  in  a  position  to
          instruct  a  local  lawyer  to  assist  him  to  obtain   identity
          documents. Nor is he in a position to obtain  these  documents  by
          any other means. Without the  required  documents,  the  appellant
          would be unable to have any semblance of a normal life in Iraq  as
          even if he were to be able to reach Baghdad on a  one-way  laissez
          passer, he would have no means to continue his journey to his home
          area or indeed to relocate to another part of  Iraq.  I  conclude,
          therefore, that the appellant cannot safely return  to  Iraq.  The
          adverse findings made in respect to the appellant's  asylum  claim
          by the previous Tribunal in 2008 have no bearing on this issue.


      46. Given my findings on the issue of identity documents and the  non-
          returnability of the  appellant  as  a  person  without  any  such
          documents and without the  means  of  obtaining  them,  I  do  not
          consider it necessary to consider the safety of return to  Kirkuk.




      47. Decision


      48. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


      49. Anonymity


      50. I make an order for anonymity.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 14 November 2019








