






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
PA/03415/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  | Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10th December 2018                 |On 20th December 2018                  |
|                                      |                                       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                     RC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Miah of Counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver promulgated on the  6th  June  2018  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's claims  for  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or relief on the grounds of articles 2,3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. As this case concerns the personal  life,  specifically  the
    sexuality of the appellant it  is  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Storey on 29th October 2018. Thus the case appeared before me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The leave refers to a decision made in the case of  Mr  HUT,  similarly
    anonymised. Mr HUT is allegedly the partner of the appellant.  HUT  had
    an appeal heard before Judge G Clarke. Judge Clarke allowed the appeal.
    The appeal before Judge Clarke was heard on  the  17th  April  and  the
    decision was promulgated on the 24th May 2018. In  the  decision  Judge
    Clarke found that  HUT  was  a  homosexual  and  was  in  a  long  term
    relationship with  the  appellant  herein,  thereby  finding  that  the
    appellant was also a homosexual. The appellant had  given  evidence  in
    the appeal of HUT.  A copy of the decision in the case of HUT has  been
    submitted as part of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. Judge Storey in granting leave questions  why  the  decision  of  Judge
    Clarke was not put before Judge  Oliver  raising  the  issue  that  the
    decision by Judge Oliver was  not  promulgated  until  6th  June  2018.
    Further Judge Storey questions why the decision of Judge Clarke was not
    adverted to in the grounds seeking permission to appeal at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal level. Judge Storey raises the prospect  that  had  Judge
    Oliver considered the "earlier" positive findings  on  credibility  the
    approach of the  judge  to  credibility  and  findings  may  have  been
    different.

 6. Judge Oliver heard this appeal on the  11th  April  2018  but  did  not
    promulgate his decision until 6th June 2018. The hearing in the case of
    HUT took place on the 17th April and the decision  was  promulgated  on
    the 24th May 2018. Accordingly the hearing for this appellant had  been
    concluded prior to the case of HUT being heard.

 7. At the hearing before me I raised the issue of whether  an  application
    had been made to join the two cases. Mr Miah sought to make  the  point
    that the respondent had not made application to the  Tribunal  to  join
    the cases. With respect it  was  open  to  the  appellant's  and  HUT's
    representative, Universal Solicitors who were acting for both, to apply
    to have the cases joined.  No  explanation  was  given  as  to  why  no
    application was made on behalf of the appellant and  HUT  to  join  the
    appeals. It does not appear that any application was made prior to  the
    hearing nor was any application apparently made at the hearing.  If  no
    application was made, Judge Oliver cannot  be  criticised  for  dealing
    with the appeal on the basis of the evidence that was before him.

 8. Equally once the decision by Judge Clark was issued the representatives
    did nothing to bring the judgment to the attention of Judge Oliver. The
    judge cannot be criticised dealing with the appeal on the basis of  the
    evidence that was before him.

 9. The appellant representative is arguing  that  the  decision  of  Judge
    Clarke should have been provided to Judge Oliver as  Judge  Oliver  had
    delayed producing his decision. Yet they appear to have taken no  steps
    until after the decision of Judge Oliver was issued.

10. In making the submission counsel  sought  to  rely  upon  the  case  of
    Chicaiza 2002 UKIAT 01200, wherein  it  asserted  that  an  adjudicator
    hearing an appeal for one member of a family, where there are decisions
    of other members of a family, should take into account those decisions,
    although the weight to be given to the findings of fact is a matter for
    the adjudicator/judge in the instant case. Further the  case  indicates
    that where one member of a family has been recognised as a  refugee  or
    granted asylum, a decision to refuse another  member  applying  on  the
    same basis must be carefully reasoned.

11. There a number of cases that deal with  family  members  and  decisions
    made. The case of:-

      a) MJ (Iran) v SSHD (2008 EWCA Civ 564.    In which the  following  is
         noted:-
    15 It is undesirable but unfortunately not uncommon in the asylum
    system to find that siblings or spouses' appeals have been separately
    heard. Where the first has succeeded, the Home Office routinely resists
    the introduction of either the record or the determination into the
    second one's appeal. Such resistance is generally justified because in
    principle no factual res judicata or issue estoppel is created by one
    determination in relation to others. In the case of Otshudi v SSHD
    [2004] EWCA Civ 893, giving a judgment with which the Vice-Chancellor
    and Chadwick LJ concurred, I said:
                 "1. This appeal comes before the court by permission of
                 Kay L.J. He was much influenced by the fact that, some ten
                 months after an adjudicator had dismissed Mr Otshudi's
                 appeal, another adjudicator, on almost identical evidence,
                 had allowed his brother's appeal. For reasons to which I
                 shall shortly come, this cannot furnish a ground of legal
                 challenge...
                 ....
                 10. Eleven days after the IAT dismissed Mr Otshudi's
                 appeal, his brother's asylum and human rights claims,
                 founded on the same evidence, were allowed by a different
                 adjudicator, Mr L D Sacks. We are told today that the
                 Home Secretary has not sought to appeal the decision. The
                 fact of this discrepant decision was drawn to the attention
                 of the IAT when permission to appeal to this court was
                 sought but the IAT made no reference to it in their
                 refusal. Although this is recounted in the appellant's
                 skeleton argument, and although the single Lord Justice who
                 gave permission to the appeal was concerned by it, no
                 submission of law is now founded on the outcome of the
                 brother's claim, and rightly so.
                 11. This is not the class of case which involves what
                 Laws LJ has called "a factual precedent" -- for example a
                 finding about the political situation in a given country at
                 a given moment. It is an illustration, if an alarming one,
                 of the fact that two conscientious decision-makers can come
                 to opposite or divergent conclusions on the same evidence.
                 But it is no more material to the legal soundness of the
                 present adjudicator's decision than hers would be to the
                 soundness of the second adjudicator's decision."
      This court went on, it should be said, to invite the Home Office to
      give very serious consideration to the possible material injustice
      that might nevertheless be reflected in such discrepant decision-
      making (see also, in this regard, Macdonald's Immigration Law
      paragraph 18.144).




      b) Otshudi v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 893 also makes the point, in dealing
         with discrepant decisions  between  two  brothers.  It  has  to  be
         accepted on the facts that the discrepant decisions were 11  months
         apart.

      c) AS & AA (Somalia)  2006  UKAIT  00052  set  down  that  a  judicial
         determination stand as a determination of the  issues  between  the
         parties but does not govern later litigation between other parties.

      d) By comparison see the case of AA & AH v SSHD  2007  EWCA  Civ  1040
         wherein it was indicated that a previous decision by an adjudicator
         may be a starting point  where  there  is  a  material  overlapping
         evidence. Even then whilst the first tribunal  decision  may  be  a
         starting point it was for  the  second  tribunal  to  evaluate  the
         evidence independently and decide  the  case  before  them  on  the
         merits.

12. With regard to the present case it has to be noted that  nobody  sought
    to put the decision of Judge Clarke before Judge Oliver.  It  does  not
    appear that the appellant's representative sought to do so or sought to
    have the cases linked. In that event the judge cannot be criticised for
    dealing with the case on the basis of the evidence that was before him.

13. Secondly there would be an issue as to whether or  not  there  was  any
    significant difference between the two cases which  might  impact  upon
    the approach to be taken with regard to credibility. As  indicated  the
    decision of Judge Clarke has been provided to the Tribunal. In  respect
    of matters impacting upon the credibility of the parties it has  to  be
    noted that in this appellant's case there were credibility issues as to
    whether  the  appellant  had  submitted  false  English-language   test
    certificate in the past. In the case of HUT there was no suggestion  of
    false certificates or attempts to mislead the immigration  authorities.
    There were therefore issues which impacted upon the credibility of  the
    appellant's account in the present case which were not present  in  the
    case of HUT.

14. In considering the  appellant's  position  Judge  Oliver  rejected  his
    claims to be a homosexual. However in  paragraph  37  the  judge  makes
    alternative findings in the event of him being wrong with regard to the
    conclusion that the appellant is not a homosexual. The judge has  noted
    that the appellant although in the United Kingdom had  on  his  account
    kept his sexuality discreet and not disclosed such to  members  of  his
    family, including an uncle with whom he lived. It was stated  that  the
    uncle became aware of the appellant's sexuality when he opened  letters
    from the tribunal to the appellant. Despite that since that period  the
    uncle  has  continued  to  support  the  appellant  but  the  appellant
    continues to live his life discreetly.

15. In the case of HUT consideration had been given as to  whether  or  not
    the appellant could relocate  within  Bangladesh  or  whether  when  he
    returned through fear of persecution he would hide his  sexuality.  The
    conclusion was that HUT would not be able to live his life as he wished
    to as a homosexual by reason of a fear of persecution.

16. By comparison in respect of the appellant the judge was satisfied  that
    the appellant was living his life discreetly not by reason of the  fear
    of persecution but rather by reason of family pressures and not wishing
    to upset his family. The judge concluded that  if  the  appellant  were
    return to Bangladesh he would continue to  live  his  life  discreetly.
    That was a finding of fact that the judge was entitled to make  on  the
    evidence.

17. The issue was then raised as to whether or not the appellant could live
    in an area in Bangladesh as a discrete homosexual  without  a  risk  of
    persecution. It was not a point that had been raised  in  the  original
    grounds of appeal. The appellant's representative had to apply to amend
    the grounds of appeal in order to include the  point.  Even  though  it
    came at such a late stage, no  issue  was  taken  by  the  respondent's
    representative.

18. Mr Miah sought to argue that the conclusions  by  the  judge  that  the
    appellant could live in a specific area of Dhaka provided he lived  his
    life discreetly was not made out by the background evidence. He  sought
    to submit that Judge Clark has taken a more detailed  consideration  of
    the evidence. With respect whilst Judge Clarke  has  quoted  at  length
    section of the background evidence the conclusion by Judge  Clarke  was
    to the effect that HUT would have to hide his nature by reason  of  the
    fear of persecution.

19. The conclusion by Judge Oliver was that the appellant would be discreet
    so as not to upset his family rather than by  reason  of  the  fear  of
    persecution. Thereafter  the  judge  has  relied  upon  the  background
    information submitted by the appellant's representative. Extracts  have
    been produced from the Home Office Country Policy and Information  Note
    on Bangladesh  and  sexual  orientation.  As  noted  whilst  there  are
    statutory provisions no arrests and prosecutions have been noted  under
    the statutory provisions making homosexuality  illegal  the  judge  had
    specifically noted the  background  information.  At  page  74  of  the
    appellants bundle it was noted that Dhaka was the centre for  the  LGBT
    movement  which  provided  a   supportive   environment.   Whilst   the
    environment was closed and private it existed.

20. Having considered the background evidence the judge on  an  alternative
    basis has found that the evidence was such  that  the  appellant  would
    live discreetly and that he could live in parts of Dhaka as a  discrete
    homosexual. The judge has adequately examine  the  evidence  and  given
    valid reasons for the conclusions reached.

21. In the circumstances there is no error of law  in  the  judgement.  The
    judge was entitled to deal with the appeal on the basis that he has.



Notice of Decision

22. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Signed

Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McClure                           Date  13th
December 2018



Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                       Date 13th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

