
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/03193/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd September 2019 & 18th November 2019|On 26th November 2019             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                  Mr K. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain of Counsel, instructed by B Assured Law
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Forster made
following a hearing at Bradford on 8th May 2019.

Mr Hussain commenced his submissions by stating that the judge had erred in
his consideration of the previous judge's decision in 2011, failing to look
at the evidence in the round and being unduly influenced by Judge Reed's
conclusion that the appellant had manufactured his claim to be a gay man at
risk on return to Pakistan.  There is little merit in that submission.  The
judge correctly stated that his starting point was the decision of 2011 and
then went on to say that the facts on which the appellant now relies are
different from those considered previously.  He said in terms that he did
not regard the issue of the appellant's sexuality as settled by the 2011
decision and that he had also considered the new evidence now put forward
by the appellant.  There is no error in that approach.

The appellant claims to be a gay man and five witnesses gave evidence on
his behalf, in addition to himself, at the hearing.  Although the judge
gave reasons for not accepting the evidence of the appellant's partner,
highlighting a number of discrepancies in her evidence, the judge also
heard from three other individuals in person who attested to the
relationship between the appellant and his partner, who is a transgender
female.  He also had letters from the manager of the Bradford LGBT
Strategic Partnership and from another individual who is a group organiser
at Equity, where the appellant attends on a regular basis.

The judge did not analyse that evidence.  More importantly, he did not
consider the evidence from the three individuals who attended the hearing,
merely stating that he had to consider it with the appellant's own
evidence, which he approached with caution because he had lied and was not
a reliable witness.

Mr Diwnycz accepted that the judge had not given adequate reasons for his
conclusions.

The judge fell into error by failing to analyse the evidence of the three
witnesses who came to the Tribunal to state that they knew the appellant
and his partner and to testify that they were in a genuine and warm
relationship.  It is not sufficient to deal with that evidence merely by
stating that it should be disregarded because he found the appellant to
have given unreliable evidence.

The decision is set aside.

Resumed Hearing

 1. At the resumed hearing I heard oral evidence from the  appellant,  from
    his partner T. I, and from five friends of theirs, A.A, M.M B, Z H  and
    M.A.  A.A runs a local LGBT group for men in Bradford and has  done  so
    for the past six years.

 2. The appellant claims that he has been in a relationship  with  T.I  who
    was born a male and is transgender since June 2012.  They live a couple
    of streets away from each other, meet every day and spend part  of  the
    week nights together.

 3. Mr Diwnycz asked both K.A and T.I a number of  questions  about  recent
    activities  which  they  enjoyed  together  and  both  gave  consistent
    evidence.  The evidence of their  relationship  was  supported  by  the
    other witnesses from their own individual knowledge who came forward to
    give evidence today.

 4. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to challenge any of the evidence which has been
    given  and said that the position of the Secretary of State was that if
    the relationship was accepted it  followed  that  the  appeal  must  be
    allowed in line with the concession in the reasons for  refusal  letter
    and the case law.  If the appellant is as he says he  is  then  a  real
    risk on return is established.

Findings and Conclusions

 5. The evidence today has been wholly consistent and unchallenged.

 6. I am satisfied to the required standard that the appellant is in a  gay
    relationship with a transgender female and that the  couple  have  been
    together for some seven years.  This is not a relationship which  could
    continue in Pakistan.  T.I is a British citizen and in the  process  of
    changing her gender from male to female.  According to the Home  Office
    Pakistan Country Information  and  Guidance  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code
    criminalises any  form  of  sexual  contact  outside  the  conventional
    understanding of heterosexual contact and whilst the authorities rarely
    prosecute cases, the police use the laws for harassment and  extortion.
    The appellant is likely to either wish to live freely and openly as  an
    LGBT person, as he has done in the UK or resort to concealment  of  his
    sexual orientation for fear that he would otherwise be persecuted.

 7. The appellant's  asylum  application  was  originally  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State because it was not believed that the  appellant  was
    gay, nor that he was in a subsisting relationship  with  a  transgender
    female. This question having been resolved in  the  appellants  favour,
    and in the light of the fact that no submissions  were  made  that  the
    appeal ought to be dismissed, it follows that it must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in law.  The decision is set aside.  It  is  remade
as follows.  The appeal is allowed on all grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 25 November 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

