
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03456/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 23rd November 2016              |on 15th December 2016              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before


                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY








                                   Between


                                 MR. M. N-N

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And




               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs. Brakaj of Iris Law Firm.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R. Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

   1. I make an anonymity order to reduce any potential risk to the
      appellant from third parties as decisions of the Upper Tribunal are
      readily accessible on the Web.


   2. The appellant is a national of Iran born in 1986. He claimed
      protection on the basis he is at risk if returned because of imputed
      political opinion. The claim is premised upon the authorities wanting
      him for having a prohibited book. His identity is accepted and the
      respondent accepts that he could be at risk if of interest to the
      authorities in Iran.

   3. He said that a friend gave him a book to mind. The appellant
      subsequently had a quick look at the book and saw it was an insulting
      account of the life of the former Supreme Leader in Iran, Ayatollah
      Ruhollah Khomeini. From the content he realised the book could bring
      the reader into difficulties with the authorities and so he decided to
      return it to his friend. He went with the book to the gym where his
      friend regularly trained but he was not there. As he was leaving a car
      pulled up and a number of men approached the appellant. A scuffle
      followed during which he managed to escape but left his bag containing
      the book behind. He noticed the men had radios and believe they were
      from the Iranian security services. Because of this he did not go home
      but went to a friend's house where he remained for a few days. He
      telephoned his family and was advised State agents had visited. His
      friend was able to find out more details about the book by asking his
      father, a University Professor, and the conclusion was that the
      appellant would be in danger for having it. It was decided that he
      should leave Iran and with the help of an agent travelled overland to
      Turkey and then flew to the United Kingdom.


   4. His claim was refused by the respondent on the basis his account was
      not credible.

   5. His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Row. The judge
      did not find the account credible and referred to internal
      inconsistencies. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
      granted on the basis that it was arguable that the judge made material
      errors of law in reaching this conclusion on the appellant's
      credibility.

The First tier Tribunal.

   6. The judge referred to a number of aspects considered relevant in the
      assessment of the appellant credibility. I summarise these as follows
      :


           i) During the appellant's national service he worked for the
              police. Given this background the judge questioned the
              likelihood of entrusting a dangerous book to him because of
              the risk he might inform.
          ii) If the authorities were aware the appellant was in possession
              of an illegal book why they would they seek to approach him
              at the gym where he might not have the book instead of
              attending at his home.
         iii) The judge commented on his account of the scuffle and escape,
              stating that it varied. In his asylum interview he said he
              ran down the street and jumped on a motorcycle taxi whereas
              in his statement and oral evidence he saw someone on a
              motorbike nearby and pushed the rider off and used it to
              escape. Although the judge considered it a minor point there
              was a variation in the number of people involved.
          iv) At hearing, the appellant said he telephoned his parents the
              following day and his mother said the security forces had
              visited the previous night and taken his father away.
              However, in his asylum interview he said when he telephoned
              his father answered and said government agents had been to
              the house the previous night and there was no mention of
              anyone being taken away. The judge found this to be a major
              discrepancy.
           v) The judge commented on the absence of evidence that the book
              was prohibited in Iran and described this as fundamental to
              the claim. This had been raised in the refusal letter and the
              appellant in the intervening time had failed to produce any
              evidence about it.
          vi) The judge also referred to section 8 of the Asylum and
              Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004, commenting
              that the appellant had not claimed protection in Turkey or
              Dubai.
         vii) In oral evidence he described using a passport in his own
              name which was a forgery which he destroyed before
              approaching the UK immigration authorities. Had he produced a
              passport this would have indicated the plane he arrived on
              and further checks could have been made. The appellant said
              he did not know what airline he travelled on. At screening he
              referred to having a piece of paper with a sticker on it. The
              judge viewed this as a failure to cooperate with the UK
              authorities in establishing his travel route. The judge took
              the view that one explanation was that he travelled on his
              own passport and then destroyed it to prevent his return.
        viii) The judge commented that in the interval the appellant had
              not produced any of the documentation he had referred to in
              relation to his identity.
          ix) The appellant had not produced any statements from his
              parents or from the friend he said helped and the judge
              commented that he could be expected to have made some effort
              to contact them.
           x) Finally, the judge at paragraph 35 referred to no effort
              being made to contact the Iranian authorities for evidence
              that the appellant was wanted.
          xi) The judge in concluding referred to discrepancies in the
              evidence and the circumstances of the appellant's arrival in
              the United Kingdom as to conceal his journey and identity.
              The judge did not find a prescribed book established. The
              judge found  the appellant was never in possession of an
              illegal book nor that the Iranian authorities had any
              interest in him or his family. The conclusion was that he was
              an economic migrant who had fabricated an account. The judge
              did not find the appellant had left Iran illegally but even
              if he had, then in line with SP (Risk on return- illegal
              exit) Iran CG [2009] UK AIT 00053 he would not be at real
              risk solely on the basis of leaving illegally.

The Upper Tribunal

   7. In seeking permission to appeal issue was taken with (i) above. At
      hearing, Mrs. Brakaj pointed out that military service was compulsory
      and the fact he worked with the police did not mean his friend would
      mistrust him. She pointed out the appellant has a brother in United
      Kingdom who has been recognised as a refugee.


   8. Regarding (iii), the judge had acknowledged that a discrepancy over
      the number of people involved was a minor point.

   9. Regarding (iv), she submitted that in the appellant's statement he
      said that he phoned home and his mother told him his father had been
      taken away. She submitted that in doing so he was correcting an error
      in his asylum interview which recorded his father answered the
      telephone. Consequently, it was unfair of the judge to conclude the
      account was fabricated and he had forgotten which version he gave
      originally.

  10. Regarding (vii), the leave application contended that there was no
      discrepancy about appellant travelling on a passport and a piece of
      paper with a sticker on it. Reference was made to his screening
      interview where he did say the agent took the Iranian passport from
      him in Dubai and he was given a paper with a sticker on it. In his
      asylum interview he referred to having a passport which he used to
      gain entry to the United Kingdom. It was submitted any inconsistency
      was minor and could be attributed to fatigue on the appellant's was
      part and problems with interpreting.

  11. Regarding the appellant's conduct at the airport the grounds states
      that the respondent could have checked flights from Dubai to verify
      his account. In submissions Mrs. Brakaj said the appellant had
      produced evidence of his identity subsequently in the form of
      kickboxing certificates.

  12. It was also contended that the judge erred in expecting the appellant
      to arrange to have his passport sent from Iran when his identity had
      been accepted. To suggest that enquiries should have been made with
      the Iranian officials on his behalf to see if he was wanted could have
      placed him at risk. The grounds argue that the appellant's did not
      claim to be involved in criminal activities but was at risk for
      imputed political beliefs.

  13. In response, Mrs Pettersen acknowledge that the judge erred at
      paragraph 35 in suggesting contact could be made with the Iranian
      authorities to see if the appellant was wanted. However, she submitted
      this was not a material error because the judge founded the decision
      upon other credibility findings: principally, the inconsistency about
      whether his father had been detained. The claim of fatigue and
      problems with interpretation did not change the strength of this
      point.

  14. She pointed out that the burden of proof was upon the appellant. The
      refusal letter had indicated that no information could be found by the
      respondent about the book at issue. The judge had commented about the
      appellant's failure to produce any evidence about the book
      particularly as he had had a year from the decision to seek this.

  15. By way of reply, Mrs. Brakaj focused on the concession by the
      presenting officer that the judge was wrong to suggest the Iranian
      authorities be approached.

Consideration.


  16. The decision has to be considered in the round. The judge has
      identified a number of material inconsistencies. The judge has
      indicated that some inconsistencies were viewed as significant whilst
      others were more minor. Although the judge raised the issue of the
      appellant's military service I note it ended six years earlier.
      However, in the appellant's statement he does say he was stationed at
      the disciplinary force within the police in Teheran. It was open to
      the judge to comment on the likelihood of someone with such a
      background being entrusted with dangerous material. The decision does
      not suggest this was a major factor in the judge's mind.


  17. The judge did question why the authorities would not have gone to the
      appellant's home rather than following him to the gym. This was a
      matter of legitimate comment rather than speculation. The logic was
      that he could have been at the gym to do his normal training and not
      have brought the book with him.


  18. The judge referred to inconsistencies about how the appellant escaped.
      His interview recorded at question 37 that after the altercation he
      ran a hundred metres down the road and left on a motorcycle taxi. In
      his statement at paragraph 6 he said he pushed someone of their
      motorcycle and escaped. There is a clear contradiction in the two
      accounts and the judge was entitled to comment on this. The judge
      indicates a fair approach by not placing undue weight on a discrepancy
      about the numbers involved. A person may have limited recollection of
      this but they should know the details of the claimed escape.


  19. The judge attached significant weight to the discrepancy between his
      asylum interview where he said he phoned home and his father answered
      and his statement and oral evidence that his mother answered and told
      him the authorities had taken his father away. Mrs. Brakaj has
      submitted these were not inconsistencies but rather the appellant in
      his statement correcting an earlier mistake. However, there was no
      such correction following the interview and his statement does not
      read as if it is correcting an error. Such a discrepancy is
      significant and the judge was entitled to comment on it.


  20. The judge then comments on the appellant's failure to claim in other
      countries. This is a legitimate comment although again the impression
      is that this was not determinative. The judge was influenced by what
      the appellant did on arrival at the airport. If a person on reaching a
      safe haven destroys documentation which would make their return more
      difficult this is a legitimate matter to comment on. The judge has
      highlighted a discrepancy as to the documentation used and this is
      apparent from the screening and subsequent account. Such matters were
      relevant in assessing credibility.


  21. The judge rightly pointed out that central to the claim was the
      appellant having a prescribed book. He named the book and the author
      but the respondent could find no trace of it. The judge was entitled
      to comment that the central aspect of the claim had not been
      demonstrated.


  22. The presenting officer has acknowledged that it was incorrect to
      expect an approach to the Iranian officials to see if the appellant
      was wanted. Whilst on the face of it this may appear unrealistic to
      expect this, in fairness to the judge this was stated in the context
      of offences being committed under the penal code. It was accepted by
      the respondent that if the appellant's conduct imputed political
      opinion to him and he was adverse interest to the authorities he would
      be at risk. Whilst the judges comment here is perhaps misconceived I
      do not find it central to the decision.

  23. The judge has set out a number of factors in assessing the truth of
      the claim. The points made were valid and from these the judge was
      entitled to dismiss the claim on credibility grounds. There was a
      general improbability of him being asked to mind the book in the
      circumstance. There was the discrepancy about how he came to be on a
      motorcycle. There was the significant the inconsistency about his
      father's detention. There was his behaviour in relation to travel
      documents . Finally, there was no evidence about the prescribed book
      that was central to his claim. I asked at the hearing if since
      anything more had been found and was advised not. Furthermore, no
      further documentation had been made available. The judge did look at
      the evidence as a whole and a credibility assessment requires
      analysing detail and evaluating matters in the round.

Conclusion

  24.  It is my conclusion that First-tier Tribunal Judge Row gave careful
      consideration to the appeal and identified substantial credibility
      issues justifying its dismissal. I find no material error of law and
      the decision shall stand.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated. Consequently, the decision
of First Tier Tribunal Judge Row dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



















