
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/03985/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 June 2017                           |On 21 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. O.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Oremuyiwa, Solicitor, Wilsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who entered the UK legally on 14
      August 2005 as a student, but became  an  overstayer  on  31  December
      2009. He made an application for protection on 2 March  2016  the  day
      before removal directions had been set, following the  rejection  (and
      certification as clearly unfounded) of a human rights application.
   2. The Respondent refused that protection application on 11  April  2016,
      and the Appellant's appeal to the First tier Tribunal ["FtT"]  against
      that decision was heard on 22 November 2016. It was allowed on  asylum
      and Article 3 grounds, in a decision promulgated on 13  December  2016
      by First Tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson.
   3. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal that  decision  on  18
      April 2017 by First tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro on the basis  that  it
      was arguable the  Judge  had  either  failed  to  deal  with  relevant
      evidence, or had failed to give adequate reasons for her acceptance of
      the disputed core of the Appellant's claim.
   4. The Appellant has filed no Rule 24 Notice in relation to the grant  of
      permission. Neither  party  has  made  formal  application  to  adduce
      further evidence. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   5. In the reasons given for the refusal  of  the  Appellant's  claim  the
      Respondent disputed his claim to be a bisexual, or a  homosexual.  The
      dispute over the issue of  his  sexuality  was  not  conceded  by  the
      Respondent in the course of the hearing. Thus it  was  an  issue  that
      fell to the Judge to resolve, because the Appellant's claim to  be  at
      risk of harm in the event of return to Nigeria would be bound to  fail
      if he was in truth a heterosexual.
   6. I am satisfied that although there is a section in the decision  which
      is headed as "findings of fact" that what follows under  this  heading
      is no more than a recitation of  part  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.
      There is no analysis of the weight to  be  given  to  the  account  so
      recited. There is also no reference to the evidence or the submissions
      relied upon by the Respondent as establishing that the  Appellant  was
      very far from being a reliable witness, or, the weight to be  attached
      to them. Although part of the immigration history is set out, there is
      no analysis of it, or its relevance to the matters in dispute. In  the
      circumstances there is  no  reasoning  behind  the  finding  that  the
      Appellant is a bisexual [66]. Thus  the  Respondent's  case  that,  at
      best, the decision contains a bald acceptance of  the  core  issue  in
      dispute without reasons, and at worst that the decision  simply  fails
      to engage with the evidence relevant to the core  disputed  issue,  is
      made out.
   7. In the circumstances the decision discloses a material  error  of  law
      that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe, and the decision must
      in the circumstances  be  set  aside  and  remade.  I  have  in  these
      circumstances considered whether or not to remit  the  appeal  to  the
      First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard, or  whether  to  proceed  to
      remake it in the Upper  Tribunal.  In  circumstances  where  it  would
      appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered  by
      the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has  been  to
      deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case to  be  properly
      considered by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(a)  of  the
      Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the
      judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard to the over-
      riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted
      to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement
      of 25 September 2012.
   8. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The appeal is not to be listed  before
        Judge Head-Rapson.
    ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) There is presently anticipated to be the  Appellant  and  no  other
        witness, and the time estimate is as a result, 3 hours.
    iv) It is not anticipated by the Respondent that she  has  any  further
        evidence to be filed. The Appellant anticipates that  a  review  of
        the evidence is required and that a short further witness statement
        may be filed. The Appellant is therefore  to  file  and  serve  any
        further evidence to be relied upon at his appeal  by  5pm  11  July
        2017
     v) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
        available date at the North Shields hearing centre  after  18  July
        2017.
    vi) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
   vii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

   9. The decision promulgated on 13 December 2016 did involve the making of
      an error of law sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and
      reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal
      with the directions set out above.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 20 June 2017
















