
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/04727/2017


                            the immigration Acts


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8 January 2020                   |On 24 January 2020                   |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                                   Mr T K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings. The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this  order,  with
reasons.
I make this order because this is a protection claim.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms U Miszkiel, of Counsel, instructed  by  VJ  Nathan
solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer.




                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka born on  22  February  1995  who
    claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  10  October  2016,
    appeals against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  K
    Swinnerton who, in a determination promulgated  on  17  September  2019
    following a hearing on 9 September 2019, dismissed his appeal on asylum
    grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant claimed to have experienced problems with the Sri  Lankan
    authorities during three incidents. The first incident occurred  on  20
    September 2013, the second on 13 August 2014 and the third on  24  July
    2016. He was beaten and detained during the first and  third  incidents
    and pushed down a well during the second incident. He was released from
    detention on two of the three occasions, on the payment of monies.  His
    family continue to be harassed by the Sri  Lankan  authorities.  He  is
    involved  in  the  United  Kingdom   with   the   activities   of   the
    "Transnational Government of Tamil  Eelam"  ("TGTE"),  an  organisation
    which is proscribed in Sri Lanka.

 3. The following is a summary of the three incidents, taken from para 7 of
    the judge's decision:

         i)   The first incident: On 20 September 2013, the appellant made a
         video recording on his mobile phone for  over  five  minutes  of  a
         youngster being beaten by two police officers. The police took away
         his phone and deleted the video that he had made. He was  taken  by
         six police officers to the nearby Point Pedro police station  where
         he was beaten with a piece of wire and a gun butt. He was  detained
         for three days after which his father paid 50,000  rupees  for  his
         release.

         ii)  The second incident: On 13 August 2014, the appellant was in a
         library discussing with his friends the  rape  of  the  wife  of  a
         former LTTE fighter  and  how  it  should  not  be  allowed.  Their
         discussion was overheard by someone who informed  the  army.  Later
         that day, five or six members of the army came and pushed him  into
         a well which was 15 feet deep and which resulted in  the  appellant
         breaking his hip bone and hitting the back  of  his  head.  Nothing
         happened to the friends with whom he had had  the  discussion.  His
         parents then moved to another address. At his asylum interview,  he
         said that he spent 7 days in Point Pedro hospital and one month  in
         Jaffna hospital. He remained in bed for 6 months as he was not able
         to walk.

         iii) The third incident: On 24 July 2016, the appellant  went  with
         his paternal uncle and aunt to Keerimalai. He took a photograph  of
         people demonstrating against a building  being  erected  on  temple
         land and put it on Facebook later that day. Four army officers came
         to the appellant's family home on 29 July 2016 and he was  detained
         until 4 August 2016. On this occasion, he was burnt with  cigarette
         butts and four of his teeth were broken. He was released after  his
         uncle in the United Kingdom sent monies to pay to the army.

 4. The documents that were before the judge included the following:

         i)   Two reports from Dr Saleh Dhumad, MBChB,  MRCPsych,  MSc  CBT,
         Consultant Psychiatrist and Cognitive Behavioural  Psychotherapist.
         The first report was dated 4 December 2018 (pages 29-54  of  bundle
         SB1) and the second was dated 1 July 2019 (pages 6-17 of the bundle
         SB2). In both reports, Dr Dhumad said,  inter  alia,  that  in  his
         opinion the appellant's condition was consistent with  a  diagnosis
         of moderate depressive episode. In his second report, he also  said
         that the appellant's condition was consistent  with  post-traumatic
         stress disorder ("PTSD") and that  the  appellant's  condition  had
         deteriorated since he saw the appellant in December 2018.  He  also
         said that the appellant was fit to attend the hearing and give oral
         evidence,  that  he  was  vulnerable  and  able  to  following  the
         proceedings meaningfully and participate  safely.  However,  in  Dr
         Dhumad's opinion, the appellant needed some  adjustments,  such  as
         more time and regular breaks.

         ii)  A copy of the records of the appellant's GP  from  10  October
         2016 (the date of the appellant's claimed  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom) until 16 August 2019 (the "GP  records")  (pages  3-14  of
         bundle SB3).

         iii) A medical report dated 17 June 2017  (pages  14-30  of  bundle
         AB1) from Dr Andres Izquierdo-Martin, Faced  FRCEM,  Consultant  in
         Emergency Medicine, who examined the appellant on 8 June  2017  and
         gave expert evidence on the appellant's scars. He grouped the scars
         into three groups, i.e. Scars 1, 2 and  3.  He  said,  inter  alia,
         that:

             a)   Scars 1 (six round hyper-pigmented scars on the middle of
             the back), which the appellant attributed to being burnt  with
             hot  cigarette  butts  during  his  detention  in  the   third
             incident, were typical of intentional and  unwillingly  caused
             injuries as described by the appellant. Dr  Martin  considered
             alternative causes. As to whether these scars could have  been
             the result of self-inflicted injuries, Dr Martin said that, in
             his opinion, this was "impossible in view of the  position  of
             the scars, on a cluster on the back, an area which would  have
             been  difficult  to  self-reach".  In   his   opinion,   other
             alternative causes were impossible or extremely unlikely.

             b)   Scars 2 (several elongated hyper-pigmented scars  on  the
             back) and scar 3 (a mildly hyper-pigmented scar on  the  lower
             part of the right flank of  the  appellant's  trunk),  all  of
             which the appellant attributed to being beaten with long blunt
             implements, were highly consistent  with  deliberately  caused
             injuries during an assault as described by the appellant.   He
             considered  that  "deliberate  self-harm  was  a   theoretical
             possibility although very unlikely in view of the position  of
             the scars, on an  area  (back)  difficult  to  self-reach  and
             harm", that it was possible that they could have  been  caused
             by accidental injury,  e.g.  falls  or  every  day  activities
             although less likely, and that they were very unlikely to have
             been caused by a skin infection  or  other  inflammatory  skin
             condition.

    In his "Summary and conclusion", Dr Martin said, at para 6.2:

         "The scars on the back are typical of the events described  by  the
         [appellant] of being intentionally burnt. The rest of the scars are
         less specific  but  did  not  show  any  inconsistencies  with  the
         description  of  events   by   the   [appellant].   Following   the
         recommendation in Chapter V, Section D, para 188  of  the  Istanbul
         Protocol where  it  states  that  "ultimately  it  is  the  overall
         evaluation of all lesions and not the consistency  of  each  lesion
         with a particular form of torture which is important  in  assessing
         the torture story", overall in my  expert  opinion  the  scars  are
         typical of torture as described by the [appellant]".

 5. This is a convenient point at which to quote  the  following  from  the
    Istanbul Protocol:

         "D. Examination and evaluation following specific forms of torture

         187. The following discussion is not  meant  to  be  an  exhaustive
             discussion of all forms of torture,  but  it  is  intended  to
             describe in more detail the medical aspects  of  many  of  the
             more common forms of torture. For  each  lesion  and  for  the
             overall pattern of lesions, the physician should indicate  the
             degree of consistency between it and the attribution given  by
             the patient. The following terms are generally used:

                  (a)  Not consistent: the lesion could not have been caused
                  by the trauma described;

                  (b)  Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by
                  the trauma described, but it is non-specific and there are
                  many other possible causes;

                  (c)  Highly consistent: the lesion could have been  caused
                  by the trauma described, and there are few other  possible
                  causes;

                  (d)  Typical of: this is an  appearance  that  is  usually
                  found with this  type  of  trauma,  but  there  are  other
                  possible causes; 37

                  (e)  Diagnostic of: this appearance could  not  have  been
                  caused in any way other than that described.

         188. Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of  all  lesions  and
             not the consistency of each lesion with a particular  form  of
             torture that is  important  in  assessing  the  torture  story
             (...)."

 6. Returning to the judge's decision, he said at para 32 that he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had given a truthful and accurate  account
    of the basis of his asylum claim and that, taking all of the  available
    evidence into account, he did not accept the appellant's core  account.
    He gave his reasons at paras 22 to 32 of his decision. I shall refer to
    them as necessary.

 7. At the hearing before the judge, the appellant was  represented  by  Ms
    Amanda Walker, instructed by A & P Solicitors. Ms  Walker  settled  the
    grounds of appeal in the application to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    for permission (hereafter the "FtT grounds").  Following the refusal of
    permission by the FtT, A & P Solicitors lodged an  application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal ("UT") for permission. The grounds in  support  of  this
    application (hereafter the "UT grounds") were  settled  by  Ms  Shivani
    Jegarajah, instructed  by  A  &  P  Solicitors.  The  UT  grounds  were
    substantially different from the FtT grounds although  there  was  some
    overlap in issues. They did not refer to the FtT grounds or state  that
    the appellant continued to rely upon them.

 8. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara  on  29  November
    2019. The Notice of Hearing for the hearing on 8 January 2020 was  sent
    to the appellant and A & P Solicitors on 3 December 2019.

 9. On 19 December  2019,  the  UT  received  a  letter  from  V  J  Nathan
    Solicitors informing the UT that they had been instructed.

10. At the commencement of the hearing before me, Ms Miszkiel  informed  me
    that she had only recently been instructed and that the  appellant  and
    his current representatives had not received  all  the  papers  in  the
    appellant's case from the previous solicitors. On taking  instructions,
    she informed me that the appellant instructed his current solicitors  a
    few days before they wrote their letter to the  UT  dated  19  December
    2019.

11. I provided Ms Miszkiel and Mr Lindsay with copies of the FtT grounds.

12. There was some overlap between the two sets of grounds.  It  was  clear
    that Ms Miszkiel had permission to argue those of the FtT grounds which
    came within the ambit of the UT grounds. These are described and  dealt
    with below, at (A).

13. Ms Miszkiel did not have permission to argue the remainder of  the  FtT
    grounds, nor did she suggest at the hearing before  me  that  she  did.
    Indeed, it is impossible to see how it can be said that  the  appellant
    had permission to argue the remainder of the FtT grounds given that the
    application that Judge Kamara considered was  the  application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal for permission, that the UT grounds did not  state  that
    the appellant continued to rely upon the FtT grounds and  that  the  UT
    grounds did not otherwise incorporate the FtT grounds.

14. Ms Miszkiel made an application at the hearing for permission  to  rely
    upon certain of the FtT grounds in respect of which the  appellant  did
    not have permission. These are described and dealt with below, at (B).

15. I heard submissions on the application for permission to amend de  bene
    esse.

16. Given that the grounds in respect of which the appellant had permission
    and the grounds in respect  of  which  Ms  Miszkiel  sought  permission
    challenged the judge's assessment of credibility, I have borne in  mind
    the possibility that, whilst one or more of  the  grounds  or  proposed
    grounds may not in themselves be sufficient to cause  the  decision  of
    the judge to be set  aside,  the  position  might  be  otherwise  on  a
    holistic consideration of them all.

17. I pause here to record that Ms Miszkiel informed me that  she  did  not
    seek to rely upon para 22 of the FtT grounds because this  relied  upon
    the notes of Ms Walker of the appellant's oral evidence at the  hearing
    concerning the third incident but Ms Walker's  notebook  had  not  been
    submitted, nor was there any witness  statement  from  Ms  Walker.  The
    judge's manuscript Record of Proceedings (RoP) did not assist  in  this
    regard because this part of the RoP was not legible.

18. I shall now deal first  with  the  grounds  in  respect  of  which  the
    appellant has permission before dealing with the grounds in respect  of
    which Ms Miszkiel made her application for permission to amend. I  have
    adopted my own numbering of the grounds indicating clearly which of the
    UT grounds and the FtT grounds my numbered grounds relate to.

(A) The grounds in respect of which the appellant has permission

19. These grounds may be summarised as follows:

         (i)  Ground 1 (ground 1 of the UT grounds and paras 4-6 of the  FtT
         grounds): At para 29, the judge said  that  he  had  difficulty  in
         reconciling the assessment of Dr Dhumad in his second report to the
         effect that the overall condition of the appellant had deteriorated
         since his previous assessment in December 2018 with the entries  in
         the GP records during that period. The judge  considered  that  the
         entries in the GP records did not appear  to  support  Dr  Dhumad's
         later assessment "such that I  have  difficulty  in  accepting  the
         overall conclusion of Dr Dhumad in his later report".

    Ground 1 contends that the judge  had  misapprehended  the  GP  records
    which, it is contended, were consistent with Dr Dhumad's  opinion  that
    the appellant's  condition  had  deteriorated  in  the  period  between
    December 2018 and July 2019.

         ii)  Ground 2 (ground 2 of the UT grounds and paras 8-11 of the FtT
         grounds): Although the judge had stated at para 13 of his  decision
         that he had  informed  the  parties  that  he  had  agreed  to  the
         appellant being treated as a vulnerable witness, there was  nothing
         in  his  decision  to  indicate  that  he  had  applied  the  Joint
         Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010, 'Child,  vulnerable  adult
         and   sensitive   appellant   guidance'   (hereafter   the   "Joint
         Presidential Guidance"),  in  his  assessment  of  the  appellant's
         credibility. He did not refer to the appellant's mental illness  as
         being a potentially  relevant  factor  in  his  assessment  of  the
         difficulties  in  the  appellant's  evidence  which  he  considered
         adversely affected the appellant's credibility.

         iii) Ground 3 (ground 3 of the UT grounds): Ground 3 contends  that
         the judge failed to take into account the overall evaluation of  Dr
         Martin at para 6.2 of his report, that the scars  were  typical  of
         torture. In view of the overall evaluation of Dr Martin, the  judge
         should have made a finding as to whether  the  appellant  had  been
         tortured because Dr Martin had ruled out other causes.

20. I turn now to ground 1.

21. Ms Miszkiel took me to the GP records for the period  between  December
    2018 and July 2019. Mr Lindsay did not dispute that these showed  that,
    as at December 2018, the appellant was  prescribed  mirtazepine  15mgs,
    that the dose was doubled on 16 April  2019  to  30  mgs  and  that  he
    remained on the higher dose of 30 mgs in July 2019.

22. However, Mr Lindsay drew my attention to the fact that the entry for 16
    April 2019 stated, inter  alia:  "History:  (1)  ...  recently  feeling
    anxious all the time - 2 yr hx but seems worse now, nil triggers.  mood
    low. compliance with mirtazepine 15 mgs ..." whereas the entry  for  11
    July 2019 stated, inter alia: "Examination: looks  well.  appropriately
    dressed.  smiling  +  maintaining   good   eye   contact.   Appropriate
    response/speech."

23. Mr Lindsay submitted that, even if the appellant was taking  medication
    in July 2019 at double the dose that he had  been  taking  in  December
    2018, the entries for 16 April 2019 and 11 July 2019 in the GP  records
    showed that the appellant's condition  had  improved  between  December
    2018 and July 2019. On this basis, Mr Lindsay submitted that the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the GP records could  not  be  reconciled
    with the opinion of  Dr  Dhumad  that  the  appellant's  condition  had
    deteriorated in the period between December 2018 and July 2019.

24. I do not accept Mr Lindsay's submission that the GP records  show  that
    the appellant's condition had improved between December 2018  and  July
    2019. In my  view,  Mr  Lindsay  was  seeking  to  focus  only  on  the
    appellant's outward physical presentation on 11 July 2019, as  recorded
    in the entry of that date in the GP records, as being determinative  of
    the state of his mental health then. However, it is reasonable to think
    that Dr Dhumad, as a consultant psychiatrist and cognitive  behavioural
    psychotherapist,  would  have  focused  on  the   appellant's   overall
    condition, and not merely upon his physical presentation.

25. The judge was aware that the appellant's medication was increased  from
    15 mgs mirtazepine to 30 mgs, as he said  at  para  29  that  this  was
    mentioned in the report of Dr Dhumad. However, on any reasonable  view,
    he could not have taken this into account when  he  said  that  he  had
    difficulty in reconciling Dr Dhumad's  opinion  with  the  GP  records.
    Given that the appellant's medication was doubled in April 2019, the GP
    records could not reasonably be said to be at odds with the  conclusion
    of Dr Dhumad that the appellant's overall  condition  had  deteriorated
    between December 2018 and July 2019.

26. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the  judge  did  err  in  law  in  his
    assessment of the medical evidence when he said that he had  difficulty
    in reconciling the assessment of Dr Dhumad in his second report of July
    2019, that the overall condition  of  the  appellant  had  deteriorated
    since his previous examination of the appellant, with  the  entries  in
    the GP records for the relevant period "such that he  [had]  difficulty
    in accepting the overall conclusion of Dr Dhumad in his later  report".
    It is clear from the way the judge expressed himself in  this  sentence
    that his error in concluding that Dr Dhumad's opinion was at odds  with
    the GP records led him either to place less weight  than  he  otherwise
    might have or to ignore it completely.

27. I have therefore concluded that ground 1 is established.

28. I turn to ground 2.

29. Paras 14 and 15 of the Joint Presidential Guidance state:

         "14. Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different degrees
             of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to  those
             are not vulnerable, in the context  of  evidence  from  others
             associated with the  appellant  and  the  background  evidence
             before you. Where there were clear discrepancies in  the  oral
             evidence, consider the extent to which the age,  vulnerability
             or  sensitivity  of  the  witness  was  an  element  of   that
             discrepancy or lack of clarity.

         15.  The decision should record whether the Tribunal has  concluded
             the appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a  child,  vulnerable  or
             sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered  the  identified
             vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and thus
             whether the Tribunal was satisfied whether the  appellant  had
             established his or her case to the relevant standard of proof.
             In  asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be  given  to  objective
             indications of risk rather than  necessarily  to  a  state  of
             mind."

30. Ms Miszkiel submitted that the judge had erred by failing to apply  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance in his assessment of credibility. The judge
    only mentioned the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  at  para  13  of  his
    decision where he referred to the fact that the appellant had  said  in
    cross-examination that he did not want to answer  any  questions  about
    being pushed down a well and then said:

         "I explained that I agreed to the  Appellant  being  treated  as  a
         vulnerable witness but that no specific requests had been  made  at
         the outset of the hearing on behalf of  the  Appellant  as  to  any
         matters about which he should not be questioned or as to any limits
         to questioning and reference was made to the report  of  Dr  Dhumad
         dated 4.12.2018 which stated that the Appellant was fit  to  attend
         court and give oral evidence and, in  that  report  and  the  later
         report of Dr Dhumad, reference was only made to extra time and more
         breaks being allowed for the Appellant. I made clear  that  it  was
         not for the Appellant to select which questions he did or  did  not
         wish to answer and I stated that we could take a break during which
         Ms Walker could make clear to the  Appellant  that  he  could  take
         whatever breaks he needed and  as  much  time  as  was  needed  was
         available for the hearing but that it was not open to the Appellant
         to select the questions that he wished to answer. A break was taken
         and the hearing resumed with Ms Walker confirming to  me  that  she
         had explained the position to the Appellant which he understood."

31. Ms Miszkiel submitted that, in particular, the judge erred  in  failing
    to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance when he took into  account  at
    para 25 of his  decision,  against  the  appellant's  credibility,  the
    discrepancy between the appellant's oral evidence that the total period
    he had spent at the two hospitals following the second incident  was  7
    days and his asylum interview when he had said  that  he  had  spent  a
    total of one month and one week at the two hospitals. At para  25,  the
    judge said that he did not accept the appellant's explanation  that  he
    had made a mistake in answering the question due to the problems he had
    with his memory. In assessing the appellant's  explanation,  the  judge
    failed to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance.

32. Ms Miszkiel submitted that, given that the appellant had said  that  he
    had suffered a head injury when he fell down the well, that he had been
    tortured and given that the judge had documents from the two  hospitals
    in question that confirmed the period that the appellant had  spent  in
    each  hospital,  the  judge  should  have  made   allowances   in   his
    consideration of the discrepancies in the  appellant's  evidence  about
    the length of his stay at the two hospitals.

33. Furthermore, at para 22 of his decision, the judge  said  that  he  had
    borne in mind, when assessing evidence given especially at  interviews,
    that "small inconsistencies and errors may be attributable  to  matters
    such as nerves and consequently may not merit much weight". However, he
    made no mention of the need to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance in
    his assessment of credibility, at para  22  or  anywhere  else  in  the
    decision.

34. In response, Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge did  apply  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance in his assessment of credibility. In this regard,
    he drew my attention to the following:

         i)   para 16.7 of Dr Dhumad's first report (page 40 of bundle  SB1)
         where Dr Dhumad said that the appellant's  concentration  was  poor
         and he therefore recommended that he is offered some adjustments in
         court such as extra time and more breaks;

         ii)  para 6.4 of Dr Dhumad's second report (page 10 of bundle  SB2)
         where Dr Dhumad said that the appellant is vulnerable, that  he  is
         able to follow the proceedings meaningfully and participate  safely
         and that he needs some adjustments such as more  time  and  regular
         breaks;  and

         iii) para 13 of the judge's  decision  where  he  referred  to  the
         appellant having been given a break of 15 minutes and also  to  the
         fact that Dr Dhumad's  reports  had  only  made  reference  to  the
         appellant being given extra time and allowed more breaks.

35. Mr Lindsay drew my attention to the fact that the grounds do not assert
    that Dr Dhumad's recommendation had not been complied with.

36. It is clear that the only reference to the Joint Presidential  Guidance
    in the judge's decision is at para 13 where he said,  in  dealing  with
    the fact that the appellant had said that he did not want to answer any
    questions about being pushed down a well, that the appellant could take
    whatever breaks he needed and as much time as he needed but that it was
    not open to him to select the questions that he wished to answer.

37. It is clear that, at para 25 of  his  decision  which  dealt  with  the
    discrepancy in the appellant's evidence about the total length of  stay
    at the two hospitals, a discrepancy which the judge described  as  very
    significant, he did not explain  pursuant  to  para  15  of  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance the effect that  he  considered  the  appellant's
    vulnerability had in assessing the discrepancy. Nor did he mention  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance at para 22, as Ms  Miszkiel  submitted,  or
    anywhere in his decision other than at para 13 in connection  with  the
    fact that the appellant had said that he did not  want  to  answer  any
    questions about being pushed down a well.

38. However, the ways in  which,  and  the  extent  to  which,  a  person's
    vulnerability may impact  upon  their  account  or  accounts  of  their
    experiences varies from case to case. Each case is  different.  In  the
    instant case,  Dr  Dhumad  said  that  the  appellant's  condition  was
    consistent with moderate depressive episode and PTSD and he made  clear
    in his reports that the appellant should  be  given  extra  breaks  and
    allowed more time. There  was  nothing  in  Dr  Dhumad's  reports  that
    suggested that the appellant may  have  difficulties  in  relaying  his
    history accurately provided he was given extra breaks and allowed  more
    time. Ms Miszkiel drew my attention to the fact that the appellant  had
    said that he had had a head injury when he fell down the well. However,
    it is clear from para 25 of the judge's decision that the appellant was
    able to give very precise information about  the  dates  when  specific
    incidents happened. Furthermore, there was simply no  medical  evidence
    that he suffered from memory problems due to any such  head  injury  or
    for any other reason.

39. Given that there was no medical evidence that  the  appellant  suffered
    from  memory  problems,  that  there  is   no   suggestion   that   the
    recommendations made in Dr Dhumad's reports were not complied  with  at
    the hearing, that  Dr  Dhumad's  reports  did  not  indicate  that  the
    appellant might  have  problems  in  relaying  his  history  accurately
    provided he was given extra breaks and allowed  more  time,  I  am  not
    persuaded that it was necessary for the judge to refer in terms to  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance in order to make clear that he had  applied
    it in assessing credibility. If he had said  something  explicitly,  he
    could only have said that  Dr  Dhumad's  reports  did  not  assist  the
    appellant because there was nothing in the reports to indicate that the
    appellant's mental health condition might be  an  explanation  for  the
    discrepancy. Indeed, even if  he  had  overlooked  applying  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance in his assessment of credibility at para  25,  he
    could not have said anything other than that Dr Dhumad's reports do not
    help to explain the discrepancy, for the reasons I have given.

40. Accordingly, I have concluded that ground 2 is not established.

41. I turn to ground 3.

42. During the course of her  submissions  in  relation  to  ground  3,  Ms
    Miszkiel argued that the judge had erred in that: (i)  he  should  have
    placed more weight on the report of Dr  Martin;  (ii)  he  should  have
    assessed Dr Martin's report with  "more  anxious  scrutiny";  (iii)  he
    considered Dr Martin's report after he had assessed  the  rest  of  the
    evidence; and (iv) he failed to take into account that  Dr  Martin  had
    ruled out other causes. When I pointed out that these submissions  went
    beyond the ambit of ground 3 of the  UT  grounds  and  that  she  would
    therefore need permission, Ms Miszkiel said she would limit herself  to
    ground 3 of the UT grounds as pleaded.

43. The submission that the judge had erred by failing to make a finding as
    to whether the appellant had been tortured ignores  the  fact  that  he
    made a clear finding that he was not satisfied that the  appellant  had
    given a truthful and accurate account and that he did  not  accept  the
    core of the appellant's account, at para 32. It is also clear from  the
    judge's reasoning at paras 23-31 that he did not accept that any of the
    three incidents that the appellant relied  upon  had  occurred.  It  is
    therefore implicit that he rejected the appellant's  evidence  that  he
    had been tortured.

44. Ms Miszkiel also  relied  upon  paras  32-35  of  the  Supreme  Court's
    judgment in KV (Sri Lanka) [2019] UKSC 10. I agree with Mr Lindsay that
    KV (Sri  Lanka)  is  irrelevant  in  deciding  whether  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law given that he did not rely upon, or  take  into
    account, any possibility of the appellant's  scars  having  been  self-
    inflicted.

45. Ms Miszkiel came close to suggesting  that,  in  view  of  Dr  Martin's
    opinion about the appellant's scars and his view as to  the  likelihood
    of alternative causes, the judge should  have  made  a  finding  as  to
    whether the appellant had been tortured on the  basis  of  Dr  Martin's
    report  alone.  I  agree  with  Mr  Lindsay  that  this  submission  is
    misconceived given that it is clear from  decided  cases  that  medical
    evidence forms part of the overall evidence and that an  assessment  of
    credibility should be undertaken on an assessment of the evidence as  a
    whole.

46. Mr Lindsay submitted that Dr Martin's consideration of the  possibility
    of Scars 1 being the result of self-inflicted injuries was inconsistent
    because he had stated (para 5.5.1 on page 21 of bundle AB1) that it was
    "impossible" that the injuries were self-inflicted  because  the  scars
    were an area of the back "which would  have  been  difficult  to  self-
    reach". He submitted that the fact that an area was difficult to  reach
    does not mean that it is impossible. In my view, Mr Lindsay was  merely
    seeking to split hairs. It was well within  Dr  Martin's  expertise  to
    arrive at his conclusion in relation  to  each  set  of  scars.  It  is
    sufficient  that  he  demonstrated  that  he  had  considered  possible
    alternative causes in order to reach his opinion on each set of scars.

47. Finally, Mr Lindsay drew my attention to the fact that  Dr  Martin  did
    not state that, in his opinion, the appellant's scars were 'diagnostic'
    of torture but that Scars 1 were 'typical' and Scars 2  and  3  'highly
    consistent with' injuries caused as  described  by  the  appellant.  He
    submitted that only scars that were diagnostic of  torture  meant  that
    other causes were ruled out. Scars that were 'highly  consistent  with'
    meant that other causes exist and scars that were  'typical  of'  meant
    that other possible causes  exist.  He  submitted  that  ground  3  was
    therefore fatally undermined.

48. In this regard, it  seems  to  me  that  Mr  Lindsay  was,  in  effect,
    submitting that, in the absence of  an  opinion  that  the  appellant's
    scars were 'diagnostic' of torture, any error of law on the part of the
    judge in his assessment of Dr Martin's report  is  not  material.  That
    cannot be right.

49. The judge considered Dr Martin's report at paras 27-28 of his  decision
    which I now quote:

         "27.  In  relation  to  the  medical  report  of  Dr  Martin  dated
         17.6.2017, this was based upon an examination and interview of  the
         Appellant as well as consideration of documentation detailed in  Dr
         Martin's report. The examination of  the  Appellant  by  Dr  Martin
         showed that the Appellant had scarring to his back and  trunk.  The
         scarring consisted of six round hyper-pigmented scars to  the  back
         (from the Appellant's detention in July  2016),  several  elongated
         hyperpigmented  scars  also  to  the  back  (from  the  Appellant's
         detention in 2013) and, to the trunk of the Appellant,  one  mildly
         hyper-pigmented scar  (again  from  the  Appellant's  detention  in
         2013). In the section of the report  where  particularly  important
         general principles are detailed, Dr Martin  states  (amongst  other
         things) that after six months it is usually impossible to  estimate
         the date of an injury with any degree of accuracy. In  relation  to
         the six round scars, Dr  Martin  states  that:  "they  are  typical
         intentionally and unwittingly caused injuries as described  by  the
         claimant". In respect of the other scars,  Dr  Martin  states  that
         "the appearance of the scars is highly consistent  with  deliberate
         injuries during an assault as described by the claimant". Dr Martin
         adds that deliberate self-harm is a theoretical possibility for the
         scars from the 2013 detention although very unlikely in view of the
         position of the scars.  In  the  section  of  the  report  entitled
         'Summary and Conclusion', it is stated (amongst other things) that:
         "[The appellant's] overall pattern of scarring is not suggestive of
         a self-inflicted explanation". I note also that  Dr  Martin  states
         that the  six  round  scars  were  not  caused  by  any  recognised
         religious or cultural ritual  and  they  were  not  caused  by  any
         surgical procedure and that it is unlikely  that  the  other  scars
         were caused by a surgical procedure.

         28.  In consideration of the report of Dr Martin, I was directed to
         the relevant paragraphs in the skeleton argument provided on behalf
         of the Appellant and I was also provided with the judgment  of  the
         Supreme Court in the  case  of  KV  which  I  considered.  All  the
         scarring of the Appellant was more than six months old at the  time
         of the examination of Dr Martin which makes  it,  according  to  Dr
         Martin, usually impossible to estimate the date of an  injury  with
         any degree of accuracy. It is not, therefore, possible to  estimate
         the date of the scarring to the Appellant. I also take note of  one
         of the concluding comments of Dr Martin that the overall pattern of
         scarring  is  not  suggestive  of  a  self-inflicted   explanation.
         Overall, I do attach weight to the report of Dr Martin but  I  must
         also consider the report of Dr Martin  along  with  all  the  other
         evidence."

         (my emphasis)

50. It is clear that the judge quoted extensively from Dr  Martin's  report
    and set out his opinion in relation to each  set  of  scars.   He  also
    referred to the "Summary and conclusion" insofar as  it  mentioned  the
    likelihood of the alternative cause being self-inflicted injuries. What
    is notably absent from paras 27 and 28  is  the  fact  that  Dr  Martin
    stated that his overall evaluation of all lesions, in  line  with  para
    188 of the Istanbul  Protocol,  is  that  the  scars  were  typical  of
    torture.

51. It is true that judges are not obliged to refer to every piece  of  the
    evidence. Even if a document or aspect of evidence is not  referred  to
    in terms, it does not follow that the  judge  had  not  taken  it  into
    account or that any failure to do so, if established, is material.

52. In the instant case, the judge said at para 22 of his decision that  he
    had considered all of the documentation provided even  if  he  had  not
    referred to it specifically. Not only did the judge specifically  refer
    to Dr Martin's report, he did so in  some  considerable  detail.  I  am
    therefore slow to reach the conclusion that  he  failed  to  take  into
    account Dr Martin's overall evaluation.

53. It is necessary, in my view, to remind  oneself  of  para  188  of  the
    Istanbul Protocol, which I have set out above. It is  clear  from  this
    that it is ultimately "the overall evaluation of all  lesions  and  not
    the consistency of each lesion with a particular form of  torture  that
    is important in assessing the torture story". I consider this  fact  in
    conjunction with the fact that it was Dr  Martin's  overall  evaluation
    that the scars were "typical of torture as described by the  appellant"
    and the fact that such an opinion is not encountered very often in this
    jurisdiction, in my experience. It  is  clear  from  para  188  of  the
    Istanbul Protocol that an overall evaluation to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant's scars were typical of torture as alleged by  the  appellant
    actually increases the likelihood that his account is true as  compared
    with the opinion as to the consistency of each individual set of  scars
    with the account given. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the
    judge should have demonstrated,  in  terms,  that  he  had  taken  into
    account Dr Martin's overall  evaluation,  failing  which  I  cannot  be
    satisfied that he had taken  it  into  account  in  his  assessment  of
    credibility.

54. I am therefore satisfied that the judge erred in failing to  take  into
    account the overall evaluation of Dr Martin. This error led him to give
    less weight to Dr Martin's report than he might  otherwise  have  given
    it.  Ground 3 is therefore established.

55. However, it does not follow  that  ground  3  is  material.  I  am  not
    satisfied that it is material, taken on its own, given that  the  judge
    did give weight to the report of Dr Martin.

The application for permission to amend the grounds

56. Mr Lindsay objected to permission being granted to amend  the  grounds.
    He submitted that the test in deciding whether permission to amend  the
    grounds should be granted was whether the grounds sought to  be  relied
    upon were Robinson obvious points, in reliance upon the UT's  decisions
    in AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 00245
    (IAC) and Durueke (PTA: AZ applied, proper approach) [2019] UKUT  00197
    (IAC).

57. This  submission  is  misconceived,  in  my  view.  As  is  well-known,
    "Robinson obvious" is  a  term  derived  from  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in R v SSHD ex parte Robinson [1998]  QB  929.  It  arises  in
    circumstances where there is a point with a strong prospect of  success
    but which a claimant's representative has not raised in the grounds  of
    appeal. This principle is not applicable in the instant  case  for  the
    simple reason that this is not a case in which the point sought  to  be
    relied upon has not been raised by the appellant.  All of  the  grounds
    that Ms Miszkiel sought to rely upon in her application for  permission
    to amend the grounds were raised in the FtT grounds.

58. I consider the application for  permission  to  amend  the  grounds  by
    taking  into  account  the  following  factors:  The  fact   that   the
    application for permission to amend the grounds was made at a very late
    stage, i.e. at the hearing itself; the explanation  for  the  delay  in
    making the application; the underlying merits of the grounds sought  to
    be relied upon; their impact on the appellant's case in this appeal  as
    a whole; the overriding objective and any prejudice to the respondent.

59. The grounds for which Ms Miszkiel sought permission  to  amend  may  be
    summarised as follows:

         i)   Proposed ground 4 (para 16 of  the  FtT  grounds):  The  judge
         misapprehended the appellant's oral evidence, at  para  23  of  his
         decision, in his assessment of the first incident.

         ii)  Proposed ground 5 (ground 4 of the  FtT  grounds):  The  judge
         erred in failing to make findings in relation to the oral  evidence
         of the appellant's  uncle  and  the  witness  statements  from  the
         appellant's family members in Sri Lanka. He failed to give  reasons
         why he gave no weight to this evidence.

         iii) Proposed ground 6 (ground  5  of  the  FtT  grounds):  In  his
         consideration of the appellant's sur place activities at para 30 of
         his decision, the judge  erred  in  stating  that  the  photographs
         submitted to show that the appellant had attended demonstrations in
         the United Kingdom  "consist[ed]  of  several  photographs  of  the
         Appellant at two protests...". Proposed ground  6  contends,  inter
         alia:

             a)   that the photographs submitted showed that the  appellant
             had attended several demonstrations in the United Kingdom.  In
             addition,  the  appellant  had  described   in   his   witness
             statements the demonstrations that he had attended which  were
             in excess of two demonstrations;

             b)   that the judge had failed to state whether, and  to  what
             extent, he accepted the  appellant's  evidence  regarding  his
             involvement with the TGTE; and

             c)   that the judge failed to engage with the country guidance
             decision in GJ and  others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
             Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

         iv)  Proposed ground 7 (ground 3 of the  FtT  grounds):  The  judge
         erred in his assessment of the appellant's evidence relating to the
         third incident. At para 26, the judge said:

             "The appellant has produced a TamilNet article dated 24.7.2016
             detailing the protest on that day with photographs such that I
             find it  very  difficult  to  accept  why  the  posting  of  a
             photograph on Facebook of the protest by the  appellant  would
             result in his being apprehended  by  the  police,  beaten  and
             detained by the army for five days before again being released
             on payment of monies. I fail to see why this claimed action by
             the Appellant would have prompted such a response by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities."

    Proposed ground 7 contends that the fact that the TamilNet article  had
    publicised the protest was irrelevant in considering the likelihood  of
    the appellant being of adverse interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    on account of having published the photographs on Facebook. Given  that
    TamilNet is a US-based Tamil news site, it was  irrational  to  suggest
    that the publication of an article by  an  overseas  media  agency  was
    relevant in considering  the  likelihood  of  the  appellant  being  of
    adverse interest  for  publishing  the  photographs  he  had  taken  on
    Facebook. The evidence showing that TamilNet was a US-based Tamil  news
    agency had not been submitted to the judge because the  judge  had  not
    raised his concern at the hearing and the  respondent  had  not  relied
    upon it.

60. I turn to consider  proposed  ground  4.  This  relates  to  the  first
    incident. The judge considered this at para 23 of  his  decision  which
    reads:

         "23. ... In respect of the claimed incident on  20.9.2013,  at  the
         asylum interview (which took place in April 2017 about three and  a
         half years after the incident) the Appellant stated that he  walked
         past the police station, saw a youngster being beaten by two police
         officers and "the public tried to stop the police from beating  the
         youngster but they could not". Those people  who  were  trying  the
         help the youngster were "beaten and chased away by the police". The
         Appellant stated that he filmed the incident for over five  minutes
         and that he did not know that the police were behind him  watching.
         I do not find it at all credible that the Appellant would have been
         allowed to record a very violent incident such  as  this  for  over
         five minutes when two police officers were beating up  a  youngster
         at the same time, members of the public had involved themselves  in
         the violent incident by trying to prevent the police officers  from
         beating up the youngster  and  there  were  other  police  officers
         present at the scene  who  were  simply  watching  the  events  and
         allowing the Appellant to continue filming for  such  a  length  of
         time despite the Appellant stating at the hearing that he now  does
         not remember for how long he was filming although it was  for  some
         time. I also do not find it at all  credible  that  those  who  had
         actively sought to obstruct the police physically would  be  beaten
         up and then simply chased away without any further interest from or
         action taken against them by the police whereas the Appellant,  who
         had simply recorded the incident and  not  tried  to  intervene  or
         obstruct the actions of the police, was taken away  by  six  police
         officers and kept in detention for three days during which time  he
         was beaten up and only released on payment of a bribe."

         (My emphasis)

61. Proposed ground 4 contends that the judge misapprehended  the  evidence
    when he said, at para 23, that it was  the  appellant's  evidence  that
    other members of the public were simply chased away by the police  with
    no further interest. There is no challenge to the judge's view that  it
    was not credible that the appellant would have been allowed to record a
    very violent incident such as this for over five minutes.

62. Para 16 of the FtT  grounds  relies  upon  Ms  Walker's  notes  of  the
    appellant's oral evidence. However, Ms Walker's notebook has  not  been
    submitted, neither was there any witness statement from Ms  Walker.  On
    the other hand, I was able to ascertain,  from  the  judge's  RoP  (the
    relevant part of which was sufficiently legible) that the appellant had
    said, in cross-examination when asked whether it was right that he  was
    not aware of anyone else being arrested, that he did not know and  that
    someone else may have been arrested.

63. It is not clear whether the judge was referring to the appellant's oral
    evidence in the final sentence of para 23, although it is clear that he
    was  referring  to  the  appellant's  asylum  interview  in  the  first
    sentence. If the judge was referring to the appellant's  oral  evidence
    in the final sentence of para 23, then he  clearly  misapprehended  the
    evidence given that his RoP shows that the appellant had said, in cross-
    examination when asked whether it was right that he was  not  aware  of
    anyone else being arrested, that he did not know and that someone  else
    may have been arrested.

64. If, on the other hand, the  judge  was  referring  to  the  appellant's
    evidence at his asylum interview, the judge failed to take into account
    the appellant's oral evidence that he did not know what had happened to
    others and that some else might have been arrested. In either event, it
    is clear that the judge did err in law.

65. If therefore the appellant had permission to argue proposed  ground  4,
    it would be established.

66. In relation to proposed ground 5, Mr Lindsay did not  seek  to  suggest
    that the judge had considered the evidence of  the  appellant's  uncle.
    There was a witness statement from the appellant's uncle. He also  gave
    oral evidence.

67. However, Mr Lindsay submitted that the fact  that  the  judge  had  not
    engaged with the evidence of the appellant's uncle, in terms, does  not
    mean that he did not take it into account. In this regard,  Mr  Lindsay
    relied upon the fact that it has been made clear in several cases  that
    judges are not obliged to refer to every aspect of the evidence.

68. I have no hesitation in rejecting Mr Lindsay's submission. Whilst it is
    correct to say that judges are not obliged to deal with every aspect of
    the evidence before  them  or  every  document  that  is  before  them,
    proposed ground 5 concerns the evidence of  a  witness  who  gave  oral
    evidence which was potentially corroborative of part of the appellant's
    case because it was alleged that it was this uncle  who  had  sent  the
    funds that were used  to  pay  the  bribe  for  his  release  from  his
    detention in 2016.

69. I therefore have no hesitation in concluding that, if the appellant had
    permission to argue proposed ground 5, it would be established.

70. Proposed ground 6 concerns the appellant's evidence about his sur place
    activities which the judge considered at para 30 of his decision.  Para
    30 reads:

         "30. With respect to the political activities of the  Appellant  he
         stated that he was not a member of the LTTE in Sri Lanka and  that,
         whilst being in the UK, he stated in his asylum interview  that  he
         was not a member of the TGTE but refers to his activities  for  the
         TGTE  at  length  in  his  witness  statements  of  19.12.2018  and
         9.9.2019.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  that  the   Sri   Lankan
         authorities would be aware of his activities in the UK but I do not
         find that the evidence produced by the Appellant, which consists of
         several photographs of the Appellant at two protests, supports that
         claim."

71. Ms Miszkiel sought to rely upon various pages in the bundles that  were
    before the judge in order to demonstrate that the judge had had  before
    him photographs that established that the appellant had  attended  more
    than two demonstrations.  However,  the  pages  she  relied  upon  were
    missing from the bundles that were before the judge. Several pages  had
    simply been omitted from the appellant's bundles. It was clear from the
    page numbering that several pages were missing.

72. In this connection, I noted that the Presenting Officer who represented
    the respondent before the judge made an application at the commencement
    of the hearing before the  judge  for  the  hearing  to  be  adjourned,
    stating that the number of bundles and witness statements made  conduct
    of the hearing and presentation  of  his  case  difficult.  Ms  Walker,
    representing the  appellant,  acknowledged  before  the  judge  that  a
    consolidated bundle  would  have  been  helpful  but  objected  to  the
    adjournment request.

73. In view of  the  objection  made  on  the  appellant's  behalf  to  the
    adjournment request and the  sheer  number  of  documents  lodged,  the
    judge's failure to draw the appellant's attention at the hearing to the
    incomplete  bundles  did  not  give  rise  to  any  unfairness,  in  my
    judgement. The judge may not even have been aware at  the  commencement
    of the hearing or during the  hearing  that  there  were  many  missing
    documents.

74. However, as Ms Miszkiel submitted,  the  appellant  described  his  sur
    place activities in detail, at paras 13-34 of his  "additional  witness
    statement" dated 19 December 2018 (pages 3-9 of bundle SB1). Two points
    emerge from this witness statement:

         i)    The  appellant  described  having  attended  more  than   two
         demonstrations, providing a level of detail about a certain  number
         and describing others in brief terms.

         ii)  In  the  case  of  all  of  the  demonstrations,  his  witness
         statement specifically referred to pages in his bundles by  number,
         the pages which I discovered at the hearing before me were in  fact
         missing from the bundles that were before the judge.

75. Having considered the detail in the additional  witness  statement  and
    noted that the page numbers of the bundles mentioned in the  additional
    witness statement were missing from the bundles that  were  before  the
    judge, I am satisfied  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  relevant
    evidence  about  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities.  If  he  had
    considered the appellant's additional witness statement, he would  have
    noted that there were several pages that were missing from the  bundles
    and that he simply could not fairly assess the appellant's  profile  on
    account of his sur place activities without the missing pages. At  that
    stage,  notwithstanding  that  the  appellant  had   objected   to   an
    adjournment for a consolidated bundle to be produced, the  judge  would
    have had no option but to notify the parties that  the  bundles  before
    him were incomplete and, if necessary, reconvene the hearing. The  fact
    that the judge did not take this action and referred at para 30 to only
    two demonstrations satisfies me that he did not take into  account  the
    appellant's evidence in his additional witness statement about his  sur
    place activities.

76. Accordingly, if the appellant had permission to argue  proposed  ground
    6, it would be established.

77. In my judgement, there is sufficient merit in proposed grounds 4, 5 and
    6, when combined with grounds 1 and 3, to lead me to conclude that  the
    judge had materially erred in law, albeit that grounds 1 and 3 were not
    sufficient in themselves. This is so notwithstanding the fact that  the
    judge gave  other  reasons  for  his  adverse  credibility  assessment.
    However, I still need to consider the  remaining  issues  explained  at
    para 58 above, such as the length of the delay and the explanation  for
    the delay.

78. I turn then to consider the explanation for the  delay  in  making  the
    application for permission to amend the grounds and the  other  factors
    mentioned at my para 58 above.

79. The application for permission to amend the grounds  was  made  at  the
    last minute, i.e. at the hearing. The explanation given for  the  delay
    in making the application for permission to amend the grounds was  that
    Ms Miszkiel had only recently been instructed and that she did not have
    sight of the FtT  grounds  until  I  provided  her  with  them  at  the
    commencement of the hearing. When I pointed out to Ms Miszkiel that  it
    was a matter for the appellant that he chose to  withdraw  instructions
    from  his   previous   representatives   and   instruct   his   current
    representatives shortly before the festive period in December 2019  and
    in the knowledge that his appeal was due to be heard in the UT  in  the
    first week of January 2020,  Ms  Miszkiel  informed  me  (having  taken
    instructions) that the reason why the appellant instructed his  current
    representatives was that he was concerned about the  representation  he
    was receiving from his solicitors.

80. It is plain from my assessment of proposed ground 6 that the  appellant
    was prejudiced by  his  previous  representative's  failure  to  submit
    complete bundles. Not only were the bundles incomplete,  there  was  no
    indication in the index or anywhere else that there were missing  pages
    and  that  these  would  be  submitted  subsequently.  This  is  simply
    unacceptable.

81. On the other hand, it was a matter for the appellant that he  chose  to
    instruct new solicitors at the time that he did. He  would  have  known
    that much of the period between that date and the date of  his  hearing
    fell over the festive period. It is therefore reasonable to think  that
    he could have anticipated that the timing of his decision  to  withdraw
    his instructions from his previous  representatives  and  instruct  his
    current representatives was such that it would be unlikely that his new
    solicitors would receive his papers from his  previous  representatives
    in time for them instruct Counsel in sufficient  time  to  be  properly
    prepared for the hearing on 8 January 2020.

82. On the other hand, Mr Lindsay was able to address me  in  full  on  the
    proposed grounds 4, 5 and 6.

83.  In  these  circumstances  and  taking  into  account  the   overriding
    objective, I have decided to  exercise  my  discretion  and  grant  the
    application for permission to amend the  grounds  to  include  proposed
    grounds 4, 5 and 6.

84. I am satisfied that grounds 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 establish that  the  judge
    had  materially  erred  in  law,  that  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and Article 3 of the ECHR should be set aside and that his reasoning at
    paras 22-32 should be set aside in its entirety. My reasons  are  given
    above. There is no therefore need for me to consider proposed ground 7.

85. The appellant's asylum claim, the  related  Article  3  claim  and  his
    humanitarian protection claim are to be decided again on the merits.

86. The following are to stand:

         i)   The judge's summary of the oral evidence, at  paras  13-16  of
         his decision.  This does not refer to the  evidence  that  was  the
         subject of ground 4.

         ii)  The judge's assessment of the appellant's  Article  8  in  the
         latter part of para 32 of his decision, where he said:

                  "32. ... The Appellant is not married, has a girlfriend in
                  Sri Lanka which is where he  had  always  lived  prior  to
                  coming to the UK and where his parents, siblings and other
                  family members live. I see no  reason  why  the  Appellant
                  cannot return to Sri Lanka and  continue  his  life  there
                  with the support of his  family.  I  find  that  there  is
                  nothing about his case that makes his removal from the  UK
                  a disproportionate breach of his right to  a  private  and
                  family life as protected by Article 8 of the ECHR."

         The judge's assessment of the appellant's Article 8 claim  was  not
         challenged in the FtT grounds or the UT grounds, nor was it  raised
         at the hearing before me.

87. The next question is whether the decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal
    should be re-made in the UT or whether the appeal should be remitted to
    the FtT.

88. Ms Miszkiel requested that the  appeal  be  remitted  to  the  FtT.  Mr
    Lindsay agreed that, in the event that  credibility  needs  to  be  re-
    assessed in its entirety, the appeal should be remitted.

89. I am, of course, aware that,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  the  Upper
    Tribunal when setting aside the  decision  will  re-make  the  relevant
    decision itself.  However, para 7.2 of the Practice Statements for  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal (the "Practice Statements") recognises that it  may  not
    be possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make  the  decision
    when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

90. I am also aware that this appeal was previously decided by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal N Manyarara whose decision was set  aside  and  the
    appeal remitted. Ms Miszkiel submitted that this fact should  not  lead
    me to refrain from remitting the appeal as it is  not  the  appellant's
    fault that this is the second time that the decision in his appeal  has
    been set aside. However, the decision whether  or  not  the  appeal  is
    remitted is not made by considering whether or not the appellant is  at
    fault.

91. There is a lot of evidence in this case. The overall evaluation  of  Dr
    Martin of the appellant's scars is not one  that  is  encountered  very
    often. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant  ought
    to have his appeal decided again by the FtT so that, if the decision is
    again adverse, he will have a further level of scrutiny.

92. I have therefore reluctantly concluded that it is only fair  that  this
    appeal be remitted again to the FtT.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum
grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and in relation  to  Article  3  of
the ECHR is set aside. The decision to dismiss the  appeal  in  relation  to
Article 8 of the ECHR stands.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  re-hearing  of  the
appellant's asylum claim, humanitarian protection claim and Article 3  claim
on the merits by a judge other than  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N
Manyarara and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal K Swinnerton.

Directions to the parties

(1)  An interpreter in the Tamil language (as spoken in Sri Lanka)  will  be
    provided at the hearing, unless notified  otherwise  by  the  appellant
    within 5 days of the date  on  which  this  decision  is  sent  to  the
    parties.

(2)  It will be assumed that the appellant and his uncle will give  evidence
    at the hearing unless notified otherwise by the appellant within 5 days
    of the date on which this decision is sent to the parties.

(3)  Not less than 14 calendar  days  before  the  next  hearing  date,  the
    appellant to  file  and  serve  a  single  consolidated  paginated  and
    complete bundle as follows:

         i)   The bundle must include all  documents  previously  served  as
         well as any further documents that he seeks to rely upon.

         ii)  In relation to any background evidence relied upon,  essential
         passages must be identified in a schedule, or highlighted.

    At the same time, the appellant must file and serve a skeleton argument
    identifying all relevant issues and citing relevant authorities.


[pic]
Signed   Date: 20 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
