
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04673/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 June 2017                              |On 13 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    [A T]
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo of Counsel, instructed by South West London
                    Law              Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This case comes before me again to remake the decision  in  the  appeal
    following the 'error of law' hearing on 29 March 2017, and pursuant  to
    Directions given at the conclusion of that hearing. I have appended the
    'error of law' decision and the Directions to this Decision for ease of
    reference: much of the background to this case is set out therein.


2.   It may be seen from the foregoing that the Appellant - a minor born  in
    May 2000 and a citizen of Ethiopia - arrived in the United  Kingdom  in
    June 2015 and claimed asylum shortly thereafter. His  protection  claim
    was based on his father's involvement with the Oromo  Liberation  Front
    ('OLF'), and his own involvement with the OLF. He claimed that  he  had
    been questioned by the authorities about his father's  activities,  and
    have  also  been  briefly   detained   and   questioned   following   a
    demonstration at his school in support of the OLF. He claimed that  the
    trigger for leaving Ethiopia was his father's arrest in April 2014.


3.   The Appellant's protection claim was refused for reasons set out  in  a
    'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  20  April  2016.  The
    Respondent did not dispute the Appellant's date of birth  and  accepted
    both his nationality and his ethnicity as an Oromo.  The Respondent did
    not accept the Appellant's account of the events in Ethiopia which  the
    Appellant claimed put him at risk if he were to  be  returned.  However
    the Respondent granted the Appellant a period of discretionary leave as
    an unaccompanied minor.


4.   In the RFRL  the  Respondent  referred  to,  and  offered  reasons  for
    rejecting, each of the core elements of the Appellant's claim under the
    following  headings  "Father's  Membership  of  OLF",  "Harassment  and
    Questioning  from  the  Ethiopian  Authorities"  and   "Attendance   of
    Demonstration and Subsequent interest from Authorities". The Respondent
    did not invoke section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  in  the  RFRL  notwithstanding  that  the
    Appellant's account of his  journey to  the  UK  involved  the  transit
    through a number of European countries, in particular Italy and France.
    Nor did the Respondent raise any issue or question in  respect  of  the
    route by which the Appellant had travelled from Ethiopia to the  United
    Kingdom, or otherwise in respect of the  circumstances  of  his  flight
    from his country of nationality to the place  in  which  he  ultimately
    sought asylum.


5.   The Appellant elected not to give oral evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It is said that this was in keeping with  guidance  on  child
    and vulnerable witnesses - and indeed the Appellant has  again  elected
    not to give oral evidence in  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the
    appeal.


6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell dismissed the Appellant's appeal  for
    reasons given in his Decision. I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal the reasons given at the conclusion of the 'error of law'
    hearing on 29 March 2017 (and  subsequently  promulgated  on  19  April
    2017). Thus the matter comes back before me to remake the  decision  in
    the appeal.

Response to Directions

7.   Because of the nature of some of the contentious issues  that  informed
    the  consideration  of  error  of  law,  and  in  anticipation  of  the
    possibility that such matters  might  require  further  exploration  in
    remaking the decision, I issued Directions (which are reproduced in the
    Appendix below). In particular: in  the  context  of  Judge  Maxwell  -
    seemingly unilaterally - having considered issues  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's arrangements for travelling to the UK, the  Respondent  was
    directed to articulate in writing if any  such  issue  was  now  to  be
    relied upon; and both parties were  directed  to  file  and  serve  any
    further evidence they wished to rely upon, with written submissions, in
    relation to the issue of 'inherited suspicion' - see  paragraphs  28-37
    of the 'error of law decision (reproduced in the Appendix below).


8.   The Respondent has not sought to raise any new  issues  in  respect  of
    the Appellant's credibility by reference to the  arrangements  for  his
    journey to the UK, or otherwise.  Nor  has  the  Respondent  filed  any
    further country information or  other  evidence.  The  Respondent  has,
    however, provided a written submission dated 2 June 2017.


9.   The Appellant has also produced  a  written  submission  by  way  of  a
    Supplementary Skeleton Argument, which it is said should be  read  with
    the original skeleton argument dated 3 October 2016 that was before the
    First-tier Tribunal.


10.  The Appellant has also filed further evidence in the form of  a  report
    dated 9 May 2017 prepared by Dr S Bekalo. Mr Yeo acknowledged  that  in
    light of  the  Respondent's  concessions  in  respect  of  the  country
    situation and risk set out in the written submission  of  2  June  2017
    (see further below), this report was of  limited  additional  value  in
    respect of risk on return. However, he submitted that it was  of  value
    in respect of the  plausibility  and  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account.


11.  There has also been filed on behalf of the Appellant a letter  dated  8
    June 2017 from a counsellor, updating an earlier letter of 22 September
    2016 (Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal,  pages  12-19)
    in respect of the Appellant's mental condition which is  said  to  have
    deteriorated.

Hearing

12.  The Appellant was present at the hearing, in the company of his  foster
    carer (the 'responsible adult'),  and  a  social  worker  from  Lambeth
    social services.


13.  The Appellant was not, however,  called  to  give  evidence.  This  was
    consistent with the position adopted before the First-tier Tribunal and
    intimated at the error of law hearing as being the likely  position  on
    remaking the decision in the appeal, subject to any  new  issues  being
    raised by the Respondent. Mr Yeo emphasised that it was ultimately  the
    Appellant's decision not to give evidence,  albeit  taken  pursuant  to
    advice. Mr Yeo noted that the Respondent had not advanced  any  further
    issues subsequent to the Directions, and stated that the Appellant  had
    said what he wished to say about the Respondent's decision  by  way  of
    his witness statement. My attention was also directed to  the  evidence
    of the Appellant's counsellor (see further below). I was also  directed
    to the guidelines contained in the UNHCR Handbook  (see  in  particular
    paragraph  213-219,  helpfully  reproduced  at  paragraph  6   of   the
    Appellant's Supplementary Skeleton Argument), and the UNHCR  Guidelines
    on International Protection, No. 8, 'Child Asylum Claims etc',  and  in
    particular  those  passages  set  out  at  paragraphs   7-12   of   the
    Supplementary Skeleton Argument.


14.  It was emphasised that the Appellant was still a minor at the  date  of
    the hearing, and more particularly that he was only 13 years of age  at
    the date of the key events upon which his claim is based. As  such,  it
    was submitted, his evidence required to be approached on the basis that
    his understanding of events would inevitably be limited because of  his
    age, and also because as a child he was reliant on filtered or  limited
    information provided to him by adults.


15.  In this context I have also noted the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note
    No  2  of  2010,  'Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant
    guidance', and the Practice Direction of 2008, which are both  referred
    to  in  the  following  passages  from  the  recent  decision   in   AM
    (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123:

    "30. To assist parties and tribunals a Practice  Direction  'First-tier
    and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult  and  Sensitive  Witnesses',
    was issued by the Senior  President,  Sir  Robert  Carnwath,  with  the
    agreement of the Lord Chancellor on 30 October 2008. In addition, joint
    Presidential Guidance Note  No  2  of  2010  was  issued  by  the  then
    President of UTIAC, Blake J and the acting President of the FtT  (IAC),
    Judge Arfon-Jones. The directions and guidance contained in them are to
    be followed and for the convenience of practitioners, they are  annexed
    to this judgment. Failure to follow them will most likely be a material
    error of law. They are to be found in the Annex to this judgment.


    31. The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance] provide  detailed  guidance
    on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal to  an  incapacitated  or
    vulnerable person. I agree with the Lord Chancellor's  submission  that
    there are five key features:


      a. the early identification of issues of vulnerability is  encouraged,
      if at all possible, before any substantive hearing through the use  of
      a CMRH or pre-hearing review (Guidance [4] and [5]);


      b. a person who is incapacitated  or  vulnerable  will  only  need  to
      attend  as  a  witness  to  give  oral  evidence  where  the  tribunal
      determines that "the evidence is necessary to enable the fair  hearing
      of the case and their welfare would not be prejudiced by doing so" (PD
      [2] and Guidance [8] and [9]);


      c.  where  an  incapacitated  or  vulnerable  person  does  give  oral
      evidence, detailed provision is to be made to ensure their welfare  is
      protected before and during the hearing (PD [6] and [7]  and  Guidance
      [10]);


      d. it is necessary  to  give  special  consideration  to  all  of  the
      personal circumstances of an incapacitated  or  vulnerable  person  in
      assessing their evidence (Guidance [10.2] to [15]); and


      e. relevant additional sources  of  guidance  are  identified  in  the
      Guidance including from international bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to
      [27])"


16.  In respect of the Appellant's election not to give evidence, Mr Yeo  in
    substance places particular reliance upon the consideration set out  at
    paragraph 31b above. With reference to  letters  from  the  Appellant's
    counsellor (see further below), it is said that  giving  oral  evidence
    could be stressful and harmful to the Appellant, but would likely be of
    little real additional benefit  to  progressing  his  case  (given  the
    manner in which the Tribunal is obliged to approach the evidence  of  a
    minor in any event): accordingly on balance the decision  not  to  give
    evidence has been reached.


17.  In the circumstances the appeal proceeded by way of  submissions  only.
    Each representative amplified the written submissions. I  have  kept  a
    note of the oral submissions in the record of proceedings.


18.  In reaching my decision I have had regard to all that was said  at  the
    hearing, and all of the written  materials.  Both  parties  have  filed
    bundles before the First-tier Tribunal which have also been used before
    the Upper Tribunal; further written submissions and evidence have  been
    filed before the Upper Tribunal as identified above. All documents  are
    a matter of  record  on  file,  and  are  known  to  the  parties,  and
    accordingly I do not list them further here

Consideration

19.  I am grateful to the assistance the parties have afforded the  Tribunal
    by way of both written and oral submissions.


20.  During preliminary discussions, it was agreed between the parties  that
    the core issue in the appeal was the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account of events  in  Ethiopia.  Mr  Tarlow  acknowledged  that  if  I
    accepted that account the Respondent conceded that the Appellant  would
    be at risk on return such that he was entitled to the protection of the
    Refugee Convention. (This was essentially the position set out  in  the
    Respondent's written submission.) Mr Yeo conceded that  if  I  did  not
    accept the Appellant's account the appeal would fail  -  the  Appellant
    was not pursuing Article 8 in the alternative because of the  grant  of
    discretionary leave to remain.


21.  The key elements of the Appellant's case are these:

    (i) The Appellant's father was involved with the OLF. The Appellant  is
    uncertain as to whether he was a member or a supporter,  and  does  not
    know the exact nature of his father's involvement.

    (ii) On the instruction of  his  father  the  Appellant  would  deliver
    communications to other persons. (These communications  have  variously
    been described  as  leaflets  or  pamphlets.  The  Appellant  has  been
    challenge as to his apparent lack of knowledge of the contents of these
    documents, but has  responded  by  saying  that  they  were  in  sealed
    envelopes.)

    (iii) Meetings were regularly held  on  Thursdays  at  the  Appellant's
    home, hosted by his father, and the Appellant saw the people to whom he
    had delivered the  communications  attending.  The  Appellant  was  not
    allowed to be present at the meetings, but was permitted into the  room
    to serve coffee to the participants. He was able to ascertain from this
    that money was collected at the  meetings,  which  his  mother  in  due
    course told him was money collected for the OLF.

    (iv) At school the Appellant belonged to an Oromo cultural and  history
    club, and would discuss issues in relation  to  the  Oromo  with  other
    students.

    (v) At  school,  from  about  grade  4,  the  Appellant  was  regularly
    interrogated by the authorities as  to  his  father's  activities.  The
    questioning was conducted by men from outside the school who claimed to
    be government officials; sometimes the director of the school would  be
    present. The Appellant's brother was also questioned in this  way.  The
    questions were about the father's activities, and also as to whether he
    possessed firearms. The  Appellant  did  not  reveal  any  information.
    Eventually, the Appellant was dismissed from the school; thereafter  he
    remained at home.

    (vi) Prior to his dismissal, when he was  in  grade  5,  the  Appellant
    participated in a demonstration at school organised by Oromo  students.
    Afterwards, he  was  held  for  about  two  hours  at  the  school  and
    questioned - as were other students. He was released after he gave  the
    names of the organisers. (I pause to note that in  context  it  appears
    that the Appellant is not suggesting that he  might  be  at  continuing
    risk by reason of his  participation  in  this  demonstration.  Indeed,
    after consideration of all of the evidence hearing, I  have  ultimately
    reached the conclusion that this incident has been referred to in  part
    because it is an aspect of the Appellant's history, and in part because
    it is illustrative of the  generally  adverse  interest  taken  by  the
    authorities in Oromo activism. However, the Appellant has not suggested
    that he had any continuing difficulties whilst he remained in  Ethiopia
    by reason of this incident simpliciter.)

    (vii) In April 2014 the Appellant's father was arrested at  the  family
    home and taken away.

    (viii) The following day the Appellant's uncle came to the family  home
    and there was discussion between him and the Appellant's  mother  about
    relocating the family. The Appellant did not wish to relocate;  he  did
    not think he would be safe anywhere in Ethiopia; he had been  dismissed
    from school and feared he  might  be  arrested  like  his  father.  The
    Appellant decided to leave Ethiopian, and in the general  disquiet  and
    'rushing' around he left without his mother and  uncle  noticing.  (The
    Appellant has described how he then crossed the border into Saddam, and
    in due course made his way to Libya before setting out to see where  he
    was picked up by Italian  coastguards,  and  thereafter  having  passed
    through Italy and France before coming to the UK. As noted above -  and
    notwithstanding exploration of this issue in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge - no adverse point in this regard has  been  raised
    by the Respondent.)


22.  Additionally it is said that the Appellant has been involved  in  Oromo
    protests in London. He has produced photographic evidence  in  support,
    and as such I do not understand his attendance to be  disputed.  It  is
    argued on his behalf that such activities are broadly  consistent  with
    the notion that he had OLF sympathies  whilst  in  Ethiopia.  Whilst  I
    acknowledge that involvement in such activities  is  indeed  consistent
    with such a notion, it is not inevitably so: I consider such activities
    in themselves to be of  only  the  most  marginal  significance  as  an
    indicator of the credibility of the narrative of events in Ethiopia.


23.  However, I do note that in the letter from the  Appellant's  counsellor
    dated 22 September 2016 (see further below) reference is  made  to  the
    Appellant's anger about how Oromo  people  are  treated,  and  concerns
    expressed about his "current youthful ideation"  such  that  "he  would
    want to follow in his father's steps to fight for justice for  a  Oromo
    people"; concerns are expressed as to the risks that might arise in the
    Appellant's "innocence and eagerness to help" without balanced and wise
    guidance from adults. In my judgement these passages do indeed indicate
    a significant political ideation on the part of the Appellant such that
    it is unlikely that he attended demonstrations simply  to  be  able  to
    provide photographic evidence  in  support  of  an  asylum  claim.  The
    apparent depth of his political ideation,  and  his  anger  over  these
    issues, does, I find, lend  a  degree  of  credence  to  his  narrative
    account of having personally experienced problems  on  account  of  his
    ethnic identity and associated political views. In this context I  also
    accept Mr Yeo's submission that  the  Appellant  displayed  significant
    knowledge of  the  OLF  during  the  course  of  his  asylum  interview
    consistent with his claimed sympathy and support, and  consistent  with
    his diaspora activity - though it is now said that  such  activity  has
    reduced because of the Appellant's mental outlook.


24.  The Respondent does not accept the  Appellant's  account.  Reasons  for
    this are set out in the RFRL,  and  are  essentially  repeated  in  the
    written submissions before the Upper Tribunal.



25.   The  Respondent's  written  submission  (prepared  by  Mr  Melvin  who
    appeared at the error of law hearing, and relied  upon  by  Mr  Tarlow)
    rehearses the background to the appeal and identifies the  Respondent's
    key contentions in the case: it is not accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    father was a supporter or member of the OLF, or that the Appellant  was
    involved consequentially; it is not accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
    harassed and  questioned  by  the  Ethiopian  authorities;  it  is  not
    accepted that he attended a demonstration in support of the OLF and was
    arrested. Submissions in support of this position  in  respect  of  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account are set out under  a  number  of
    bullet points under paragraph 20 of the written submission, and further
    submissions in respect of risk are set out at paragraph 26 et seq..


26.  Extracts from the most recent Country  of  Information  Guidance  Notes
    are reproduced in the Respondent's written submissions: 'Policy summary
    (Oromos and the Oromo protests)' (paragraphs 3.1.1-3.1.7 of  'Ethiopia:
    Oromos and the Oromo Protests',  v.1.0,  December  2016);  and  'Policy
    summary (Opposition to  the  government)'  (paragraphs  3.1.1-3.1.8  of
    'Ethiopian: Opposition to the government', v.1.0,  December  2016).  In
    light of these policy documents, the  Respondent  acknowledges  that  a
    person who has close family links with a person connected with the  OLF
    may also themselves be at risk of persecution, and that accordingly the
    real issue in the appeal is the Appellant's credibility. The Respondent
    concedes "If the Upper Tribunal finds that this appellant's father is a
    member of the OLF and has been arrested and that the appellant's  links
    are sufficient to arouse the suspicion of the  authorities  his  appeal
    will succeed" (paragraph 31). However it is argued  that  the  Tribunal
    should conclude that the Appellant's claim "is incredible,  implausible
    and full of inconsistencies" to an extent that the appeal  should  fail
    (paragraph 32).



27.  At the risk of  being  overly  reductive,  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    Respondent's challenge to the Appellant's credibility -  which  is  set
    out in more detail in the RFRL and in  the  written  submissions  -  is
    essentially based on the following matters: the Appellant was unable to
    provide details of the nature of his father's involvement with the OLF;
    the Appellant's inability to provide details of the  attendees  of  the
    regular meetings  hosted  by  his  father  was  inconsistent  with  his
    proximity to such meetings and his  involvement  as  a  distributor  of
    communications to the attendees; similarly the Appellant's inability to
    give details as to the contents of the letters or  pamphlets  delivered
    was not credible in the circumstances; it was not considered  plausible
    that the Appellant would have  been  interrogated  about  his  father's
    activities given that he was just a child;  it  was  not  plausible  or
    credible that the Appellant would have been questioned about his father
    over a period of approximately two years without any apparent  raid  or
    arrest of his father until April 2014; the Appellant had not  mentioned
    the demonstration and subsequent questioning  in  his  initial  witness
    statement (dated 23 November 2015), but had  only  raised  it  for  the
    first time in his asylum interview - (for completeness I pause to  note
    that in contrast to the assertion at paragraph  39  of  the  RFRL,  the
    Appellant did mention  participating  in  a  demonstration  at  school,
    albeit he did not refer to the specific interrogation  thereafter);  it
    is implausible that the Appellant would have gone against the wishes of
    his family who appeared to be planning to relocate, and  left  home  on
    his own and unsupported. It is also argued that the lack of interest in
    the Appellant is evident even on his own case because  had  there  been
    any adverse interest in him the  authorities  had  the  opportunity  to
    arrest him at the same time as they arrested his father.




28 . The Appellant seeks to  meet  these  matters  by  way  of  his  witness
    statement, the Skeleton Argument and Supplementary  Skeleton  Argument,
    the supporting evidence from his counsellor, and the expert opinion  of
    Dr. Bekalo.


29.  I note that in the report of Dr Bekalo dated 9 May  2017,  the  general
    observation is made that the Appellant's account  is  "consistent  with
    what goes on in the country", and as  such  is  "plausible"  (paragraph
    1.2). Although a careful caveat to this is offered in  respect  of  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's departure (paragraph 3.1), this itself
    is considered in the context of  the  Dr  Bekalo's  own  knowledge  and
    experience of minors who appear to attempt migration with little or  no
    support from agents or family (paragraph 3.2). The  limited  nature  of
    the Appellant's knowledge of his father's connections  and  involvement
    with the OLF are considered consistent with local socio-cultural  norms
    and the traditional patriarchal Oromo culture in which  young  children
    would not be fully informed about, or  involved  in,  serious  male  or
    adult affairs - particularly in rural areas  such  as  the  Appellant's
    home region (paragraph 4.1-4.2).


30.  I have noted and taken into account the letter of  Mr  Akiko  Kobayashi
    dated 22 September 2016, and his  supplementary  letter  dated  8  June
    2017. I have done so both in the context of the potential corroborative
    value of such evidence, and in the context of the Appellant's  decision
    not to give oral evidence.


31.  Mr Kobayashi is a counsellor with 'Compass, Off the  Record',  to  whom
    the Appellant was referred by his college tutor at the end of 2015.  As
    of 22 September 2016  Mr  Kobayashi  had  seen  the  Appellant  for  21
    sessions  of  counselling  -  starting  off  initially  with  an  Oromo
    interpreter, but later as the  Appellant's  language  skills  improved,
    conducted in English. In the circumstances I accept that  Mr  Kobayashi
    has considerable experience of the Appellant  and  is  well  placed  to
    offer the information contained in his letters; this is not a case of a
    report based on one or two sessions arranged with an appeal hearing  in
    contemplation, but arises because of the perceived need for counselling
    identified within the school environment - a need seemingly  reinforced
    by the Appellant's  presentation  in  the  course  of  the  counselling
    sessions themselves.


32.  In the letter of 22 September 2016 Mr Kobayashi states that  the  usual
    quota of 6 sessions has been extended indefinitely  for  the  Appellant
    "due to his current fragile and vulnerable emotional and  psychological
    state", and because it was  considered  he  was  benefitting  from  the
    counselling.


33.  In so far as the counselling sessions  have  explored  the  Appellant's
    past, it appears that he has  related  matters  essentially  consistent
    with the details of his asylum claim. It is opined that his "conditions
    fit with the symptoms of  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (PTSD)  and
    severe depression". It is said  that  in  trying  to  communicate  past
    events he seeks to report "past events in as much detail  as  possible,
    but not how he felt then or feels now"; it is suggested that this might
    be because of emotional numbness (a symptom of PTSD), or as  a  defence
    mechanism to avoid emotional and psychological  pain,  or  because  his
    culture forbids a male to show emotion.


34.  In the supplementary letter dated 8 June  2017  it  is  said  that  the
    Appellant has stopped engaging in activities  that  he  had  previously
    enjoyed; it is opined that he is deeply depressed, find it difficult to
    talk about his  mother,  and  "feels  confused  and  is  tormented"  in
    thinking about his sudden departure from  Ethiopia  and  pondering  the
    alternatives - "He always end up thinking he had no other  choice,  but
    this quickly becomes doubtful if he did the right thing".


35.  I note the following passage in the letter of 22 September 2016:

    "He talked about how he felt confused  when  the  Home  Office  officer
    asked him many questions. The questions jumped from subject to subject,
    and quickly moved to the next  question,  without  a  chance  for  [the
    Appellant] to give details. I wondered aloud in our counselling  if  he
    felt scared being questioned by the officer,  remembering  how  he  had
    been interrogated by officers in Ethiopia,  but  he  said  he  was  not
    scared as the Home Office officer was not angry with him and he was not
    shouted at. I also asked him if he felt he should not say some  aspects
    of his experiences due to being  told  by  his  father  not  to  reveal
    certain things, but he denied this, saying his solicitor had  explained
    to him before that he should tell the  officer  everything  openly.  He
    insisted he was just confused, and if he was given  chance  to  explain
    what he had said, he could have made it  clearer  and  perhaps  correct
    some errors he had made."

    I am impressed by this passage. The Appellant  was  'offered'  possible
    explanations for any deficiencies in his account at interview, but  did
    not take them insisting essentially that it was no more than  confusion
    because of the number of questions and the  movement  from  subject  to
    subject.  The  Appellant's  reasoned   'rejection'   of   the   offered
    explanations, and his maintenance of his own  explanation  has,  in  my
    judgement, a credence that reinforces  his  overall  credibility  as  a
    young interviewee doing his best to advance  a  narrative  account  but
    perhaps falling short in some respects. I factor this in to my  overall
    evaluation of the Appellant's claim.


36.  I also factor in as a favourable feature what is, in my judgement,  the
    consistency of the Appellant's narrative during  counselling  with  the
    substance of his claim,  and  the  consistency  of  his  mental  health
    presentation with  the  events  recounted.  In  this  latter  regard  I
    acknowledge that the Appellant has also related traumatic events during
    his journey to the UK. I also acknowledge that the uncertainty  of  his
    situation in the UK - notwithstanding the grant of discretionary  leave
    to remain - appears to have been a matter of concern for him. As  such,
    I acknowledge that there may be other  factors  that  account  for  his
    vulnerability and mental health presentation; however, on balance, I do
    not consider that I can rule  out  from  consideration  the  very  real
    likelihood that much of his  present  mental  health  difficulties  are
    rooted in the trauma of the events that the Appellant  claims  preceded
    his departure from Ethiopia.


37.   Looking  at  all  matters  in  the  round  I  accept  the  Appellant's
    submission that much  of  the  Respondent's  case  is  premised  on  an
    expectation  of  knowledge,  and  that  the  Appellant  has  adequately
    explained why he  did  not  have  such  a  knowledge;  accordingly  the
    Respondent's reasoning in this regard is without  adequate  foundation.
    On balance I accept that the Appellant has attempted to recount  events
    from actual experience in respect of his father's involvement with  the
    OLF,  albeit  that  there  are  substantial  gaps  in  the  Appellant's
    knowledge that are entirely understandable in the context of him having
    been a child at the relevant time, bearing in mind  both  his  minority
    and the sociocultural patriarchal environment in which it  is  unlikely
    that he would have  been  informed  of  the  details  of  his  father's
    political activities.


38.  I also accept the criticisms made on behalf of the Appellant  of  those
    aspects of the Respondent's reasoning that are based on an  expectation
    of how  the  authorities  in  Ethiopia  might  behave.  The  Respondent
    submitted that it was implausible  that  the  authorities  in  Ethiopia
    would not have arrested the Appellant's father at  some  earlier  point
    bearing in mind that the Appellant himself had  been  questioned  about
    his father from time to time over a period of approximately two  years.
    I accept that there is no particular reason to expect  the  authorities
    in Ethiopia to  have  acted  against  the  Appellant's  father  at  any
    particular point in time: how they conduct their security operations is
    essentially a matter for them, and  in  my  judgement  it  is  entirely
    plausible that this might involve a significant passage of time pending
    investigation and/or surveillance prior to an  arrest  -  investigation
    and surveillance may not only lead to evidence against the  individual,
    but may result in the collection of useful information in respect of  a
    wider network. In the absence of  anything  more  specific  as  to  the
    methods of the authorities in Ethiopia I am not  prepared  to  conclude
    that the passage of time in the Appellant's account between the initial
    questioning of the Appellant  and  his  father's  arrest  is  a  matter
    damaging to the Appellant's credibility. Similarly, in the  absence  of
    anything more specific as to methods, I am  not  prepared  to  conclude
    that the authorities would not have questioned a schoolboy.


39.  In this context, it is also to be noted - as  identified  at  paragraph
    14 of the Appellant's Supplementary Skeleton Argument with reference to
    an Amnesty International report from October 2014 - that there had been
    a wave of Oromo protests followed  by  large  security  sweeps  between
    April and June 2014. It is reasonable to  assume  that  some  of  those
    arrested might have already been the subject of interest on the part of
    the authorities without having previously been arrested; in other words
    it is plausible that protests triggered round-ups which targeted people
    already the subject of interest. In any event, the  fact  of  increased
    arrests by  the  authorities  at  this  time  is  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's account of his father having been arrested in April 2014.


40.  Further, my attention was directed to the Human Rights Watch report  of
    15 June 2016, in  which  reference  is  made  to  protesters  including
    secondary  and  primary   school   students,   and   the   arrests   of
    schoolchildren. Whilst this report is in respect of events  that  post-
    date the events at the core of the Appellant's account, I  accept  that
    it is indicative of the caution required in assuming that  the  methods
    of the authorities of  oppressive  regimes  would  not  resort  to  the
    questioning of children.


41.  Having carefully considered all of the evidence I do not consider  that
    there is anything of adverse substance in the  piecemeal  emergence  of
    the Appellant's claim to have been held for two  hours  and  questioned
    after involvement in a demonstration at school. The Appellant did refer
    to such a demonstration in his initial witness statement; he  has  also
    consistently referred to being questioned at school from time to  time.
    The significance of this demonstration and his  questioning  thereafter
    is not at the core of his claim. It did not appear on his own  evidence
    that the Appellant was singled out for questioning  on  this  occasion,
    but that many of the participants at the school  were  treated  in  the
    same way. I am not persuaded that there is  anything  sinister  in  the
    fact that the Appellant this particular incident of  interrogation  was
    omitted from the initial witness statement.


42.  In my judgement the Respondent has not sustainably identified  anything
    that   is   inherently   implausible,   or   significantly   internally
    inconsistent, or significantly inconsistent with the country situation,
    in respect of any aspect of the Appellant's narrative.


43.  It seems to me that the most  surprising  element  of  the  Appellant's
    account is not in respect of the claimed events in  Ethiopia  prompting
    is departure, but is rather in respect of his decision as a  child  not
    yet 14 to run away on his own. I  acknowledge  that  this  circumstance
    stretches the bounds of credulity - however it seems to me that  it  is
    not  so  unlikely  that  it  could  be  characterised   as   inherently
    implausible, or that it is otherwise such as to negate the  consistency
    and plausibility of all other aspects of his account.


44.  I have  given  consideration  to  the  circumstance  of  the  Appellant
    electing not to give oral evidence in the appeal. I take  into  account
    what has been said about his mental health, and  I  accept  on  balance
    that he is a vulnerable individual. I also note  that  ultimately  this
    case turns on the credibility or otherwise  of  an  account  of  events
    experienced over a period of time, and  culminating  in  the  event  of
    April 2014, all prior to the Appellant's 14th birthday. I consider that
    the  points  made  on  his  behalf  in  respect  of   the   Appellant's
    understanding and perception of events as a minor, and  the  likelihood
    that this would be incomplete in  respect  of  the  activities  of  his
    father, are well made. Bearing in mind in particular those  aspects  of
    the Respondent's refusal that are based on the plausibility of the lack
    of detail, it is difficult to see what further the Appellant might  say
    about these matters in the context of oral evidence  that  he  has  not
    already related. In so far as the Respondent has  sought  to  challenge
    other aspects of his narrative, it seems to me that these matters  have
    been aired and addressed by way of the  written  materials  before  the
    Tribunal. Again it is difficult to see what further might emerge by way
    of oral evidence. I accept that the election not to give  evidence  was
    made pursuant to striking a balance between the potential value of oral
    evidence and the potential stress caused by the  experience  of  giving
    oral evidence, and was not motivated by a desire to be evasive, or  not
    to be held to scrutiny. In all the circumstances I do  not  accord  any
    adverse weight to the  fact  that  the  Appellant  did  not  give  oral
    evidence in support of his appeal.


45.  Looking at all matters in the  round;  having  regard  to  the  general
    plausibility of the  Appellant's  account  when  measured  against  the
    country situation - which is significantly, though not  determinatively
    favourable; having regard to the consistency of his  narrative  account
    across his initial witness statement, his  interview,  and  his  appeal
    statement - and in respect of the matters discussed during  counselling
    - again significantly but not determinatively favourable; having regard
    to his knowledge of, and commitment to the cause of the Oromo people in
    Ethiopia; and  having  rejected  the  Respondent's  core  reasoning  in
    support of an adverse assessment of the Appellant's narrative  account,
    I have reached the conclusion that the Appellant is to be considered  a
    credible witness, and I accept his account in  all  material  respects.
    For the avoidance of any doubt, in my judgement he proves his case  far
    beyond the lower standard required in an asylum appeal.


46.  In circumstances where  the  Respondent  concedes  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk if his account is credible, it is unnecessary  for  me
    to rehearse the country information that has been filed in the  appeal.
    Suffice to say I have concluded  that  the  Appellant:  is  the  family
    member of a person who has been arrested in  relation  to  his  support
    and/or membership of the OLF; is reasonably likely to be  perceived  as
    having links to a supporter  of  the  OLF  by  reason  of  such  family
    membership; is also himself a person who has in the past attracted  the
    attention of the authorities by reason of his family connection to  the
    OLF;  is now a champion of the OLF cause and cannot, for  the  purposes
    of evaluating his entitlement to protection, be expected  to  deny  his
    political opinions if questioned upon return to Ethiopia. As such, I am
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant  falls  within  the   risk   categories
    identified in the now somewhat aged country guidance case  of  MB  (OLF
    and MTA, risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030,  and  more  particularly
    identified in the Respondent's  recent  policy  summaries  referred  to
    above and quoted in the Respondent's written submissions. Moreover,  in
    light of the Respondent's concession,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
    consider further for the purposes of this appeal the issues in relation
    to 'inherited suspicion' explored in the body of  the  'error  of  law'
    decision.


47.  The Appellant is entitled to the international surrogate protection  of
    the Refugee Convention as having a well-founded fear of persecution  in
    his country  of  nationality  by  reason  of  actual  and/or  perceived
    political opinion combined with ethnic origin. The Appellant's  removal
    in consequence of  the  Respondent's  decision  would  also  reasonably
    likely be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  by
    reason of the UK's obligations pursuant to Article 3 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

48.  The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:                                 Date: 12 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


TO THE RESPONDENT:

FEE AWARD

It is unclear to me whether or not a fee has been paid in  this  appeal,  or
whether the Appellant was fee exempt. In the event that a fee has been  paid
I am satisfied that the Appellant should, in  all  the  circumstances,  have
the benefit of a full fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 12 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)




                                  APPENDIX

                    'ERROR OF LAW' DECISION & DIRECTIONS
                 (pursuant to the hearing on 29 March 2017)


1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Maxwell promulgated on 27 October 2016.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia and a minor born  in  May  2000.
    His personal details are a matter of  record  on  file  and  I  do  not
    amplify upon them here in keeping with the  anonymity  order  that  has
    been made herein.

3.   The trigger  for  the  Appellant  leaving  his  home  country  was  his
    father's arrest in April 2014 -  an  event  that  occurred,  therefore,
    shortly before the Appellant's 14th birthday.  Although  the  Appellant
    left Ethiopia soon thereafter, it was not until over a year later  that
    he arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2015.  Shortly  after  arrival
    he claimed asylum and in due course was interviewed on 3 February 2016.

4.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's  protection  claim  for  reasons
    set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 20 April 2016.
     However, although his claim for asylum under  the  Refugee  Convention
    was  refused,  the  Respondent  granted  the  Appellant  a  period   of
    discretionary leave to remain, which I understand is due to expire on 3
    November 2017.

5.   The RFRL, which is a matter of  record  on  file,  indicates  that  the
    Respondent did not apparently dispute the Appellant's date of birth and
    accepted both his nationality and his ethnicity as an Oromo.   However,
    the Respondent did not accept the Appellant's account of the events  in
    Ethiopia which the Appellant claimed put him at risk if he were  to  be
    returned.

6.   The Respondent has helpfully and clearly under three separate  headings
    in the RFRL identified the core aspects of the Appellant's  claim,  and
    articulated  reasons  thereunder  for  not  accepting  the  Appellant's
    narrative.   Those  headings  are   "Father's   Membership   of   OLF",
    "Harassment  and  Questioning  from  the  Ethiopian  Authorities"   and
    "Attendance of Demonstration and Subsequent interest from Authorities".

7.   It is to be noted that the Respondent did not  make  any  reference  to
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004 in the RFRL notwithstanding that the  Appellant's  account  of
    his journey to the UK involved the transit through a number of European
    countries, in particular Italy and France. Nor did the Respondent raise
    any issue or question in respect of the route by  which  the  Appellant
    had travelled from Ethiopia to the  United  Kingdom,  or  otherwise  in
    respect of  the  circumstances  of  his  flight  from  his  country  of
    nationality to the place in which he ultimately sought asylum.

8.   Although the Appellant was granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  he
    nonetheless brought an appeal to the IAC against those aspects  of  the
    Respondent's decision that refused him 'protection'.   The  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge for  reasons  set
    out in his Decision.  The Appellant made an application for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was in the first instance refused
    by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  on  6   December   2016,   but
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  on  13  February
    2017.

9.   The  Appellant  essentially  raises  two  bases  of  challenge  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  He  argues  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's assessment of  the  credibility  of  his  account  was
    flawed.  He also argues that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment
    of the objective risk upon return to Ethiopia  was  flawed.  I  address
    these two grounds in turn.

10.  The Appellant elected not to give oral evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Whilst in many cases this might be  considered  unusual,  Mr
    Yeo suggested in the course of submissions before me, this  stance  was
    broadly in spirit with the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  No  2  of
    2010, 'Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive  appellant  guidance',  to
    the effect that unless it was necessary to ensure a fair hearing it was
    not appropriate for such people to be required to give evidence.

11.  There was some discussion before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  this
    regard prior to the substance of the hearing and the  entertainment  of
    submissions from the representatives: see  Decision  at  paragraph  12.
    There has been some focus on this in the renewed grounds of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, bearing in mind that comments were  made  by  Judge
    Chohan  in  respect  of  what  was   described   as   the   Appellant's
    representative's decision that the Appellant not give evidence.  As the
    renewed  grounds  point  out,  this  was  not  a   decision   for   the
    representative but the representative acted  pursuant  to  instructions
    (albeit those instructions may have been informed by  advice  from  the
    representative).

12.  Be that as it  may,  ultimately  those  matters  are  marginal  to  the
    substance of issues before me.  What is of note is that  the  Appellant
    did not give oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

13.  Somewhat confusingly in this  regard,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    notes at paragraph 31 that this meant that the Appellant had  "declined
    to explain a number of concerns that would have been  put  to  him  and
    therefore he does not have the benefit of any  explanation  to  assuage
    such concerns".  I characterise this as 'somewhat  confusing'  for  two
    reasons: it is not immediately apparent what the  concerns  might  have
    been that could have been put to the Appellant in  circumstances  where
    any concerns harboured by the Respondent were set  out  in  detail  and
    with cogency in the RFRL  and  addressed  in  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement; further, later on in the decision the Judge  indicates  that
    the absence of oral evidence from the Appellant was not a  matter  that
    he considered adverse to the case.

14.  From paragraph 32 through  to  paragraph  37  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  considered  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  made  findings   on
    credibility.  Paragraph 32 explores what appear to have been discrepant
    statements made in respect of the origin  of  the  Appellant's  gastric
    problems.  However, I accept, as Mr Yeo has indicated, that the Judge's
    exploration of these matters at paragraph  32  does  not  seem  to  'go
    anywhere' beyond paragraph 32, and it is difficult to see on what basis
    these matters might  have,  or  the  Judge  thought  they  might  have,
    informed an adverse assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility  more
    generally.

15.  Paragraph 33 addresses the Appellant's route to the United Kingdom  and
    this is picked up again at paragraph 36.  I return to these  paragraphs
    below.

16.  At paragraph 34 the Judge considers the Appellant's account  primarily,
    it seems, in respect of his father's  activities  with  the  OLF.   The
    Judge says this:

         "I accept that there has been a resurgence of activity against  OLF
         on the part of the Ethiopian authorities and this  began  at  about
         the time the Appellant's father was seized.  I also accept that the
         Appellant's scant knowledge of  his  father's  activities  and  his
         account own involvement are plausible.   I  accept  the  submission
         made by his representative to the effect that I must  take  account
         of the Appellant's tender years at the time this was  taking  place
         and that as such a young person it would be likely his father would
         exclude him  from  meetings.   His  explanation  of  his  ignorance
         included him stating he was not interested at that time and  whilst
         that might be regarded as somewhat at odds with  the  remainder  of
         his account I find it does not  undermine  it  to  any  significant
         degree."

17.  I pause to note that on its face this seems to be an acceptance of  the
    plausibility of the Appellant's account  in  respect  of  his  father's
    activities, and to that extent a rejection of the reasoning in the RFRL
    at paragraphs 24-29.  That said, it is to be noted that  an  evaluation
    that events described are 'plausible' is not inevitably a finding  that
    those events actually took place.

18.  At paragraph 35 the Judge accepts  that  the  Appellant  "may  well  be
    traumatised" but indicates that he does not  think  that  much  can  be
    inferred from this with regard to the Appellant's account of events  in
    Ethiopia because such  trauma  might  have  arisen  for  other  reasons
    including separation from his  family,  being  plunged  into  an  alien
    environment, or the nature of the journey to reach the United Kingdom.

19.  In respect of the journey the First-tier Tribunal Judge  says  this  at
    paragraph 33:

         "Although the description of the route claimed to have  been  taken
         from Ethiopia to the United Kingdom is plausible, the account given
         is not.  He left Ethiopia in April 2014 and landed  in  the  United
         Kingdom some fourteen months later.  He claims the fee for this was
         900, including being accommodated in Sudan for six months and then
         Libya for a further six months.  This was a trip which engaged  the
         services of several agents and a car trip between Sudan  and  Libya
         lasting for a month.  I find  this  part  of  his  account  neither
         plausible nor credible."


20.  As I have already indicated, immediately following this  evaluation  of
    the Appellant's account of his journey to the United Kingdom the  Judge
    stated that the Appellant's account of events in Ethiopia, at least  so
    far as his father was concerned, was plausible.

21.  However, the Judge  ultimately  rejects  the  Appellant's  account  for
    reasons set out  at  paragraph  36,  which  picks  up  on  the  adverse
    assessment of his account of his journey to the United Kingdom.

         "Against the Appellant are the wholly implausible  aspects  of  the
         account of his journey.  I do not accept he would just  leave  home
         without telling anyone with no plan, no funds and no support.  I do
         not accept the claimed cost of him being smuggled out of  Ethiopia,
         kept in Sudan and Libya for six months in each country  then  taken
         to Italy by boat comes anywhere near possible, let alone reasonably
         likely."


    At paragraph 37 the Judge then states his conclusion that the Appellant
    "has failed to discharge his burden" of establishing his asylum claim.


22.  It may be seen  that  the  Judge  has  placed  seemingly  determinative
    reliance  upon  his  evaluation  of  the  Appellant's  account  of  the
    circumstances of the 'mechanics' of his departure from Ethiopia and his
    journey to the United Kingdom.  This, as I have already indicated,  was
    not a matter raised in the Respondent's  RFRL.  Nor  was  it  a  matter
    anywhere else adverted to as a likely issue.   In  those  circumstances
    the Judge has essentially relied upon an entirely new matter  to  which
    the Appellant was not alerted, and  upon  which  he  therefore  had  no
    opportunity to comment.

23.  I do not consider that the matter is 'rescued' by any  suggestion  that
    had he given oral evidence the Appellant would have  had  a  chance  to
    explain "a number of concerns". If it was likely that the route to  the
    United  Kingdom,  and  the  Appellant's  account  in  respect  of   the
    arrangements made for him to come to the United Kingdom, was  going  to
    be an issue that troubled anybody it was something of which  he  should
    have been given due notice, particularly bearing in mind that he was  a
    minor, so that his advisers could consider the best way to  advise  him
    as to how to address it and whether that would involve  the  filing  of
    some form of documentary evidence as to  the  typical  nature  of  such
    journeys, or the filing  of  further  written  evidence  by  way  of  a
    statement from  the  Appellant,  or  indeed  advising  him  to  take  a
    different view as to his decision on giving oral evidence.

24.  I am satisfied in  those  circumstances  that  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's overall  credibility  was  flawed  to  an  extent  that  it
    amounted to an error of law.  I should note  in  this  regard  that  Mr
    Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State very  properly  acknowledged
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had indeed appeared to focus upon an
    issue that had not been raised at that time by the Secretary of  State,
    or at all - albeit with the caveat that the Secretary of State may  now
    yet wish to raise such an issue in light of  the  Judge's  observations
    (see further below).

25.  I  have  in  setting  out  the  foregoing  analysis  observed  that  an
    evaluation that a circumstance might be plausible does  not  inevitably
    equate to an acceptance of an account.  To that extent it seems  to  me
    that this is not a case where  the  flaw  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's reasoning in respect of the  Appellant's  credibility  and  the
    findings in respect of his account  can  simply  be  reversed:  if  the
    adverse assessment  of  the  Appellant's  account  of  his  journey  is
    disregarded what remains is the evaluation that the Appellant's account
    in respect of his father was 'plausible'. This is an insufficient basis
    upon which to remake the decision in the  appeal.  'Plausibility'  does
    not equate to a clear  finding  of  fact;  moreover  there  were  other
    aspects of the Appellant's credibility  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge quite simply did not address.   Those  include  the  further  two
    matters identified in the  RFRL  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  own
    harassment and questioning from  the  Ethiopian  authorities,  and  his
    account of a demonstration and his arrest and detention in Ethiopia.

26.  Although I have concluded that the  credibility  assessment  is  flawed
    and that it  is  not  possible  simply  to  substitute  an  alternative
    credibility assessment, these matters are not ultimately significant if
    it might be said that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  adequately
    assessed the  risk  on  return  in  the  alternative  scenario  of  the
    Appellant's account being accepted as true. Indeed, this  is  what  the
    Judge purports to do from paragraph 38 onwards.  Paragraph 38 states in
    terms: "Even if I am wrong and the Appellant's account be  accepted,  I
    find, for reasons given below, the Appellant has not proved  he  is  at
    risk."

27.  In the following paragraphs the Judge sets out an  evaluation  of  risk
    to  the  Appellant  by  reference  to  the  Appellant's  own   account.
    Complaint is made on behalf of the Appellant before this Tribunal  that
    the Judge's  evaluation  in  this  regard  fails  to  engage  with,  or
    otherwise take account  of,  relevant  background  country  information
    that, it is said, was 'on point'.

28.  In this regard  my  attention  is  directed  to  the  contents  of  the
    Skeleton  Argument  that  was  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   in
    particular at paragraphs 16 and  17.   Paragraph  16  of  the  Skeleton
    Argument refers the reader to the Appellant's bundle  at  pages  74-77,
    which is said to be "on treatment of family members of OLF suspects and
    'inherited suspicion'" adding "There have been 'dozens  of  reports  of
    extrajudicial executions, including of family  members  of  suspects'."
    Paragraph 17 of the Skeleton Argument then summarises  the  Appellant's
    case in this way:

         "the  combination  of  the  current  atmosphere  in  Ethiopia,  his
         father's activities, his own history of involvement and questioning
         at school, his activities in the UK and his genuinely held  beliefs
         about the relationship between the Ethiopian state  and  the  Oromo
         people  mean  that  the  Appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear   of
         persecution."


29.  The substance of those grounds are in fact repeated in the  context  of
    the grounds of challenge to  this  Tribunal,  although  additionally  a
    point is made in respect of the principle in HJ (Iran)  to  the  effect
    that were the Appellant to be questioned he could not  be  expected  to
    deny his own political interests, allegiances, and beliefs.


30.  The pages identified in the Appellant's Skeleton Argument appear  in  a
    document from the Asylum Research Consultancy (Appellant's bundle pages
    38-97). The document is dated 7 September 2016 and is said  to  provide
    country information up to 27 August 2016.  It is headed  "Ethiopia  COI
    Query Responses: the Master Plan; OLF Members and their Family Members;
    Ill-treatment by State Agents of Oromo Persons who are not  politically
    active".

31.  The particular passages referred to use as their  principal  source  an
    Amnesty International Report from October 2014.  My attention has  also
    been directed to a footnote at page 76,  (footnote  181),  which  is  a
    reference to a Human Rights Watch  Report  dated  June  2016.   Mr  Yeo
    suggests in consequence that there are two authoritative  human  rights
    organisations providing similar evidence.

32.  I pause to note that without the opportunity of looking at  the  source
    documents in any more detail, it is not immediately clear  whether  the
    later  report  is  simply  making  reference  and  reporting  incidents
    referred to in the earlier report, or whether it is providing  examples
    and illustrations of further occurrences. However, for the moment  that
    is not a matter material to a consideration  of  the  approach  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge - albeit it is  a  matter  that  may  in  due
    course require some further consideration.

33.  The passages particularly relied upon by the Appellant come  under  the
    heading "Treatment of OLF Family Members".  The  October  2014  Amnesty
    International Report is quoted at some length and for present  purposes
    I simply refer to the following.

    (i) At page 74 of the Appellant's bundle there is a reference to  "over
    a dozen people reported to  Amnesty  International.   They  had  fallen
    under suspicion which led to harassment or arrest and  detention  based
    on previous activities or the actual or suspected political opinions of
    family members."

     (ii) The report coins the phrase "inherited suspicion", and says  this:
    "In many of these  cases  this  inherited  suspicion  was  reported  to
    manifest when other incidents occurred". It is also said:  "In  several
    cases reported to Amnesty International multiple members  of  the  same
    family were arrested based on inherited suspicion".

34.  The concept  of  suspicion  is  expressly  recognised  in  the  country
    guidance of MB (OLF and MTA, risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 where
    persons perceived to be OLF members or sympathisers are  identified  as
    individuals of potential risk if returned to Ethiopia.  To that  extent
    the information to which Mr Yeo has referred me does not, as  it  were,
    create  an  entirely  new  category  of  potential  successful   asylum
    applicants.   Rather,  this  information  potentially  assists  in  the
    evaluation of who might be considered to be  suspected  of  involvement
    with the OLF.

35.  There are other  passages  in  the  pages  referred  to  that  identify
    different types of reasons why family members might come to the adverse
    attention of the authorities in Ethiopia:

    (i) An individual might be arrested in lieu of family  members.   (That
    is not a situation which would apparently pertain to the  Appellant  on
    the basis of the way he has put his case.)

     (ii) Reference is also made to  the  detention  of  family  members  of
    persons who are either wanted or already detained, in order to have the
    family member reveal the principal person's whereabouts or to hand over
    documents that it is believed might be  available  to  incriminate  the
    principal.  (Again, on the face of it, with the passage of time,  these
    are not matters that appear to relate to the Appellant.)

36.  The Human Rights Watch Report - in respect of  which  there  is  little
    more than a footnote -  refers  more  generally  to  "individuals  with
    perceived family ties with the OLF" being at risk of detention.

37.  In the absence of the source document, it is  perhaps  not  immediately
    clear whether Amnesty International's identification of a  category  of
    person  who  might  be  at  risk  by  reason  of  so-called  'inherited
    suspicion' is intended to  encompass  exhaustively  those  persons  who
    would be arrested in lieu and/or to reveal  whereabouts  or  hand  over
    documents, or whether  this  is  intended  to  be  a  further  distinct
    category.    It   seems   to   me   these   matters   require   careful
    consideration/investigation.

38.  What is clear in my judgment, however, is that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not essay any analysis of these  passages  in  the  materials
    expressly drawn to his attention.  Mr Melvin submits  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has nonetheless considered what risk  might  relate
    to the Appellant by reason of his connection with his  father,  but  it
    seems to me that the Judge has done that entirely in the context of the
    circumstances that pertained immediately after his father's arrest - at
    a time when the Appellant was 13 years old.  I accept that so far as it
    goes the Judge's  analysis  is  careful  and  cogent.  However,  in  my
    judgement the Judge does not go far enough: no consideration was  given
    to the country information expressly relied upon, and nor was any  risk
    by reason of family connection looked at from the  perspective  of  the
    Appellant no longer being a young boy of some 13 or 14 years old but  a
    young adult of over  16  years  old.  If  there  is  such  a  thing  as
    'inherited suspicion', a relevant factor may well be the age at which a
    family member is considered  worthy  of  suspicion  as  possibly  being
    sympathetic and/or active in a political organisation.

39.  For these reasons I conclude that the evaluation of risk on  return  is
    not one that has been made properly addressing all matters put  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal: it is flawed to an extent that it  amounts  to  an
    error of law.

40.   The  combined  errors  of  approach  to   credibility   and   'country
    information' are such that in my judgment the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Maxwell must be set aside and requires to be remade.


Remaking the Decision; Directions

41.  Mr Yeo indicated that absent  any  new  matters  being  raised  by  the
    Respondent it presently remained the case that the  Appellant  did  not
    wish to give evidence in the appeal. Mr  Melvin  suggested  that  there
    were a number of areas where a Tribunal would  likely  be  assisted  by
    oral evidence from the Appellant; however, ultimately, it  is  not  for
    the Respondent to decide whether  or  not  the  Appellant  should  give
    evidence. (This is not to deny the Respondent the opportunity of making
    submissions in due course as to how any  written  testimony  should  be
    evaluated in the absence of oral evidence, bearing in mind all  of  the
    evidence and circumstances, and the contents of the Joint  Presidential
    guidance.) Mr Melvin also indicated that the Respondent might now  wish
    to raise a further credibility issue  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    arrangements for travelling to the UK - but was not in  a  position  to
    indicate definitively if that was the case. If the Respondent wishes to
    do so this will require to  be  articulated  in  writing  so  that  the
    Appellant and his advisers may have a proper  opportunity  to  consider
    it, and in doing so consider how best to respond.

42.  Accordingly, as things stand, the Tribunal is presented with a case  in
    which the Appellant does not propose to give further  evidence  but  to
    proceed by way of submissions only. In so far  as  country  information
    requires to be considered beyond  the  existing  country  guidance  the
    potential issue is that of 'inherited suspicion',  which  will  require
    analysis of the two source  documents  cited  in  the  Asylum  Research
    Consultancy document. Mr Yeo was uncertain as to whether or not further
    expert evidence might be obtained on this issue.  Mr  Melvin  suggested
    that if expert evidence was to be obtained the Respondent would require
    considerable time to respond. However, I do not see any reason  why  in
    the first instance the Respondent  cannot  formulate  her  position  on
    'inherited suspicion' irrespective of the filing  of  evidence  by  the
    Appellant; providing there is an opportunity to file  further  evidence
    in response there will be no unfairness.

43.  Accordingly, after very considerable discussion, I determined  that  it
    was appropriate to retain the appeal in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
    decision to be remade pursuant to the following Directions. Given  that
    some of these matters are essentially contingent upon the position that
    might be adopted by the other party, or  the  evidence  that  might  be
    filed by the other party, I have included in the Directions a  reminder
    that either  party  is  at  liberty  to  apply  for  variation  in  the
    timetable.

44.  Moreover, for the avoidance of  any  doubt  I  made  it  clear  to  the
    parties that the Directions - which were given orally at the hearing  -
    should be considered to run from the date of the hearing and  not  from
    the date of the promulgation of this Decision.






                                 Directions

(1)  Within 14 days (i.e. by 12 April 2017) the  Respondent  shall  indicate
    to the Appellant in writing with reasons  any  further  issues  in  the
    appeal, and is also to file and serve any supporting evidence  in  this
    regard.


(2)  Within 21 days (i.e. by 19 April 2017) the Appellant is to  notify  the
    Tribunal and the Respondent if any expert is to be commissioned.

(3)  Within 28 days (i.e. by 26 April 2017) the Appellant  is  to  file  and
    serve any response to any new matters raised by the Respondent pursuant
    to (1) above, to include an indication as  to  whether  or  not  it  is
    proposed that the Appellant give oral evidence. (The Appellant is  also
    to notify the Tribunal of any interpreter requirements.)

(4)  Within 42 days (i.e. by 10 May 2017)  both  parties  are  to  file  and
    serve any  further  evidence  they  wish  to  rely  upon  with  written
    submissions in relation to the issue  of  'inherited  suspicion'.  Such
    submissions should at the very  least  address  those  matters  I  have
    outlined in my brief exploration of the materials above.

(5)  Within 56 days (i.e. by 24 May 2017)  both  parties  are  to  file  and
    serve any response to the evidence and submissions  filed  pursuant  to
    (4) above.

(6)  The case is retained in the Upper Tribunal to be listed for hearing  on
    the first available date after 31 May 2017.

(7)  Both parties are at  liberty  to  apply  for  variation  in  the  above
    timetable. Any application should be supported by reasons and  evidence
    so far as appropriate and available.

Notice of Decision

45.  The Decision of the First-tier-Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.

46.  The decision in the appeal is  to  be  remade  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    pursuant to the Directions herein.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


