
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04853/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2018                         |On 25 September 2018          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    MR OO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Panagiotopoulou, Counsel, instructed by Montague
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lyndsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008  (the  UT  Procedure  Rules)  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person whom  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified. The effect of such an "anonymity  order"  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone (not merely the parties  in  the  case)
    from disclosing relevant  information.  Breach  of  the  order  may  be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

 2. The appellant is a national of Turkey.  He had left Turkey  in  October
    2011 and travelled to France where he claimed  asylum  on  October  25,
    2011. He lost his appeal and  returned  to  Turkey  in  2013  where  he
    remained until June 2, 2016. The appellant  clandestinely  entered  the
    United Kingdom on June 7, 2016 and claimed asylum.

 3. The respondent refused his application in a  decision  dated  March  9,
    2018 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His appeal  came  before
    Judges of the First-tier Tribunal Nightingale and SH Smith (hereinafter
    called "the Judges") on May 16, 2018 and in a decision  promulgated  on
    June 27, 2018 the Judges dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision on July 11,  2018.  The  appellant
    argued that the Judges' decision  was  flawed  because  their  positive
    findings particularly in paragraphs 35, 45 and  62  contradicted  their
    ultimate conclusion.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Lambert on August 1, 2018  as  she  found  it  arguable  there  was  an
    inconsistency between the Judges' finding at paragraph 62 in  light  of
    the fact the Judges had accepted the appellant had given a credible and
    consistent account, supported by witnesses, in respect of  his  alleged
    detention and previous activities in Turkey as set  out  in  paragraphs
    66(iii) and (iv) of the Judges' decision.

    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Ms Panagiotopoulou adopted her grounds of appeal that had been
    submitted with this application. She highlighted the fact that the
    Judges had accepted that the appellant was both a credible and
    consistent witness, was a supporter of the HDP and other political
    parties and suffered with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).


 8. Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted:

      a) The Judges had misunderstood the evidence provided by the
         appellant's maternal cousin and failed to make material findings on
         aspects his evidence or put questions to the witness about the
         appellant's family's political profile. The Judges found the
         cousin's evidence did not advance the appellant's case in any
         material respect but overlooked the fact that cousin was a maternal
         cousin and the problems the appellant was describing were on his
         father's side of the family.
      b) The Judges failed to give adequate reasons for only finding the
         appellant was merely a supporter of both the BDP and DTP whereas
         the appellant claimed and had provided some evidence to show that
         he was a member.
      c) The Judges erred by making an adverse finding on his activities in
         France because the appellant had never claimed to have been
         politically active in France.
      d) The Judges erred at paragraph 48 of the decision when considering
         the court documents as they should have considered those documents
         in the round and not in isolation. At paragraph 49 of the decision
         the Judges made a negative finding on the arrest warrant because
         none could be seen on a search engine but the Judges overlooked the
         fact that he claimed he had been unofficially detained.
      e) The Judges placed too much weight on the appellant's screening
         interview and overlooked the medical problems and the intention of
         the screening interview.
      f) These errors contributed to an inadequate assessment of the risk
         factors set out in IK (Returnees-Records-IFA) Turkey CG [2004]
         UKIAT 00312.

 9. Mr Lyndsay opposed the application and submitted that the findings made
    by the Judges had been opened to them. He submitted that the cousin's
    evidence was self-serving and that the documents were not reliable for
    the reasons given by the Judges and the Judges were entitled to have
    expected the appellant to have given a consistent timeline because he
    had previously had a claim rejected for protection in France. He
    submitted that all issues had been considered and this was not a case
    where there was any material error.

    FINDINGS

10. In considering the appellant's appeal the  Judges  were  aware  of  the
    appellant's vulnerability. Their decision confirmed that  during  cross
    examination they intervened where they felt it was necessary.

11. At paragraph 34 of their decision, the Judges accepted  that  in  broad
    terms the appellant's  account  of  detention  in  2015  and  2016  was
    consistent with country evidence concerning what was happening at  that
    time. The Judges also accepted the appellant had a  detailed  knowledge
    of Kurdish political parties and identified that the central issue  was
    whether his case was credible.

12. Ms Panagiotopoulou's challenges relate  to  the  Judges'  approach  and
    assessment of the evidence.

13. Ms Panagiotopoulou raised an issue in her submissions that  the  Judges
    had failed to understand the relevance of the family tree that had been
    submitted  to  the  Tribunal   but   it   appeared   conceded   by   Ms
    Panagiotopoulou that the family tree took the matter no further because
    the respondent accepted during  the  hearing  that  the  appellant  was
    related to his cousin, as claimed, and I agree  with  their  conclusion
    that the family tree consequently did not take  the  appellant's  claim
    any further.

14. Ms Panagiotopoulou addressed me at some length both in her grounds  and
    oral  submissions  regarding  the  Judges'  approach  to  the  evidence
    provided by the appellant's cousin. She submitted  that  there  was  an
    error because the Judges placed weight on the fact that the cousin were
    silent as to his family's political activities and they stated, "we are
    surprised by this omission given  the  centrality  of  the  appellant's
    family's political activities to his  case  and  the  fact  that  Mr  S
    himself enjoys refugee status for, in his  words,  'similar  reasons'".
    The Judges went on to state that they  found  it  telling  the  witness
    failed to  mention  the  family's  profile.  Mr  Lyndsay  in  his  oral
    submissions stated the  cousin's  evidence  was  self-serving  and  the
    findings in paragraph 42 of the Judges' decision was open to them.

15. The argument being advanced by Ms Panagiotopoulou is  that  the  Judges
    erred in their approach to this evidence, but the Judges  were  clearly
    aware that the appellant and the witness were maternal cousins  because
    the Judges recorded in paragraph 41 of the decision that "their mothers
    or sisters". They also recorded the cousin's evidence to be that  their
    respective families lived very close to each other in Turkey and  I  am
    satisfied the Judges were entitled to have the  reservations  expressed
    in paragraph 41 of the decision because if the families lived as  close
    as was claimed, were related as claimed  and  the  cousin  had  similar
    problems then it seems reasonably likely the cousin  would  have  known
    about the appellant's family's problems and his failure to address that
    issue was a factor they could take  into  account  when  assessing  the
    cousin's evidence. The  position  may  have  been  different  if  their
    families did not live close to each other or had no  contact  but  that
    was not the argument advanced.

16. Ms Panagiotopoulou has criticised the Judges for failing  to  find  the
    appellant was a member of certain  political  parties.  They  addressed
    this issue between paragraphs 43 and 46 of their decision.  The  Judges
    had regard to his claimed activities  and  his  claimed  membership  of
    political groups and went on to consider  documents  submitted  to  the
    respondent regarding his membership of the BDP.

17. The Judges criticised the lack of translation of the document found  at
    page D3 in the respondent's bundle, but Ms Panagiotopoulou pointed  out
    that there was a translation of this in the appellant's bundle at  page
    22 indicating that he was a member of the BDP. However, this was not  a
    case where the Judges ignored this claim because at paragraph 45 of the
    decision they stated the  document  had  little  probative  value  when
    assessing the central aspect of his case that  he  was  a  "politically
    active HDP  supporter  whose  profile  led  to  his  detention  on  two
    occasions".

18. Ms Panagiotopoulou also submitted that the Judges were  wrong  to  make
    reference to the fact he had not been  politically  active  during  his
    four years in France in circumstances because he  had  not  claimed  to
    have been politically active. Ms Panagiotopoulou's submission  that  he
    did not claim to be politically active in France was  accepted  by  the
    Judges at paragraph 46.

19. Ms Panagiotopoulou  challenged  the  Judges'  approach  to  the  arrest
    warrant and indictment. In submissions, Ms Panagiotopoulou  argued  his
    detention had been unofficial and the argument advanced was that  there
    would therefore be no records available but if that was the  case  then
    why would there be an arrest warrant or indictment issued in the  first
    place? The Judges noted the appellant had searched for his own  records
    using  the  online  facility  but  had  found  nothing   and   in   the
    circumstances the Judges' finding there were no outstanding warrants or
    indictments was a finding open to them.

20. The Judges considered the appellant's claims of detention  and  torture
    between paragraphs 50 and 58 of their decision. They had regard to  his
    vulnerability and mental health difficulties when assessing the fact he
    had given different versions of events. They noted  that  some  of  the
    earlier accounts given in his interviews differed from the  account  he
    gave at the hearing. They had regard to the fact that when he  attended
    his screening interview he would have been tired and it would have been
    a stressful time for him. The finding in paragraph 51 was open  to  the
    Judges and they gave reasons for that finding from paragraph 52 onwards
    of their decision.

21. Contrary to Ms Panagiotopoulou's submissions the adverse findings  were
    not based simply on the initial  screening  interview.  The  subsequent
    inconsistencies compounded concerns that they had  over  the  screening
    interview. The points now advanced by Ms Panagiotopoulou were similarly
    advanced before the First-tier Tribunal.

22. This was an extremely detailed decision  where  considerable  time  was
    spent assessing numerous facets of the  appellant's  claims  and  I  am
    satisfied that the appropriate weight was given to all  of  the  issues
    now raised by Ms Panagiotopoulou.

23. Having made their findings, summarised in paragraph 66 of the decision,
    the Judges went on to consider whether the appellant would be at  risk.
    They had regard to both the country evidence and the decision of IK and
    their findings were open to them.

24.  I  am  satisfied  that  none  of  the  matters  either  singularly  or
    collectively, advanced by Ms Panagiotopoulou, disclose an error in law.

    DECISION

25. There is no error in law I uphold the original decision.

Signed                              Date     23/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     23/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
