
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04485/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 January 2020                            |On 26 February 2020           |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     CM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Rodgers, Immigration Advice Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which, following a hearing at North Shields on 9 August 2019, dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  the
    appellant's protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Honduras.   He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in August 2017 with his  partner  and  one  of  her  sons.   He
    claimed asylum the following day but the  application  was  treated  as
    withdrawn on 21 September 2017, as the appellant was  alleged  to  have
    absconded.

 3. On 24 July 2018, the respondent received further submissions  from  the
    appellant's representatives, which were treated as a fresh claim.  This
    was considered but refused in a decision letter dated 9 April 2019.  At
    paragraph 3 of his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge says this:-

         "3.  In  deciding  this  appeal,  I  have  considered  all  of  the
             documentary evidence which had been submitted to me,  as  well
             as oral evidence from the Appellant, his partner [V], [another
             individual (G)] and [a third individual (H)]."

 4. The judge then recorded the evidence given by  the  appellant  and  the
    nature of his international protection claim.  He said that he had been
    forced to relocate from his home when he was a teenager because of gang
    problems and violence in Honduras.  Aged 18, he  began  to  work  as  a
    mechanic and then a driver.  In 2013 he commenced his relationship with
    his partner, V, who has two sons, one of whom has refugee status in the
    United Kingdom.

 5. At paragraph 6, the judge recorded the  problems  which  the  appellant
    said began when his elder stepson's girlfriend went to live with  them.
    That family had had problems in Honduras, as  a  relative  was  a  high
    ranking member of a particular gang.  A person had been killed in  2004
    and since then some  sixteen  other  family  members  had  been  killed
    because of family links to him.  Others had been forced to  flee.   The
    appellant said his problems began because of the family connection.  He
    had received a letter at his house with two bullets.  In  addition,  he
    had experienced issues at work.  All of this led the appellant to  have
    to leave his job and his home in September 2015.  The family  relocated
    to stay with a friend in Roatan Island.  They remained there for  about
    three months and the appellant was able  to  secure  employment.   They
    then managed to find accommodation of their own.

 6. However, on 6  January  2017  some  men  from  the  gang  went  to  the
    appellant's house armed with machetes.  He said that they were  looking
    for the family and the appellant's younger stepson.  They wanted him to
    join the gang but the family refused.  One  of  the  men  attacked  the
    appellant's partner and attempted to rape her but the  family  dog  was
    barking, so they eventually fled, but the family was  warned  that  the
    gang would return.  At this point, the family realised they  could  not
    remain in Honduras any longer.   They  reported  the  incident  to  the
    police but knew that the authorities would be unable to do anything  to
    protect them.  They stayed for a month with  a  friend  before  renting
    another apartment for four to five months, but  they  feared  the  gang
    would find them once more.  The appellant told the  judge  that  if  he
    were to return to Honduras, his stepson would be  forced  to  join  the
    gangs or he would be killed.  The family would  not  be  safe,  as  his
    wife's elder son was in a relationship with the family of another  gang
    member.

 7. The appellant was cross-examined.  He was asked if he knew why the gang
    had not approached him until 2015, if they knew his identity  in  2013.
    He said that he had remained hidden, going only from work to  home  and
    back.  It was put to him that at his interview he said that everyone in
    his area knew where the gang members and killers were and he was  asked
    how no one appeared to have known his identity.  The appellant  replied
    there was a mistake at that point.  So again he kept himself hidden.

 8. Cross-examination then turned to the attempts to extort money from  the
    appellant's employer, which the  appellant  had  also  mentioned.   The
    appellant said that the gangs asked for a form of work tax.

 9.  The  representative  of  the  respondent  suggested   there   was   an
    inconsistency between the appellant's 2019 statement, where he said  he
    employer had refused this tax and his response to question  28  of  the
    interview, where he said that  the  company  did  pay.   The  appellant
    replied that his employer had paid a certain sum per week, but took the
    opportunity to capture the gang member who was asking  for  money.   He
    went on to explain he had refused the request to deliver the  money  on
    the basis he would have been complicit with the  gang  and  liable  for
    arrest as a result.

10. The Secretary of State's representative pressed the  appellant  on  the
    discrepancy.  The appellant said that the owner of  the  business  paid
    20,000 Lempiras per month but did not agree with  it.   When  the  gang
    member was captured, this sum of money was returned  to  the  employer.
    It was pointed out to the appellant that he had made no mention of  the
    arrest of a gang member in his original statement or of him being  held
    responsible for this.  On the contrary, he had said he  had  left  work
    because his employer refused to pay the gang.  The  appellant  repeated
    that he was threatened with death if he did not take the money that  he
    had refused as he would be considered  an  accomplice.   The  appellant
    said he had  not  been  inconsistent  but  he  had  perhaps  not  fully
    understood or something had been lost in translation.

11. At paragraph 12 of the decision,  the  judge  recorded  further  cross-
    examination by the respondent's representative, who asked  why  in  his
    interview the appellant had said the employer's business  continued  to
    operate in Honduras and why therefore it had not been targeted  if  the
    company was considered responsible for the arrest of a gang member  and
    had refused to pay.  The appellant said the employer had a lot of well-
    armed security guards who protected the business.  He  also  said  that
    when he and his family relocated to Roatan, he used a different surname
    so that he might be protected.  He was asked why he had returned to  La
    Ceiba to report the incident to the police if he had fled  due  to  the
    gang.  He said while he was in Roatan two men went  to  his  house  and
    were close to killing his wife.  He therefore returned.  It was put  to
    him that at his screening interview he  had  said  that  following  the
    September 2015 attack the family left their home and  relocated,  since
    when they  had  not  been  contacted  again;  but  in  his  substantive
    interview he had  complained  of  the  machete  attack  in  2017.   The
    appellant said there was another mistake here and insisted he had  been
    consistent.  He said the interviewer in  the  screening  interview  had
    stopped and the appellant had said that he was going to  explain  other
    facts in his substantive interview.  He  complained  he  had  not  been
    afforded the opportunity in his screening interview to provide  further
    information as it was "capped" abruptly.

12. The appellant said he had been at work at  the  time  of  2017  attack.
    Other people had informed him of the incident and he ran home.  By  the
    time of his arrival, the men were gone and his wife was crying.  It was
    pointed out to him that it had taken him and his family  four  days  to
    report the incident to the police.  The appellant denied this and  said
    there was an error and it was reported the following day.  He  did  not
    know why the report was dated four days after the incident.

13. The appellant told the judge he had relocated on the same  day  as  the
    incident in January 2017, finding a new job, and that he was  happy  to
    be working.  However, he had decided to come to the United  Kingdom  as
    he had been threatened with death.  He was asked  by  the  respondent's
    representative if he had received any further threats after the January
    2017 incident. He admitted he had not.

14.  After  re-examination,  the  judge  then  heard  evidence   from   the
    appellant's partner who adopted her witness  statement.   She  produced
    the original police reports and confirmed she had  provided  them  when
    the asylum claim was made.  When asked if she knew why she and her  son
    had been targeted in 2017, she said it was  related  to  her  husband's
    problems with the family, adding that she did not allow her son so much
    freedom that he could become involved with other people.  She was asked
    by Mrs Rodgers why the gangs would target her son, to which she replied
    she never had any other problems.

15. In cross-examination, she confirmed that the January 2017 incident  had
    been reported to the police on 10 January because she  was  afraid  and
    not want to leave her house.  Asked why the appellant should  say  that
    it was reported on the following day, she said he may have forgotten.

16. The  judge  then  heard  evidence  from  G,  who  adopted  her  witness
    statement.  She produced, amongst other things, a family  tree  showing
    those who had been killed.  She said she arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in 2002.  Prior to that she did not know the appellant.  She  had  been
    aware of the family but they were not in contact.

17. The final witness was H.  She adopted her  witness  statement  of  June
    2019 and she confirmed that she had lived with the  appellant  and  his
    wife in Honduras from April to September 2013.  At that point she  came
    to the United Kingdom because her family was experiencing problems with
    the gangs.  H was not cross-examined.

18. Having set out the submissions and the relevant law, the judge began at
    paragraph 28 of  his  decision  to  consider  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account.  He looked at the  account  by  reference  to  the
    background  evidence.   His  consideration  of  that  extended  to   an
    examination of an UNHCR paper to which he was referred by Mrs  Rodgers.
    At paragraph 40, the judge noted that the  respondent's  representative
    did not challenge the appellant's evidence that H had  lived  with  his
    family up to September 2013.  She and her mother had been recognised as
    refugees.  The judge  therefore  considered  that  their  evidence  was
    largely historical, given that neither was in the UK at the time of the
    appellant's alleged  problems.   The  judge  considered  it  reasonably
    likely that H's family had links to the gangs.   However,  he  reminded
    himself that she had left the appellant's home in September 2013.   The
    appellant said that he had not experienced any  problems  between  2013
    and 2015, his explanation being that he was hiding.

19. The judge noted the record of interview where the appellant was said to
    have explained that people knew  one  another  in  the  community,  the
    inference being that it would be easy  to  identify  gang  members  and
    those who were sympathetic to them, as well  as  potential  targets  in
    those opposed to the specific gangs.  The judge then said:-

         "I reject the Appellant's assertion  that  he  did  not  make  this
         comment.  There was no satisfactory evidence before me to show that
         the interview record was not an accurate  transcript  of  what  was
         said.  Nevertheless, he said that he was able to go out to work.  I
         do not consider that to be evidence of maintaining  a  low  profile
         over a two year period as he suggested.  I do not find it  credible
         that, if the gangs wished to target him due to his association with
         the family of a rival gang, he would have waited for two  years  to
         do so."

20. At paragraph  31,  the  judge  found  inconsistences  in  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's employer.  In his most recent statement the
    appellant had said his former employer refused to pay the form  of  tax
    imposed by the gang.  However, in his substantive interview he said his
    employers had in fact paid something which resulted in the  capture  of
    one of the gang members.  The judge said:-

         "I found that the Appellant was unable to provide any  satisfactory
         explanation for this significant discrepancy  in  his  account.   I
         would  not  have  expected  such  an  inconsistency  had  he   been
         recounting his experiences."

21. The judge said that if the employer had not paid, then there would have
    been no possibility of any gang member being  entrapped.   Furthermore,
    he did not believe the appellant would have been open to an  allegation
    of collusion with gangs if he had merely delivered the money  to  them.
    He was unable to accept Mrs Rodgers' submission that this was a case of
    details emerging to clarify the account.  On the  contrary,  the  judge
    found  that  the  inconsistencies  "undermined   it.    This   detracts
    significantly from the appellant's overall credibility as a witness".

22. At paragraph 32, the judge considered the appellant's  explanation  for
    the discrepancy over the date of his last problem with the  gangs.   In
    his screening interview he said he had been forced by two gangs to take
    money from his employer and give it to them.  He went on to say that he
    and his family had left their house in  September  2015  and  relocated
    "since when the gangs had not contacted him again".

23. The judge contrasted this account with the subsequent evidence  of  the
    2017 attack.  The judge said:-

         "I cannot accept his explanation that the screening  interview  was
         stopped or "capped" as this was information which  he  was  clearly
         able to volunteer during the  interview.   This  casts  substantial
         doubts over his evidence and that of  his  partner  concerning  the
         2017 attack.  This is especially so, given that she agreed with the
         contents of his witness statements."

24. At paragraph 33, the judge noted the appellant as  being  adamant  that
    the 2017 incident was reported to the police on the following  day  but
    his partner had said it was reported some four  days  afterwards.   Her
    evidence was consistent  with  the  documents  before  the  judge,  but
    obviously inconsistent with the appellant.  In the police report of the
    incident on 6 January 2017 the appellant's partner  made  reference  to
    "her dogs".  In his statement however the appellant said that the  dogs
    belonged to someone else.

25. At paragraph 34, the  judge  considered  the  delay  in  the  appellant
    claiming  asylum.   He  considered  that  that  further   reduced   the
    credibility of the appellant's account.  At paragraph 35  we  find  the
    following:-

         "Documents have to be considered in the round.  Given that  I  have
         rejected the core of the Appellant's account, I am not prepared  to
         attach any real weight to the letters from neighbours in  terms  of
         reliability.  One of the police reports is of no  value  whatsoever
         as it fails to mention any name."

    I shall return to that paragraph in due course.  It is the  subject  of
    specific criticism by Mrs Rodgers on behalf of the appellant.

26. At paragraph 36, the judge found that if the  appellant's  account  had
    been found to be reasonably likely to be true, then the judge  accepted
    that the police in Honduras struggled to  provide  adequate  protection
    from gangs.  However, the judge would not have found that there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection.  In the case of the appellant,  however,  he
    said to the judge that he had not experienced any problems in the  four
    to five months prior to his departure when he and  his  wife  rented  a
    property on Roatan Island and he was able to secure work.  He  said  he
    was happy with this employment and no further threats were made against
    him.  The judge found that:-

         "Internal flight to Roatan would therefore have been  a  reasonable
         option particularly bearing in mind the background evidence of  the
         geographical separation and the  lower  crime  rates.   However,  I
         stress that my principal finding is that the appellant's account is
         not reasonably likely to be  true  and  so  I  dismiss  it  in  its
         entirety."

27. The grounds of challenge to the decision  are  as  follows.   Ground  1
    contends that the judge failed to consider what was  described  as  the
    second police report submitted in support of the appeal.   This  report
    named the appellant's wife and the circumstances of  the  incident  and
    was material evidence to corroborate that the claimed  event  occurred.
    The judge was said to have materially erred as he  failed  to  make  an
    assessment of the document which was relevant to the credibility of the
    appellant.  Reference was then made to paragraph 35, which I  have  set
    out.  Although the first police report may have been rejected due to it
    not having names, the grounds said that the second police report had to
    be evaluated.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  give  any
    consideration to the document and its failure led to material errors as
    the document was relevant to the finding  about  the  incident  and  to
    credibility overall.

28. The second ground deals with the evidence of H.  It is pointed out that
    as the judge recognised in his decision H was  not  cross-examined  and
    therefore it  is  said  that  her  evidence  stood  unchallenged.   She
    confirmed she had lived with the appellant up to 2013 but, according to
    the ground,  she  had  also  provided  evidence  that  despite  leaving
    Honduras she remained in touch with the appellant and his  family.   It
    was contended that this evidence had to be weighed in the balance, when
    coming to a conclusion on the credibility  of  the  appellant  and  his
    wife, as it was not challenged  by  the  Secretary  of  State;  and  in
    failing to deal with the evidence, the judge materially erred in law.

29. The grounds of challenge found  arguable  favour  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge who granted permission considered it was  arguable
    that, in his consideration of the documentary evidence, the  judge  had
    made an error such as was identified by the Court of Appeal in  Mibanga
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367  in
    reaching a conclusion on credibility before surveying all the  evidence
    relevant thereto.  The second ground the granting judge  considered  to
    be  more  of  a  disagreement  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    assessment of the weight to attach to the evidence of H.  Nevertheless,
    all grounds were said to be able to be argued.

30. Before me, Mrs Rodgers relies upon the grounds.  We spent time  looking
    at the police reports in particular.  One of those does  not  give  any
    names but the other one does give the name of the appellant's wife.  It
    records her account of the crime as being that she was  at  home  doing
    chores when she heard "my dogs barking" so she went outside  and  there
    were two men with machetes.  One of them put a machete to her neck  and
    the other entered the house and asked if her son worked in a particular
    place.  They searched the house and were  said  to  be  looking  for  a
    pistol. The men said that they would come back for her son's head  "and
    if it wasn't for the barking dogs they would have raped me".

31. The judge who granted permission made reference to the Court of  Appeal
    authority  in  Mibanga.   That  case  is  indeed  authority   for   the
    proposition that findings on credibility must be taken  in  the  round.
    The issue here, therefore, is whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    made his findings in the round or whether, having found  the  appellant
    not to be credible for the reasons given, he improperly disregarded all
    other evidence that might tend to a contrary conclusion.

32. At paragraph 3, as I have already noted the judge said in terms that in
    deciding the appeal he had  considered  all  the  documentary  evidence
    submitted as well as all the oral evidence.  There is  in  my  view  no
    reason not to take the judge at face value in that regard.

33. Paragraph 35, which is the subject of criticism by Mrs Rodgers, in fact
    reiterates the point that the judge was aware that documents have to be
    considered "in the round", together with the other evidence. There is a
    danger of Mibanga being misunderstood.  One has to start  any  forensic
    examination of evidence at a particular point.  One  cannot  throw  all
    the ingredients into the hypothetical mixing bowl together.  That is  a
    recipe for a problematic outcome.  In taking the issues as he did,  and
    making adverse credibility findings regarding the  consistency  of  the
    appellant as between his various accounts, the judge did no  more  than
    what he was entitled to do.  It was for him, weighing the evidence,  to
    decide whether those inconsistencies were such as to show in the  round
    that the appellant's account was not capable of belief.  That I find is
    what the judge did.

34. So far as the witness statement of the appellant's wife  is  concerned,
    relating to the incident of January 2017, as we can see from  paragraph
    33 of his decision, the judge was specifically aware of  that  evidence
    and he refers to it.  He refers to the reference made therein  to  "her
    dogs".  The judge contrasted that with the evidence from the appellant,
    who said that the dogs had belonged to someone else.  It  is  therefore
    not the case at all that the judge overlooked that particular document;
    quite the contrary.   But,  even  if  he  had  not  made  any  specific
    reference to it, for the reasons I have given the judge would not  have
    erred in law.

35. The second ground is in my respectful view of no  materiality.   H  was
    not cross-examined.  That did not in any sense mean the respondent  was
    taking the view of that anything she had said  about  her  conversation
    with the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  when  he  was  still  in
    Honduras had to  be  taken  as  representing  the  truth  of  what  the
    appellant told the respondent were his difficulties  at  that  time  in
    Honduras.  In any event, her evidence  was,  at  best,  second-hand  in
    nature.  It is manifest that the judge had regard to it, together  with
    all the other evidence.  It is not remotely conceivable that the  judge
    would have taken a different view of the appellant's credibility if  he
    had decided specifically to refer to  that  particular  aspect  of  H's
    evidence in his decision.

36. Thirdly, as pointed out by the respondent  in  the  rule  24  response,
    there is a finding at paragraph 36 that the appellant could  internally
    relocate.  Even if one accepted his  difficulties  up  to  that  point,
    matters ended for him in Honduras in the following way:  he was able to
    live for several months; he and his family rented property and  he  was
    also able to secure work.  No further problems were faced by him.   The
    judge noted that difficulties on the  mainland  in  Honduras  regarding
    gangs are not, according to the background evidence, encountered to the
    same degree offshore.  Since there is no challenge in  the  grounds  to
    the judge's internal relocation finding, it follows that, even if there
    had been problems relating to the judge's  assessment  of  credibility,
    they would not have been material.  However, for  the  reasons  I  have
    given, the judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility is  devoid
    of legal error and I therefore dismiss this appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date 21 February 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
