




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/04909/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Civil Justice Centre       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Manchester                              |On 2nd October 2019                 |
|On 16th September 2019                  |                                    |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between


                            MR DYAR KHEDER HAMAD
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq of Adams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on the 4th July  2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances, I do  not  consider
    it necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Norton-Taylor on 21st August 2019. Thus the case appeared  before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

      2 The succinct grounds of appeal assert  that  because  the  appellant
      came from a "contested" area (a fact  not  to  have  been  in  dispute
      between the parties), he could not return to the home  area.  Although
      the grounds refer to credibility, it appears the real  thrust  of  the
      challenge is that the Appellant could not  return  to  his  home  area
      notwithstanding the adverse credibility findings.

      3 It is arguable that the judge has failed  to  take  account  of,  or
      provide adequate reasons in respect of the apparently undisputed  fact
      that the Appellant's home area was "contested". In turn it is arguable
      that this would be relevant to the issue of  a  return  to  that  home
      area. I  note  that  the  judge  has  not  specifically  addressed  an
      alternative place of relocation such as Baghdad.

 5. The leave does not identify any error in the adverse findings  of  fact
    made by the judge in respect of the substance of the appellant's  claim
    to asylum. Having considered the decision as a whole I do not find that
    there is any error of law in the findings rejecting the  factual  basis
    of the appellant's claim.  The adverse  findings  with  regard  to  the
    reasons why the appellant left Iraq stand  and  the  appellant  is  not
    entitled to  asylum.  Thereafter  consideration  has  to  be  given  to
    humanitarian protection and Article 3 of the ECHR and  whether  or  not
    the appellant came from a contested area in light of the  cases  of  AA
    2017 Imm AR 1440 and AAH [2018] UKUT 00212.

 6. Mr Tan accepted that central to a consideration of the appellant's case
    was whether the appellant came from a contested area. Whilst the  judge
    has made  adverse  credibility  findings,  given  the  current  country
    guidance it was incumbent on the judge to determine whether even taking
    into account the adverse credibility findings it had been  proved  that
    the appellant came from a contested area or not.

 7. The case of AA (Article 15 C) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  544  has  considered
    each of the regions in Iraq and whether a risk arises in  the  area  in
    question. From paragraph 112 of the judgment specific consideration  is
    given to the IKR, which encompasses Erbil, Sulaymaniyah and Dahuk.  The
    conclusion appearing to be that in the  IKR  the  area  appears  to  be
    virtually violence free and only exceptional incidents,  on  a  one-off
    basis, disrupt this.

 8. By  comparison  other  governorates  including  Anbar,  Diyala  Kirkuk,
    Ninewah  and  Salah-Al-din  continue  to  be  beset  by  violence.  The
    volatility of the situation in those areas,  the  number  of  displaced
    persons and the tactics of warfare used, will mean that  an  individual
    will be simply by virtue of presence in such an area at a real risk  of
    suffering harm of  the  type  identified  in  Article  15  (c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive. In  the  case  of  AA  it  was  conceded  that
    individuals in those areas would be entitled to humanitarian protection
    on that basis.

 9. In the light of that, consideration has to be given as  to  whether  or
    not the appellant was from a contested area. The appellant has referred
    to Makhmur Town and to relocating to Perdawood. At page 5 of the bundle
    of documents submitted by the appellant's representative  there  is  an
    indication that Makhmur may be  close  to  Erbil  [sometimes  known  as
    Hawler]. At page 8 in dealing  specifically  with  Makhmur,  under  the
    heading of Nineveh Iraq there is reference to Makhmur a district to the
    south-east of Mosul. Similarly at page 11 there is an  indication  that
    Makhmur is a district in the Erbil  governate  but  it  is  a  district
    between Erbil and Nineveh.

10. A proper assessment needs to be made as to whether or not Makhmur is in
    the Erbil governate or another governate and therefore whether  or  not
    it is in a contested area. Further  an  assessment  needs  to  be  made
    whether or not the town of "Perdawood" is similarly within the Erbil or
    other governate. Only when such has been considered can it  be  decided
    whether the appellant is from a contested area and therefore can proper
    consideration be made of whether the appellant  would  be  entitled  to
    Article 15 (c) protection. The judge has failed  to  determine  whether
    the appellant is from a contested area.

11. For the reasons set out the adverse  credibility  findings  as  to  the
    appellant's version of events and the decision with  regard  to  asylum
    stand. With regard to the issue of Article 15 c and therefore article 3
    of the ECHR as well the judge has failed to make proper  assessment  of
    whether or not the home area of the appellant is in a contested area in
    accordance with the cases of AAH and AA. That is a  material  error  of
    law.

12. I asked the parties to  the  proceedings  how  the  proceedings  should
    determine the issues  identified.  It  was  agreed  that  it  would  be
    appropriate for the matter  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to hear evidence on the issue  and  to  make  findings  as  to
    whether or not the appellant was from a contested area and  whether  or
    not it would  be  reasonable  otherwise  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    relocate. Material in that regard would be whether or not the appellant
    would be able to obtain a CSID card or other documentation as indicated
    by the case law. The findings in that respect by the judge of paragraph
    54 indicate that the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID card  and
    no reason has been advanced why that finding of fact should not  stand.
    The issue thereafter would be whether or not it would be reasonable for
    the appellant to relocate and whether or not it would  be  possible  or
    unduly harsh for him to relocate to a safe area.

13. Forhe reasons set out there are no material errors of law  with  regard
    to the findings in respect of asylum. There is a material error of  law
    with regard to the assessment of Article 15 c  humanitarian  protection
    and article 3 of the ECHR.

    Notice of Decision

14. I allow the appeal to the extent that it will be remitted back  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  issues  of  Article   15c   humanitarian
    protection and Article 3 of the ECHR.



Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date  1st October 2019









