
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04113/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29th September 2017                   |On 23rd October 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               mr Aydin Yilmaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Sirikand (Solicitor), Ahmed Rahman
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colvin, promulgated on 9th June  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on  26th  May  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Turkey,  who  was  born  on  21st
    December 1985.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 20th April  2017  refusing  his  application  to  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State made on 20th April 2017 for asylum and  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 336 of HC 395.

The Grant of Permission

 3. In this matter, permission was granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  8th
    August 2017 to the effect that the judge in this case had made  adverse
    credibility findings partially on the basis that she found there was no
    reference in the psychiatric report to the Appellant having "sought any
    medical assistance for his mental  state  until  very  recently  -  for
    example the prescription of antidepressants is dated April  2017".   In
    fact, the  Appellant  had  received  counselling  for  PTSD  two  years
    earlier.  The judge found this omission.  Given that the judge had then
    also stated that, as a result of there being no  earlier  reference  to
    the Appellant's mental state, that this would "lessen the  weight  that
    can be attached to this report", permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me on 29th September 2017, Mr Staunton, appearing
    as Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, on behalf of the  Respondent,
    conceded that, notwithstanding  the  Rule  24  response,  there  was  a
    material error in the  judge's  determination.   This  being  so,  this
    matter ought to be remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Colvin.

Notice of Decision

 5. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and  remit  the  matter
    back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. In granting permission,  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  observed  that  the
    medical result was no longer on file, and although this may  present  a
    problem, it is important that the fact that  there  was  a  report  two
    years ago, rather than in 2007, referring to the medical assistance for
    the Appellant's mental state, does mean that a proper evaluation of the
    circumstances must take place.

 7. This is particularly so given that the judge below had referred to  the
    psychiatric report of Dr J Hajioff dated May 2017  (see  paragraph  12)
    and had noted that there were scars on the Appellant's head  (paragraph
    13).

 8. Given the omission of the relevant evidence, the conclusion reached  by
    the judge that "the Appellant's account is  unreliable  and  lacks  any
    credibility" (paragraph 28) requires  revisiting  on  the  basis  of  a
    proper analysis of all the evidence that was submitted.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that it  is  submitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge Colvin.

10. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th October 2017
