
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04569/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th September 2017                        |On 26th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                   MR M.S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Wass, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Davidson) promulgated on  21st  June  2017,  which
    dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum/humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Iran, was born  on  [  ]  1996.   He
    entered the UK in May 2016 and claimed asylum on  8th  June  2016.   On
    11th  April  2017  the  Respondent  refused   his   asylum/humanitarian
    protection claim.

 3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing
    on 14th June 2017, the FtT promulgated its decision on 21st  June  2017
    dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

 4. Grounds of Appeal against the FtT's decision were lodged  and  on  24th
    July 2017 Judge Chohan granted permission in the following terms:

         "3.  The grounds submit, in essence, that the judge erred in law by
             failing to give adequate reasons for the findings made.

         4.   I state from the outset that there is substance in the grounds
             seeking permission.  The judge's findings are set out  in  two
             paragraphs in which the judge  concludes  that  the  appellant
             failed to establish his claim for asylum.  However, the  judge
             has failed to give adequate reasons for the findings made.  In
             other words, due to the lack of reasoning, it is not clear  on
             what basis the judge made the findings".

    The Respondent lodged a Rule 24 notice defending  the  decision.   Thus
    the matter comes before me to decide initially whether the decision  of
    the FtT discloses such error of law that it needs to be set  aside  and
    re-made.

Error of Law Hearing

 5. Before me Ms Wass appeared for the Appellant  and  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    for the Respondent.  Ms Wass's submission kept  to  the  lines  of  the
    grounds  seeking  permission.   She  said  that  the  FtT  decision  is
    altogether lacking in any proper  reasoning  or  consideration  of  the
    issues before it.  She referred to the decision itself  and  said  that
    the decision is set out in twenty paragraphs but only paragraph 18 sets
    out any sort of findings.  She said there is one  sentence  only  which
    deals with the reasoning behind the dismissal.

 6. In support of her submission that the findings are inadequate, she said
    that the Appellant answered twelve questions in  cross-examination  and
    gave no evidence in examination-in-chief.  She said it is unclear  from
    the decision  whether  that  evidence  is  accepted  or  rejected.   No
    indication is given of what  evidence  is  inconsistent  internally  or
    otherwise.

 7. In addition, Ms Wass submitted that the judge misdirected herself.  The
    Appellant's Convention reason has always been imputed political opinion
    based on his brother's claimed actions in Iran.  Those errors go to the
    core of the decision and because this is  a  matter  where  credibility
    lies at the heart of the claim, the decision is not sustainable.

 8. Ms Willocks-Briscoe defended the decision.  She submitted  that  whilst
    it is correct that the judge did not go into significant detail in  her
    findings, nevertheless the findings made were adequate.   She  referred
    to Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  00085  (IAC)
    and said a fair reading of the decision showed that as a whole it  made
    sense in the light of the material available to the judge.

 9. At the end of submissions I announced that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the FtT contained material errors sufficient that it should
    be set aside and re-made.  I now give my reasons for this finding.

Consideration

10. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC)  it  was
    held that:

      a) It was axiomatic that a determination disclosed clearly the reasons
         for a Tribunal's decision.

      b) If a Tribunal found oral evidence to be implausible, incredible  or
         unreliable or a document to be worth no weight whatsoever,  it  was
         necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to
         be supported by reasons.  A bare statement that a witness  was  not
         believed or that a document was afforded no weight was unlikely  to
         satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

11. In looking  at  the  present  decision,  I  find  force  in  Ms  Wass's
    submissions.  At [18] the judge says:

         "Having considered the  totality  of  evidence,  I  find  that  the
         Appellant  has  failed  to  establish  his  claim  for  asylum   or
         humanitarian protection. ... The basis for his contention that  the
         Iranian authorities are interested in him in 2015 in Evaz  is  that
         his brother was involved in a demonstration over a number  of  days
         in June 2009  in  Tehran.   The  account  he  gave  in  his  asylum
         interview and the evidence  he  gave  before  the  Tribunal  lacked
         credibility because of  inconsistencies  and  the  absence  of  any
         detail." (my italics)

12. I find there is no depth to this statement.  The judge has relied on an
    overall approach and it is hard to see from  a  reading  of  [18]  what
    merited a  finding  that  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the  asylum
    interview and the oral evidence given before the Tribunal. I find  that
    this is as a result of there being  no  analysis  of  either  piece  of
    evidence.  Credibility is at the core of this Appellant's claim, and it
    is of fundamental importance that there is a proper assessment  of  all
    the relevant evidence when relying on adverse credibility findings.

13. I find therefore that the decision must be set aside for  legal  error.
    I set aside the decision in its entirety.  Because of  the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact-finding in this case, the decision will need to
    be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.  The effect  of  the  error  has
    been to deprive the Appellant of a fair hearing or other opportunity of
    having his case put to and considered by that Tribunal.   None  of  the
    findings of fact are to stand.  A complete rehearing is necessary.

14. Having announced my decision that I would  remit  this  matter  to  the
    First-tier  tribunal,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  sought  permission  for  a
    decision relating to the Appellant's brother, whose initials  are  also
    M.S, to be submitted in evidence as  part  of  the  Respondent's  case.
    That decision was promulgated on 30th May 2017 and it is correct to say
    that the Appellant's brother's asylum appeal  has  been  dismissed.   I
    therefore make a direction that this decision be admitted  as  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross to
    be heard before any judge other than Judge Davidson.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for material  error  of
law.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
afresh (not before Judge Davidson).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        C E Roberts               Date     23 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

