
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04822/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2019                    |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DDM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Anzani, instructed by Nag Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1977 and is a male citizen of Sri Lanka.  His
    application for asylum was refused on 2 August 2016. He appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on  6  June  2019,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Both parties agree that the judge misunderstood part of the evidence of
    the appellant. At [33], the judge discusses an article put in  evidence
    by the appellant from the Columbo  Telegraph.  The  article  bears  two
    dates, 9 April 2019 at the head of the document but  also  January  18,
    2016. The judge noted  that  the  article  concerned  an  investigation
    conducted 'during the last few weeks to identify those who gave  orders
    to kill the rugby player...' The appellant produced an  arrest  warrant
    indicating   that   he   was   wanted   in   connection    with    this
    murder/manslaughter. The warrant is  dated  to  June  2016.  The  judge
    considered that it was 'highly  improbable  that  a  warrant  could  be
    issued for the arrest of a person who was not in in the country at  the
    time the death occurred and literally years  before  the  investigation
    into [the rugby player's] death began.'

 3. It is clear that the judge overlooked the second date  and  has  simply
    recorded the  later  date,  which  is  presumably  that  on  which  the
    particular copy of the article was printed. The gap in time between the
    article and the investigations was, as a consequence, much shorter than
    the judge assumed. Mr Singh, who appeared for the Secretary  of  State,
    argued that the  sentence  which  I  have  quoted  above  contains  two
    separate parts; a finding that it was highly improbable that a  warrant
    would be issued for the arrest of a person is not in Sri Lanka  at  the
    time of the murder and, secondly, an observation that is  not  probable
    that warrant would be issued against the  appellant  years  before  the
    investigation began. I disagree. It may be the case that the  appellant
    shall have to explain why he claims that it is reasonably  likely  that
    the warrant would be issued in respect of a crime which  occurred  when
    the appellant  was out of Sri Lanka but is clear that uppermost in  the
    judge's mind was his incorrect observation that the arrest warrant  had
    been issued long  before  the  investigation  started.  Mr  Singh  also
    submitted that there were a number of  other,  separate  and  severable
    findings concerning  the  appellant's  credibility  at  [34-37].  Those
    findings alone could justify  the  judge's  finding  that  the  warrant
    should be rejected on the basis of Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439. However, I
    accept the submission of Ms Anzani, who appeared for the appellant. She
    submitted that, whilst those paragraphs do contain negative credibility
    findings, they  also  accept  parts  of  the  appellant's  account.  In
    consequence, it appeared  that  the  judge's  (erroneous)  findings  in
    respect of the newspaper  article  may  have  weighed  heavily  in  his
    rejection of the appellant's credibility. I find that this is  case  in
    which the error of law infects the credibility findings overall.  As  a
    result, it will be necessary for there to be a hearing de novo  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 6 June  2019  is
    set-aside. None of the findings of fact  shall  stand.  The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision at or following a hearing.


Signed                              Date 2 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

