
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04123/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 September 2016                       |On 12 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               Ako Muhsen Agha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is Ako Muhsen Agha who was born on 26 July 1992 and is  a
    male citizen of Iran.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2015
    and claimed asylum.  His  claim  was  refused  by  a  decision  of  the
    respondent on 12 April 2016.  The appellant appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  19  July
    2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant attended the Upper Tribunal hearing  in  person.   I  was
    careful to explain the procedures of the Tribunal to the appellant  and
    to use language avoiding legal jargon.  I asked the appellant  to  tell
    me if  there  was  any  part  of  the  proceedings  which  he  did  not
    understand.  He was assisted in court by a Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter
    with whom he appeared to have no difficulty communicating.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, it is submitted that the judge
    failed to make a clear finding as to whether the  appellant  left  Iran
    illegally.  Secondly, the  appellant  submits  that  the  judge  failed
    properly to consider his sur place activities in the United Kingdom  on
    behalf of the KDPI.

 4. The grounds have no merit.  First, the judge did not believe  any  part
    of the appellant's account as to his claimed involvement with the  KDPI
    or otherwise.  At [32], she wrote:

         I therefore conclude that the appellant did not face a real risk on
         return to Iraq either on the basis of what would happen to him when
         questioned at the airport or subsequently if he was convicted of an
         offence of illegal exit.

 5. It is true the judge did not make a specific finding as to whether  the
    appellant had left Iran illegally.  However, I consider her findings at
    [32] to be sufficient to cover  any  possible  risk  to  the  appellant
    solely on account of his having left Iran illegally and having returned
    to their country as a failed asylum  seeker  who  had  no  security  or
    criminal profile in Iran whatever.  The judge's findings are wholly  in
    line with current country guidance (SSH and HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
    asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).

 6. With regards to the second ground  of  appeal,  the  appellant  claimed
    that, notwithstanding that he is illiterate, he maintained  a  Facebook
    page which he supported the KDPI and criticised the Iranian government.
     What the judge says at [28] is a little unclear;  she  speaks  of  the
    appellant having "fabricated a Facebook account in a cynical attempt to
    bolster his claim."   I  am  not  entirely  clear  what  she  means  by
    "fabricated" in that context given that the appellant was able to  show
    the judge printouts from a Facebook account.  However, the  judge  went
    on [29] to

         find that the appellant's activities in  the  UK  are  unlikely  to
         bring him to the attention of the  Iranian  authorities.   Although
         the printouts of his Facebook account bear  an  unclear  photograph
         they appear to be under a pseudonym of Ako Arabi  Mohsen  and  none
         contain original material.  I was not given  any  evidence  of  the
         privacy settings on  his  account  or  how  these  posts  would  be
         accessed without someone knowing the log in details or how the post
         could be directly linked to the appellant.

 7. It was up to  the  judge  to  decide  whether  the  photograph  of  the
    appellant was "unclear" or otherwise.  The grounds simply disagree with
    the judge at this point.  As for the pseudonym, the  judge's  point  is
    well made; it is unclear why the Iranian authorities, even if they were
    interested  in  the  account  at  all  (which  seems  unlikely),  would
    associate the appellant with a  Facebook  account  in  the  name  of  a
    different individual.  At the hearing, the appellant insisted that Arab
    Arabi Mohsen was the name which he had used when he had claimed  asylum
    in the  United  Kingdom  and  that  his  name  had  in  some  way  been
    incorrectly recorded  or  transliterated.   However,  both  the  asylum
    interview record and the screening interview are clearly shown to  have
    been provided in the name Ako Mohsen Agha.  It was  also  open  to  the
    judge to query the evidence regarding privacy settings; it was for  the
    appellant to prove his case to prove to the judge that postings on  the
    Facebook account would be  visible  to  third  parties  (including  the
    Iranian government).  His failure to do so has, not  surprisingly,  led
    to the judge finding that the appellant is not at real risk in Iran  on
    account of any Facebook or other internet activities with which he  may
    be associated.  The judge has reached an outcome clearly  available  to
    her on the evidence and has supported that outcome with cogent reasons.
     There  is  nothing  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  which  significantly
    challenge the judge's findings.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  There is no payment of a fee order.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

