
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04564/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 9 December 2020                         |On : 21 December 2020         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COTTON


                                   Between

                                     JP
                         (Anonymity Direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, instructed by SD Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1  January  1983.  He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Khawar dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 15  October  2006  with
      leave to enter as a student and was granted further periods  of  leave
      to remain  under  the  points-based  system  until  15  May  2016.  An
      application for an extension of leave as a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur  was
      refused on  7  July  2016  and  the  decision  was  maintained  on  an
      administrative review, and a further application for leave outside the
      immigration rules, varied to an application for  indefinite  leave  to
      remain on 10 years long residency grounds,  was  refused  on  27  June
      2017. Following an unsuccessful attempt to challenge the  decision  to
      remove him from the UK by way of judicial review  proceedings  and  an
      application to the Court of Appeal, the appellant applied  for  asylum
      on 21 December 2018. His claim was refused on 30 April  2019  and  his
      unsuccessful appeal against that decision  has  given  rise  to  these
      proceedings.

   3. The appellant's claim for asylum was made in relation  to  a  fear  of
      persecution in Bangladesh on two bases. The first basis  was  that  he
      had been targeted due to being Hindu and to his support  for  a  Hindu
      group called Joykalibaru Mandir between September  2005  and  February
      2006. The appellant claimed to  have  distributed  leaflets  for  this
      group  and  to  have  attended  meetings.  He  claimed  to  have  been
      threatened in February 2006 by an  Islamic  political  group,  Shibir,
      which was the same  as  Jamat  e  Islami,  when  he  was  distributing
      leaflets and was told to stop his involvement with  the  Hindu  group.
      After that he stopped working for the group and he came to the  UK  on
      15 October 2006 on a student visa. The second basis was in relation to
      some land which was taken from his father and  grandfather  by  Rashid
      Miah and his son in 1971 and where his father was threatened  in  1999
      and 2002 after he had attempted, unsuccessfully, to get the land  back
      through the courts. In 2012, his father was asked by the  same  people
      to sign some papers, but he refused and  on  12  August  2012  he  was
      attacked and killed by some men whom he believed were associated  with
      Rashid Miah. The appellant claimed that he was kidnapped  by  four  or
      five men when on his way to the  family  office,  during  a  visit  to
      Bangladesh for his father's funeral, on  5  September  2012,  and  was
      beaten up and forced to sign some paperwork which he  believed  to  be
      about the land. He was rescued by the police and taken to hospital and
      he and his brother filed a statement with the police. He feared  being
      killed if he returned to Bangladesh.

   4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account of  his  claimed
      problems with an Islamic political group and rejected that part of his
      claim. As for the appellant's claim to be at risk from Rashid Miah and
      his son, the respondent considered  that  the  account  of  the  court
      challenge to the land appropriation was inconsistent with the  country
      information, that the appellant  was  speculating  about  Rashid  Miah
      being involved in his father's death and that  there  was  a  lack  of
      supporting evidence in relation to his father's death. With regard  to
      the FIR and charge sheet submitted by the appellant in relation to his
      claimed kidnapping, these were considered to be inconsistent with  the
      appellant's  own  evidence  and  were  accorded  no  weight   by   the
      respondent. The respondent considered that  the  appellant  had  given
      inconsistent evidence about whether or  not  his  family  remained  in
      Bangladesh. The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant  had  a
      genuine, subjective fear of returning to Bangladesh and found that his
      claimed fear was, in any event, not objectively well-founded as  there
      was a sufficiency of protection available to him from the  authorities
      in Bangladesh and he could safely relocate  to  another  part  of  the
      country. Although the  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
      Hindu, it was not accepted that he would be at risk on that basis. The
      respondent found that the appellant's removal to Bangladesh would  not
      breach his human rights under Article 3 or 8.

   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard on 24  February
      2020 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar. The appellant gave  oral
      evidence before the judge who found him to be an  unreliable  witness.
      The judge did not believe the appellant's account of having to go into
      hiding after being threatened in February 2006 and did not accept that
      he was of any interest to the Shibir group. The judge also  found  the
      appellant's account of being at risk due to a historic land dispute to
      lack credibility and considered that his account had been inconsistent
      and lacking in supporting evidence that  could  reasonably  have  been
      obtained. He did not accept the  appellant's  account  of  his  family
      being threatened and leaving Bangladesh for India in 2015.  The  judge
      had regard to an expert report relied upon by  the  appellant  from  a
      practising lawyer in Bangladesh in relation to the reliability of  the
      FIR and charge sheet, but found neither that report  nor  a  newspaper
      article referring to the claimed kidnapping to be  of  any  evidential
      weight. The judge did not accept the  appellant's  account  about  the
      land dispute  and  considered  that  even  if  there  were  continuing
      proceedings, the authorities could provide  him  with  protection.  He
      found that the appellant would be at no risk on return  to  Bangladesh
      and that his removal would not breach his human rights. He accordingly
      dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   6. Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal the judge's  decision
      to the Upper Tribunal, on four grounds: firstly, that the judge made a
      "Mibanga" error (Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367) by making adverse
      credibility findings about the appellant's account before  considering
      the expert evidence which confirmed the reliability of the  documents;
      secondly, that the judge made adverse findings on the basis of a  lack
      of corroborating evidence; thirdly, that the judge had failed to  have
      regard to the expert's  conclusion  as  to  the  plausibility  of  the
      appellant's account; and fourthly, that the judge failed  to  consider
      Article 8 and had erred by saying that a witness  was  not  called  to
      give evidence, when she was.

   7. Permission to appeal was granted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  4
      August 2020 and the matter came before us for a  face-to-face  hearing
      on 9 December 2020.

   8. Both parties made submissions on the error of law issue.

   9. Ms Fitzsimons focussed on the first and third grounds,  as  consistent
      with the grant of permission. With regard to  the  first  ground,  she
      submitted that the judge had  made  very  strong  adverse  credibility
      findings prior to considering  the  expert  report,  contrary  to  the
      guidance in Mibanga. She referred by way of  example  to  [25],  [26],
      [28]  and  [30]  of  the  judge's   decision,   which   preceded   the
      consideration of the expert report at  [42]  and  submitted  that  the
      findings at [42] were limited. In regard to those  findings  at  [42],
      and in relation to ground 3, Ms Fitzsimons submitted  that  the  judge
      had erred by making  adverse  findings  on  the  plausibility  of  the
      appellant's account without considering the  expert's  conclusions  on
      the account being plausible. The expert had considered  the  documents
      produced by the appellant and had found them to conform to the  format
      he would have expected for  such  documentation.  The  judge  had  not
      considered that and had also failed to have  regard  to  the  expert's
      opinion on risk when rejecting the appellant's claim owing to his  low
      level of activities. As for the second ground, Ms Fitzsimons submitted
      that the appellant had tried to corroborate his account as much as  he
      could by producing documentary  evidence  and  should  not  have  been
      expected to corroborate every aspect of his  account.  The  judge  had
      erred by requiring him to do so. With regard to the fourth ground, the
      judge had made a mistake of fact by saying  that  Article  8  was  not
      relied upon by the appellant when it was,  and  when  submissions  had
      been made on paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules.  The  judge
      was also wrong to say that the witness was not  called  when  she  had
      been tendered, but had not been required to give oral evidence as  the
      respondent's representative did not seek to cross-examine her.

  10.  Mr Jarvis, in response, relied upon  the  case  of  HH  (Ethiopia)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  306  in
      submitting that there was nothing unlawful in the judge's approach  in
      assessing credibility and in  considering  the  expert  evidence.  The
      majority  of  the  judge's  adverse  findings  were   not   based   on
      plausibility, but on the  appellant's  account  of  particular  events
      occurring  in  Bangladesh  which  he   found   to   be   significantly
      inconsistent. The expert's opinion on plausibility therefore  did  not
      assist the appellant. As for the documentary evidence, the  judge  had
      regard to the expert's opinion but was entitled to accord  it  limited
      weight as the expert had only seen scanned copies of the documents and
      not originals. The judge's reliance on the  absence  of  corroboratory
      evidence was consistent with the approach set out in SB (Sri Lanka)  v
      The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 160 and
      he was entitled to have regard to the absence of evidence which  could
      reasonably have been obtained. Mr Jarvis submitted that any failure by
      the judge to consider the grounds of appeal based  on  Article  8  was
      immaterial as the appellant could not possibly have succeeded on  that
      basis, on the evidence available. He relied upon the case of Sarkar  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 195 in that
      regard.

  11. Ms Fitzsimons submitted,  in  reply,  that  the  judge's  approach  to
      credibility was one which fell within the category described in HH  at
      [15] as being a Mibanga type of case and there was therefore an  error
      of law in his approach. As for the fourth ground, there  were  factors
      which the judge ought to have considered under Article 8, such as  the
      discrimination  faced  by  minority  Hindus  in  Bangladesh  and   the
      appellant's medical condition,  and  he  therefore  erred  in  law  by
      failing to consider Article 8.

Discussion

  12. In our view the grounds have  no  merit.  We  do  not  agree  with  Ms
      Fitzsimons that the judge erred in his approach to the  evidence  when
      assessing the credibility of the appellant's account and do not accept
      that this is  a  'Mibanga'  type  situation.  As  Mr  Jarvis  properly
      submitted, the Court of Appeal in HH at [15] and  [16],  endorsed  the
      approach in S v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  1153  approving  the  following
      passage in the AIT's decision, that:


    "The Tribunal considers  that  there  is  a  danger  of Mibanga being
    misunderstood. The judgments in that case are  not  intended  to  place
    judicial  fact-finders  in  a  form  of  forensic  straightjacket.   In
    particular, the Court of Appeal is not to be regarded  as  laying  down
    any rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact-finders  are  to
    approach the evidential materials  before  them.  To  take  Wilson  J's
    'cake' analogy, all its ingredients cannot be thrown together into  the
    bowl simultaneously. One has to  start  somewhere.  There  was  nothing
    illogical about the process by  which  the  Immigration  Judge  in  the
    present case chose to approach his analytical task."

  13. As in the case of HH, we agree with Mr Jarvis that  Judge  Khawar  did
      not artificially separate the expert evidence from credibility. It  is
      clear that the judge considered all the evidence in the  round  before
      making his credibility finding, as is evident from his self-directions
      at [21], [44] and [47].

  14. In any event, as Mr Jarvis submitted, the expert report did not assist
      the appellant in relation to the  inconsistencies  identified  in  his
      account of his own particular experiences in Bangladesh. The  majority
      of the expert report concerned the  general  situation  for  religious
      minorities, in particular Hindus, in Bangladesh and,  aside  from  the
      consideration of the  documentary  evidence,  the  assessment  of  the
      appellant's particular account of events was limited. In so far as the
      report supported the appellant's claim by way  of  its  references  to
      threats from local extremists and the historic seizure  of  land  from
      Hindus,  the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's   account   was   not
      particularly a matter of concern to the judge. As Mr Jarvis submitted,
      plausibility was only a peripheral matter  in  the  judge's  decision,
      whereas the issue taken by the judge was with the appellant's  account
      of particular events occurring in Bangladesh  which  he  found  to  be
      inconsistent.

  15. By way of example, Mr Jarvis referred to the judge's findings at  [26]
      in relation to the  letter  purportedly  from  the  President  of  the
      Kalibari Mundir charitable organisation, which made no mention of  the
      claimed incident in February 2006 and of the appellant  having  to  go
      into hiding, and to the inconsistent evidence about  the  incident  in
      February 2006 described by the judge at [27]. At [25] and [28] to [30]
      the judge made findings on the appellant's limited activities for  the
      Hindu group, the passage of time since his claimed activities and  the
      lack of any ongoing adverse  interest  from  Shibir.  Those  were  all
      specific  matters  which  the  judge  considered  to   undermine   the
      appellant's credibility and there is  nothing  in  the  expert  report
      which addressed those issues. Likewise, in relation to the appellant's
      account of his family's land being seized and of  the  subsequent  and
      related threats to his family,  the  judge,  at  [33]  to  [41],  gave
      various reasons why the  appellant's  account  of  the  land  transfer
      lacked credibility, including at [33] and [34] the appellant's lack of
      knowledge about the title deeds for the land and  the  timing  of  the
      events that he described and,  at  [35],  [38],  [39]  and  [41],  his
      inconsistent evidence about which land the family  possessed  and  the
      change in his  account  in  that  regard.  The  judge  considered  the
      documentary  evidence  which  the  appellant  had  produced  and  also
      considered documentation which could reasonably have been produced but
      had not been obtained. None of  these  issues  were  assisted  by  the
      expert report.

  16. Returning to the "Mibanga" issue, we agree with Mr Jarvis that, having
      made these observations on the appellant's evidence, the fact that the
      judge then referred to the expert evidence at the point that  he  did,
      at [42], did not mean  that  he  had  already  determined  credibility
      without having regard to the report, but that he simply  brought  into
      his findings the way in which the expert report may have assisted  the
      Tribunal, namely in relation to the documentary  evidence.  The  judge
      gave cogent reasons, in that paragraph, as to why the  expert's  views
      on the documentary evidence were of limited assistance. We  note  that
      the expert found the documents to be reliable only to the extent  that
      they were consistent with the usual format of such documents.  He  had
      not seen the original  documents  but  had  only  been  provided  with
      scanned copies. On that basis, the judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
      accord the documents, and the expert's conclusions arising from  those
      documents, limited weight.

  17. Having considered the expert report, the judge went  on,  at  [43]  to
      [44]  and  [48],  to  give  further  reasons  why  he  considered  the
      appellant's  claim  to  lack  credibility,  including  the  section  8
      concerns as to the circumstances under which the asylum claim was made
      and the late stage at which it  was  made.  The  judge  tied  all  his
      findings  together  in  his  conclusions  and  then  made  alternative
      findings at [45] and [46] on risk on return in terms of sufficiency of
      protection and internal relocation. As such we find no  merit  in  the
      challenge in the grounds to the judge's approach to the  evidence  and
      to his assessment of credibility.

  18. As for the challenge in the second ground, we consider that the  judge
      was perfectly entitled to draw the adverse conclusions that he did, in
      his overall credibility assessment,  from  the  fact  that  there  was
      documentary evidence which could have been obtained by  the  appellant
      and which the appellant could reasonably have been expected to obtain,
      but which he had not produced. The judge was not thereby imposing upon
      the appellant a duty to produce corroborating evidence, but was simply
      making observations about the lack of such evidence as he was entitled
      to do in accordance with the findings in SB (Sri Lanka) at [46].

  19. Turning to the  fourth  ground,  we  do  not  consider  that  anything
      material arises from the judge's reference at [4] to the  witness  not
      being "called". It is clearly a matter of semantics and what the judge
      meant was that the witness did not actually give  any  oral  evidence.
      The record of proceedings reflects  the  fact  that  the  witness  was
      tendered   for   cross-examination   but   that    the    respondent's
      representative had no questions for her.  It is clear from  [53]  that
      the judge had regard to the witness's evidence in her statement.

  20. As for the assertion that the judge made a mistake of fact by  stating
      that Article 8 was not relied upon, we note that, whilst Article 8 was
      raised in the grounds of appeal before the judge,  the  focus  of  the
      appeal at the hearing was on the appellant's protection claim.  As  we
      advised Ms Fitzsimons, the detailed record of proceedings on the court
      file does not show that there were any submissions made on  Article  8
      and therefore even if submissions were made,  they  were  clearly  not
      detailed or expansive. The judge made findings on Article 8 at [53] in
      his decision, albeit briefly, and we agree with  Mr  Jarvis  that  the
      appellant could not have succeeded on an Article 8 claim in any event,
      on the evidence before the judge. We  do  not  consider  any  material
      error to have arisen in that regard.

  21. For all of these reasons we consider that the grounds of appeal do not
      disclose any errors of law requiring the judge's decision  to  be  set
      aside. The judge clearly had regard to all the evidence, both oral and
      documentary, and made his credibility findings on the basis of a  full
      and complete assessment of that evidence, taken as  a  whole.  He  was
      entitled to make the adverse findings that he  did,  for  the  reasons
      fully and cogently given,  and  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant had failed to show that he would be at  risk  on  return  to
      Bangladesh and that his removal to that country would breach his human
      rights.

DECISION

  22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. We do not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

     Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.



Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  10 December
2020
