
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04658/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th February 2018                 |On 26th February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [a s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya born on [ ]  1974.   The  Appellant
    had asked to be recognised as a refugee and applied for asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom on  the  basis  that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Libya on the basis of his imputed political opinion.  He
    has an extensive immigration history set out  at  paragraph  4  of  the
    Notice of Refusal.  The Appellant's application was refused  by  Notice
    of Refusal dated 11th April 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal P J Holmes sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 9th May 2017.  In
    a decision and reasons promulgated 5th June 2017 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed.

 3.  The  Appellant  lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro
    on 28th June 2017.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper
    Tribunal on 25th July 2017.

 4. On 25th September 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Southern granted permission
    to appeal.  Judge Southern noted that the grounds were lengthy and wide
    ranging and that on closer examination they may prove to be little more
    than expressions of disagreement with well-reasoned conclusions arrived
    at by a judge who has carried out a very  careful  examination  of  the
    evidence the parties chose to put before him.  However  Judge  Southern
    did note that the Appellant had five children born in the UK  who  will
    be returning to Libya with the Appellant one of whom is now 8 years old
    and that it was arguable that the approach taken by the  judge  to  the
    best interests of those children may be open to legitimate criticism.

 5. Judge Southern noted that the new country guidance now available in ZMM
    (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263 (IAC) was not before the judge
    and may well be of relevance in an area of law material to the  outcome
    of this appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24
    requesting an oral hearing on 11th October 2017.  It is on  that  basis
    that the appeal comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     The Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel Ms Patel.  Ms Patel is
    familiar  with  this  matter  having  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and being the author of the Grounds of Appeal.   I  note  that
    there was in fact no representation on behalf of the Secretary of State
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  He is today represented  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Bates.

Country Guidance

 7. ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263 (IAC) is authority for the
    proposition:

         "That the violence in Libya has reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

    That authority of course was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Submissions/Discussion

 8.  Mr  Bates  concedes  following  the  authority  of  ZMM  it  would  be
    appropriate for the appeal to be  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds pursuant to the authority and a finding  under  Article  15(c).
    Further he concedes that any claim pursuant to Article 8 is  influenced
    by the finding under Article 15(c) and it is hard  to  see  bearing  in
    mind those conclusions how it could ever  be  proportionate  for  young
    children to be returned at present to Libya.

 9. Ms Patel takes me to paragraph 15 of her Grounds of Appeal pointing out
    that at paragraph 31 of his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    stated that he is satisfied that there is a  state  of  internal  armed
    conflict in Libya but has then gone at paragraph 33 to state that he is
    not  satisfied  the  situation  in  the  Appellant's  home  area  shows
    indiscriminate violence of such severity to pose a threat  to  life  or
    person generally and that neither does he find sufficient evidence that
    the Appellant and his family would be so vulnerable as to be under  any
    individual real risk of serious harm from  the  general  conditions  of
    violence in that area.  She  submits  that  this  fails  to  take  into
    account the current country guidance but importantly that the judge has
    not engaged with or given reasons as to how the Appellant could  return
    to his home area and whether in order to get there  he  would  have  to
    travel through areas that were the subject of internal armed  conflict.
    She submits that this constitutes the material error of law.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. I agree with the submissions made by Ms Patel.  Whilst  the  judge  has
    carried out a very thorough analysis and whilst I acknowledge that  his
    decision predates ZMM it is fair to say particularly  when  considering
    the decision in the round that the judge has failed to give reasons  as
    to how the Appellant could return to his home area to give any detailed
    analysis as to whether in doing so he  would  have  to  travel  through
    areas that were subject of internal armed  conflict.   The  failure  to
    engage with this issue constitutes a material error of law.

Re-Making of the Decision

13. Having found that there is a material error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge Mr Bates does not  seek  to  persuade  me
    further and is prepared to concede the position as is now  set  out  in
    ZMM as being authoritative country guidance.  I agree  with  that.   In
    such circumstances I remake the decision allowing the  appeal  pursuant
    to Article 15(c).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
