
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04050/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 September 2017                     |On 9 November 2017            |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DEANS

                                   Between

                                    [K R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Green dismissing an appeal against the refusal of protection.


   2. The appellant is an  Iranian  Kurd  who  claims  to  have  a  fear  of
      persecution in Iran because of his involvement with KDPI.

   3. The Judge of the First Tier Tribunal accepted that the  appellant  was
      an active member of the KDPI and had made posts on Facebook expressing
      support for the KDPI.  The appellant had attended one demonstration in
      London.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis
      that the judge did not refer to AB & Others (internet activity - state
      of evidence) [2015] UKUT 257 and  did  not  consider  the  questioning
      about his Facebook account the appellant might face at the airport  on
      return.  The appellant was not  required  to  delete  the  entries  on
      Facebook or lie about his beliefs.  It was  arguable  that  the  judge
      erred in failing to consider properly the risk at the point of  return
      having regard to the facts as found.

   5. At the hearing before me Mr Matthews indicated that having  regard  to
      the findings made, including the appellant's support for the KDPI, and
      to Home Office policy, it was difficult for him to proceed.  Mr Caskie
      indicated that he relied upon the positive findings made by the  judge
      at  sub-paragraphs  16(i)  and  (ii)  of  the  decision  relating   to
      involvement with KDPI and Facebook activity.

   6. The parties agree that the judge erred in law  by  failing  to  assess
      properly the risk on return at the airport in  Iran.   It  is  further
      agreed that the appellant's political beliefs and his having expressed
      these on Facebook give rise to a real risk of  persecution.   On  this
      basis I find the Judge of the First Tier Tribunal erred  in  law.    I
      set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by  allowing  the  appeal  on
      protection grounds.

      Conclusions

   7. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   8. I set aside the decision.


   9. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.


Anonymity

  10. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction.   As
      the appeal is allowed I do not consider it necessary or appropriate to
      continue this direction.  Accordingly I make no anonymity direction.


Fee award                        (N.B. This is not part of the decision}

As no fee has been paid or is payable I make no fee award.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Deans                                6th
October 2017

