
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04940/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2018                           |On 30 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Raiyad Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AR, is a citizen of Bangladesh.  By a decision which was
    promulgated on 12 June 2018, I found that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision fell to be set aside.   My  reasons
    were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, AR, was born in 1984  and
         is a male citizen of Bangladesh.  The Secretary  of  State  accepts
         that the appellant is a homosexual.  He applied for  protection  in
         the United Kingdom but his application was refused  by  a  decision
         dated 11 May 2017.  He appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Jessica Pacey) which, in a decision promulgated on  30  June  2017,
         allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   I find that the appeal should be allowed.  I have reached that
         decision for the following reasons.  First, I accept the  Secretary
         of State's submission that at [39] the judge in effect reversed the
         burden of proof:

             "The fact remains, however, that homosexual acts  are  illegal
             in Bangladesh and were the appellant to go back and  under  HJ
             Iran principles live  openly  as  a  homosexual  he  would  be
             breaking the law.   The  respondent  has  not  identified  any
             evidence indicating that the lack  of  prosecutions  could  be
             attributed to tolerance of homosexuals rather than and to  any
             other reason, such as incompetence."

         3.   There was no burden on the Secretary of State to identify such
         evidence.  The  burden  of  proof  in  the  appeal  rested  on  the
         appellant subject to the required standard of proof.  Secondly,  it
         is difficult to see what evidence the respondent may have been able
         to adduce which might show that the reason for the  low  number  of
         prosecutions of  homosexuals  in  Bangladesh  originated  not  from
         tolerance of homosexual  activities  but  to  police  incompetence.
         Whatever the reason for the  low  incidents  of  prosecutions,  the
         judge has had no regard to  the  fact  that  the  infrequency  (two
         recorded arrests under the Penal Code of Bangladesh, paragraph 377)
         is plainly a factor which has to  be  considered  as  part  of  the
         assessment of risk on return.  It was not open to the judge  simply
         to reject that evidence or to refrain  from  including  it  in  the
         assessment simply because she  believed  that  the  respondent  had
         failed to show the cause for the low number of prosecutions.

         4.   There will need to  be  a  proper  examination  of  the  risks
         possibly facing this individual as a homosexual man  on  return  to
         Bangladesh.  The remaining part of the appellant's protection claim
         which relates to problems with money lenders will not be  revisited
         and the findings made by Judge Pacey in regard to that part of  the
         claim shall stand.  The  sole  issue  remaining  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal is that of the appellant's sexuality.

         Notice of Decision

         5.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 30 June 2017 is set aside.  The findings of fact are  set  aside
         save for those relating to the appellant's  claimed  problems  with
         money lenders (see above).   The  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Lane) will remake the decision  at  or  following  a  resumed
         hearing.  The parties shall send to the Upper Tribunal and to  each
         other any documentary evidence upon  which  they  may  respectively
         seek to rely at the resumed hearing no later than 10 days prior  to
         that hearing."

 2. Before the Upper Tribunal at the resumed hearing on 15  November  2018,
    Mr Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer,  appeared  for  the
    respondent.  Mr Hussain appeared  for  the  appellant.   The  appellant
    attended court but no interpreter had been booked by his solicitors and
    I was told by Mr Hussain that it was not intended that he  should  give
    evidence.  The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only.

 3. The Tribunal reserved its decision.

 4. Mr  Hussain  relied  upon  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
    Bangladesh:  Sexual  Orientation  and  Gender  Identity  (Version  3.0:
    November 2017).  He cited a number of passages from that document which
    make it clear that those men who not only live openly as homosexual men
    but also who may be described as "pioneers of practising and  promoting
    homosexuality in Bangladesh" are at real risk of persecution  and  ill-
    treatment on account of their sexuality.  The document refers variously
    to those who "publicly reveal their sexual orientation" and [7.3.4] and
    who are "visible gay men..." at [8.2.4].  Mr  Avery  did  not  disagree
    with the  proposition  that  those  who  live  openly  as  gay  men  in
    Bangladesh are also at risk.

 5. It is against that background (with which both parties appear to agree)
    that  I  have  to  assess  the  risk  to  this  individual   appellant.
    Difficulties arise in that assessment because, as Mr  Avery  submitted,
    there is very little evidence to show (i) whether the  appellant  would
    behave openly as a gay man in Bangladesh or whether he would not act in
    such a way as to conceal his sexuality and (ii) if he did act so at  to
    hide his sexuality whether he would do so as a result  of  societal  or
    family pressure or out of a fear  of  persecution.   I  accept,  as  Mr
    Hussain submitted, that fear of persecution may constitute only one  of
    several possible  reasons  for  acting  discreetly  in  order  for  the
    appellant to be recognised as a refugee.

 6. In the absence of any oral evidence by the appellant, I was referred by
    Mr Hussain to the appellant's statement in support of  his  application
    for asylum.  In that statement at [26] the appellant states:

         'I want to [live] my life openly as a gay man and for  everyone  to
         accept me.  I cannot do this  should  I  be  forced  to  return  to
         Bangladesh as my family will not accept [it] and  [I]  will  remain
         vulnerable to attack and persecution by others.'

 7. In his asylum interview [question 42], the appellant  was  asked,  "You
    fear getting arrested, imprisoned by the police and attacked by  people
    in Bangladeshi society,  is  that  correct?"  to  which  the  appellant
    replied "yes."  In the same interview [question 84], the appellant  had
    stated that, "when I was in my own  country,  I  could  not  share  [my
    homosexuality] with others.  I had to hide.  After coming here I opened
    up and could share that with others..."

 8. The proper approach for Tribunals in cases such as these is set out  in
    HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 at [82]:

         "When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality.

         If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on
         the available evidence that gay people who lived  openly  would  be
         liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.

         If so, the tribunal must go on  to  consider  what  the  individual
         applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

         If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
         "discreetly".

         If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.

         If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.

         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

 9. It would have been helpful had the appellant been tendered  for  cross-
    examination.  Had his evidence been tested by  cross-examination,  then
    not only is it likely that I would have had  a  more  detailed  account
    than that pieced together from an interview record and a statement  but
    the weight attaching to the appellant's evidence would potentially have
    been increased.  Some of the passages from the written evidence which I
    have set out above do not unambiguously support the  appellant's  case;
    it seems likely from the  very  limited  evidence  available  that  the
    appellant's fear of the reaction of his family is at least part of  the
    reason why he would behave discreetly and  hide  his  sexuality  if  in
    Bangladesh.  However, I do consider there  is  enough  in  the  written
    evidence upon which the appellant relies to show that at least  one  of
    the reasons why he would behave discreetly is a fear  of  ill-treatment
    should the fact of his  sexuality  become  known  more  widely  in  his
    community beyond the confines of the family.  I find that the appellant
    has shown that he has  a  real  fear  of  physical  injury  should  his
    sexuality become known more widely and that such fear  would  influence
    his behaviour.  I find that the respondent's guidance note from which I
    quoted above does establish that, whilst prosecutions for homosexuality
    are not the norm, there is a general climate of homophobia and impunity
    for  those  who  persecute  homosexual  men  such  that  it  has   been
    objectively established, on the facts of this case, that there exists a
    real risk of ill-treatment. I am satisfied also, on the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me,  that,  whilst  they  may  be  reluctant  to  bring
    prosecutions of gay men, the Bangladesh authorities would be  unwilling
    to offer this appellant adequate protection.  In the  circumstances,  I
    allow the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated
11 May 2017 is allowed on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 26 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 26 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
