
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04051/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2019                   |On 20 November 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                    RUJEKO OSCARS (AKA PERPETUA KATEHWE)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Acharyas of Acharyas Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Saffer ('the Judge') promulgated on 28th  June  2019
        in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  protection
        and human rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant, a female citizen of Zimbabwe born on 19  June  1970,
        appealed the respondent's refusal dated 15 April 2019 of her  claim
        for international protection.
     3. The Judge noted the appellant has  had  a  previously  unsuccessful
        application and appeal (AA/04367/2010) heard on 23 April 2010.  The
        Judge notes the basis of the appellant's claim before  setting  out
        findings of fact from [30] of the decision under challenge.
     4. The Judge reminds himself that the previous findings  in  the  2010
        decision form  the  starting  point  in  this  appeal  as  per  the
        Devaseelan principles. In  that  earlier  case  it  was  found  the
        appellant had lied about the length of time she intended to come to
        the United Kingdom, her motivation for coming to the  UK,  and  her
        past in Zimbabwe. The Judge finds at [32] that  the  appellant  had
        lied to him regarding  lack  of  family  or  support  available  in
        Zimbabwe  which,  for  this  and  other  reasons  set  out  in  the
        determination, led to the finding at [36] in the following terms:


             36.  For all  these  reasons,  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
                  establish it is reasonably likely she  has  any  political
                  profile whatsoever  that  would  be  of  interest  to  the
                  authorities in Zimbabwe  and  her  asylum  claim  is,  and
                  always has been, a complete fabrication. She has therefore
                  failed to establish she will be reasonably  likely  to  be
                  subject to second stage interrogation at  the  airport  in
                  Harare or of any interest to the authorities at  any  time
                  thereafter for any reason.


     5. The Judge considers article 3 ECHR writing at [38]:


             38.  Given the facts I have found,  and  the  facts  that  her
                  sister is able to live in and work in Zimbabwe, Mrs Couper
                  was able to stay there for 3 months as recently as January
                  2019, and that Claire was able  to  live  there  until  as
                  recently as August 2018,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
                  political, financial and economic position is such  as  to
                  mean that  her  article  3  rights  will  be  breached  if
                  returned to Zimbabwe, or that any of  the  conditions  for
                  humanitarian protection apply.


     6. Thereafter the Judge considers family and  private  life  accepting
        the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  Mr
        Brown. The Judge finds Mr Brown has never been to Zimbabwe and does
        not want to go but that he entered into  the  relationship  at  the
        time the appellant's status was unlawful and precarious and he knew
        that it was. The Judge finds at [40] that it was  not  accepted  it
        will be unduly harsh or even unreasonable for the appellant and  Mr
        Brown to live in Zimbabwe as they have significant  family  support
        available, somewhere to stay, and that Mr Brown has an income  from
        rental property together with investments and that any ties to  the
        UK do not even remotely establish they go beyond  normal  emotional
        ties existing between adults.
     7. The Judge also finds it would not be unduly harsh, unreasonable  or
        disproportionate for Mr Brown  to  remain  in  the  UK  whilst  the
        appellant returns to Zimbabwe where she can make an application  to
        re-enter the United  Kingdom  lawfully.  The  Judge  is  unable  to
        conclude the appellant has prospects of success with such  a  claim
        as Mr Brown failed to produce the specified  evidence  required  by
        the Rules to establish his financial position.  It  was  found  the
        appellant could continue her church activities in Zimbabwe.
     8.  The  Judge  concludes  the  appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the
        Immigration  Rules  and  that   she   had   failed   to   establish
        circumstances outside the Rules sufficient to warrant a finding the
        respondent's decision is not proportionate.
     9. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal; the operative part of the
        grant being in the following terms:


             2.   The grounds assert that the FTT Judge had erred in law in
                  failing to make a finding as to whether the appellant  had
                  an adverse political profile  and  whether  she  would  be
                  subject to a second stage interrogation at Harare airport;
                  that the judge had failed to consider as to whether  there
                  were  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
                  integration on return; that the Judge failed  to  consider
                  the impact of removal and had made  an  error  of  law  in
                  stating that her daughter had not filed  a  statement  and
                  had failed to take into account  the  statement  from  the
                  appellant's partner.


             3.    This  was  the  second  appeal  by  the  appellant.  The
                  appellant had  stated  that  she  had  written  anti  Zanu
                  newspaper articles and blog in Zimbabwe and supported  the
                  Zimbabwean vigil and attended meetings and  demonstrations
                  in London.


             4.   The Judge considered the issue of credibility  and  noted
                  that the appellant had been found not to  be  credible  in
                  her earlier appeal in 2010. It was noted that she had  not
                  claimed to have any political profile either  in  Zimbabwe
                  or in the UK.


             5.   In this current appeal the appellant claimed that she had
                  become   politically   active   in   2010   and   attended
                  demonstrations and writing political blogs for the African
                  Aristocrat website. The Judge considered the evidence from
                  her witness, who was living in  Zimbabwe,  but  failed  to
                  give it any due weight on the basis that the appellant had
                  made no application  for  her  witness  to  give  evidence
                  through electronic means. The failure to make any findings
                  on this evidence arguably amounts to an error of law which
                  in turn arguably undermine such findings which  have  been
                  made as to the appellant's political profile.


             6.   At [33] the Judge noted that there was no  evidence  from
                  the appellant's daughter before the Tribunal but this  was
                  incorrect as there was statements at 30 to  31  B  of  the
                  appellant's bundle. This omission is arguably an error  of
                  law.


             7.   There had been before the Judge in the appellant's bundle
                  a statement from the appellant's husband, explaining  that
                  the appellant's daughter lived with  them  as  she  was  a
                  student and that he had mental health issues. Such  issues
                  are material but the judge made no  findings  in  relation
                  thereto. There was a further omission in  that  the  Judge
                  failed to consider the issue of integration on return.


             8.   In all it is considered that the determination  discloses
             arguable errors of law.



Error of law


    10. Mr Acharyas on behalf of the  appellant  submitted  the  Judge  was
        wrong to find the appellant  did  not  have  an  adverse  political
        profile that will place her at risk on return to Zimbabwe.  It  was
        argued sufficient evidence had been provided, including evidence of
        newspaper articles, and that although the Judge set out the  issues
        at [21] he failed to make any findings upon the same.
    11. At [21] the Judge writes:


             21.  Mr Kudzayi said  that  he  had  been  granted  asylum  in
                  January 2013 due to his journalistic work. He returned  to
                  Zimbabwe where he works as a journalist. He was the editor
                  of the Sunday Mail.  He  criticised  the  regime  and  was
                  detained (articles relating to which I have seen) and then
                  remanded on bail before the charges were dropped.  He  was
                  then fired, and computers tablets and phones in excess  of
                  the value  of  $10,000  was  seized.  Since  then  he  has
                  repeatedly  been  harassed  by  the  authorities  and  was
                  arrested in 2019. The charges against him were thrown  out
                  by  the  magistrate.  He  is  the  editor  of  a  WhatsApp
                  newspaper which has in excess of 35,000  subscribers.  The
                  Appellant  was  a  contributor  to  publications  he   was
                  previously involved  with.  The  relevant  website  is  no
                  longer online that can be accessed  through  the  Internet
                  archive and be found by  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  who
                  have  a  sophisticated  and  well-resourced   intelligence
                  apparatus. The Appellant said orally  that  she  had  last
                  spoken to him 2 days ago.


    12. The Judge at [22] confirms that he has seen  two  undated  articles
        written by the appellant, undated screenshots of her on  ZBN  where
        she is identified as a human rights activist and a letter from Rose
        Benton dated 29 July 2011 noting  the  appellant's  involvement  in
        vigils.
    13. At [34 - 36] the Judge sets out his findings in relation  to  these
        issues  and  also  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant   had
        established she possessed  the  relevant  adverse  profile  in  the
        following terms:


             34.  The Appellant has produced 2 article she says  have  been
                  published  in  Zimbabwe  which   are   critical   of   the
                  authorities. They are both undated. I place little  weight
                  on the evidence from Mr Kudzayi as no request was made for
                  him to give evidence through electronic means and  it  has
                  not therefore been tested.  The  relevant  website  is  no
                  longer online. In those circumstances she  has  failed  to
                  establish they have appeared anywhere currently accessible
                  or that the Zimbabwean authorities would have any interest
                  or reason to seek to access it.


             35.  The Appellant did not claim to attend vigils before 2010.
                  The evidence from Rose Benton is 8 years old and  she  has
                  not attended to have that evidence tested.  The  Appellant
                  said she attended until 2014 and again in December 2018. I
                  have seen no pictures to confirm that and have no evidence
                  from anyone who was with her or from the organising  group
                  to confirm what she says. That is  evidence  that  can  be
                  obtained from within her protective host country. I do not
                  have to believe what the appellant says just  because  she
                  says it particularly given  her  long-standing  dishonesty
                  over many years including at the hearing before  me.  Even
                  if she did attend a  vigil,  I  am  satisfied  it  was  to
                  fabricate a claim and she did  not  have  a  role  of  any
                  prominence such as to bring her to the  attention  of  the
                  authorities, and she would not engage  in  anti-government
                  activity in Zimbabwe and she has  no  such  interest.  She
                  would not need to lie about her behaviour on her return as
                  she will either say she did not attend, or  only  attended
                  to fabricate a claim.


             36.  For all  these  reasons,  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
                  establish it is reasonably likely she  has  any  political
                  profile  whatsoever  that  will  be  of  interest  to  the
                  authorities in Zimbabwe  and  her  asylum  claim  is,  and
                  always has been, a complete fabrication. She has therefore
                  failed to establish she will be reasonably  likely  to  be
                  subject to second stage interrogation at  the  airport  in
                  Harare or of any interest to the authorities at  any  time
                  thereafter for any reason.


    14. The assertion the Judge placed little weight upon the  evidence  of
        Mr Kudzayi as no request had been made for  him  to  give  evidence
        through electronic means misrepresents the Judge's actual findings.
        The Judge was particularly concerned that the lack of  any  ability
        to interact with the witness  regarding  his  evidence  meant  that
        evidence had not been tested. That is clearly stated at  [34].  The
        weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge.  The
        Judge did not place 'no weight' upon the evidence but only  'little
        weight' for which adequate reasons were given.  This  evidence  was
        adequately assessed by the Judge.
    15. The Judge was not required to make findings in relation to each and
        every aspect of the  evidence.  The  Judge  clearly  took  all  the
        evidence into account and considered the evidence with the required
        degree of anxious scrutiny. Whilst matters may have been  mentioned
        in the bundle the Judge cannot be criticised for  not  producing  a
        determination dealing with each and every aspect  which  would,  by
        its nature, result in a publications and  considerable  volume,  an
        arguably unnecessary.
    16. The Judge's primary  finding  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
        discharge the burden of proof upon her  to  establish  she  has  an
        adverse political profile such as to place her at risk on return is
        a conclusion reached having assessed the evidence as a whole and  a
        conclusion which has not been shown  to  be  infected  by  arguable
        legal error.
    17. One basis on which permission to appeal was granted is that  it  is
        said the Judge in finding at [33] that there was no  evidence  from
        the appellant's daughter  was incorrect. It is  necessary  to  read
        the content of [33] which is in the following terms:


             33.  I do not accept it is reasonably likely that  her  mother
                  or Claire would have had any problem at all in Zimbabwe as
                  there is no evidence from Claire (who is  here  but  chose
                  not to make a statement) to support  that  assertion,  and
                  there is no evidence from the sister in  Zimbabwe  despite
                  there being contact as evidenced by  Mrs  Couper's  recent
                  three-month visit.  Whilst  I  accept  that  there  is  no
                  requirement to produce corroboration, in this case it will
                  be readily available with  no  risk  to  anyone  and  oral
                  evidence can be given using modern means of communication.




    18. The finding of the Judge is not that there is no evidence from  the
        appellant's daughter but  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
        daughter to support the claim the appellant experienced problems in
        Zimbabwe as she claimed.  The  Judge  clearly  took  the  statement
        provided by  the  appellant's  daughter  into  account  and  it  is
        factually correct that that material did not provide  the  type  of
        evidence the Judge  is  specifically  referring  to.  There  is  no
        arguable legal error made out on this basis.
    19. The Judge considered the  human  rights  aspects  both  within  and
        outside the Immigration Rules. The appellant takes  issue  with  an
        integration point claiming there was no assessment of whether there
        were very significant obstacles to reintegration into Zimbabwe  and
        asserting the Judge failed to assess adequately  the  situation  in
        Zimbabwe. The appellant claims to have been integrated as a  result
        of time in the United Kingdom, to be in a  relationship,  and  that
        her daughter is also in the United Kingdom, and  claims  there  has
        been no assessment of the same or the impact upon the daughter, who
        is in education,  if  the  appellant  is  returned.  The  appellant
        asserts the Judge failed to assess that there are health issues and
        that it will be harsh for Mr Brown to have to go  to  Zimbabwe  and
        that greater weight should have been given to  the  factors  relied
        upon in support of the appellant.
    20. As  noted,  the  Judge  found  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship  with  Mr  Brown  who  had  never  been  to
        Zimbabwe. The Judge was arguably entitled to note the  relationship
        was formed at a time when both parties knew the appellant's  status
        in the United Kingdom was unlawful/precarious. The finding  of  the
        Judge it would not be unduly harsh or  even  unreasonable  for  the
        appellant and Mr Brown to live in Zimbabwe for  the  reasons  given
        has not been shown to be a  finding  outside  the  range  of  those
        reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.  Family  members
        in the United Kingdom are all adults in  the  appellant's  daughter
        has only been  in  the  UK  for  10  months  and  is  an  adult  at
        university. The Judge's finding the relationship with  such  adults
        had "not even remotely  established  as  going  beyond  the  normal
        emotional times existing between adults" is a finding available  to
        the Judge on the evidence.
    21. The Judge's primary finding  is  therefore  that  family  life  can
        continue  in  Zimbabwe  where  there  will  be  no   insurmountable
        obstacles to integration. Whilst the appellant disagrees it has not
        been shown to be a finding outside the range of those available  to
        the Judge. What the Judge also does at  [41]  is  consider  another
        option in the following terms:

             41.   I  do  not  accept  that  it  would  be  unduly   harsh,
                  unreasonable, or disproportionate for him to  remain  here
                  whilst  she  returns  to  Zimbabwe  as  she   would   have
                  significant family support available from her  sister,  he
                  can support her financially, he  can  visit,  and  he  can
                  support her application for entry clearance in  the  usual
                  way. It will be for the Entry Clearance Officer to  assess
                  the evidence in the usual way  as  the  most  recent  HMRC
                  Annual Summary is from 2016 - 2017, and  his  most  recent
                  payslip is dated for October 2018 as  it  is  most  recent
                  bank statement and they do not cover any  6  month  period
                  let alone the 6 months just  before  the  application  for
                  leave to remain for  the  6  month  period  prior  to  the
                  hearing.  He  has  objectively  failed  to   produce   the
                  specified evidence required by the rules.


    22. It is not been made out this is a  finding  outside  the  range  of
        those available to the  Judge  on  the  evidence.  Accordingly  the
        appellant's challenge to the Judge's conclusions regarding Mr Brown
        fail. Similarly it is not  established  that  the  Judge  erred  in
        concluding the appellant could be expected to  return  to  Zimbabwe
        where she could make an application for entry clearance  which,  if
        granted, would enable her to return to the United Kingdom lawfully.
    23. It is also noted at [42] that the  Judge  records  the  appellant's
        daughter did not even file a statement or give  evidence  regarding
        the extent of the ties between  her  and  the  appellant.  This  is
        correct. The appellant had chosen to live apart from  her  daughter
        for 17 years and they only lived together in the same house for  10
        months. The Judge's conclusion their relationship did not go beyond
        the normal emotional ties existing between adults is a finding open
        to the Judge on the evidence. Whilst the time the appellant  spends
        with her daughter is part of her private life the  Judge  concluded
        the decision is proportionate which has not  been  shown  to  be  a
        finding outside the range of those available to the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.
    24. Reading the evidence available to the Judge and the decision  as  a
        whole I find it is not made out the Judge has erred  in  law  in  a
        manner material to the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient to
        warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this  matter.
        No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal has been made out.


Decision

    25. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14 November 2019












