
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04354/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2019                  |On 29 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Zanko [R]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms J Fisher, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, Zanko [R] (the Applicant), is a national of  Iraq  born
    on [~] 1992.  He is a Sunni Kurd from a  village  near  Kirkuk  and  is
    single with no dependants.

 2. He stated he left Iraq in 2015.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 13
    January 2015 clandestinely by lorry  when,  after  being  arrested,  he
    claimed international surrogate protection because on return he  feared
    persecution by Da'esh.

The SSHD's Original Decision

 3. On 15 March 2018 the Respondent  (the  SSHD)  refused  the  Appellant's
    application on all grounds but did accept that he is a Sunni Kurd  from
    the area of Kirkuk.  The SSHD did not accept the Applicant's account of
    difficulties he and his family  had  experienced  with  Da'esh  in  his
    village and considered his early claim to  be  a  minor  which  he  had
    subsequently withdrawn, damaged his credibility.

 4. The SSHD considered if the Appellant could  not  return  to  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Region (IKR) he could safely be returned  through  Baghdad  and
    relied on the country guidance in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ.944
    that there was no real risk to an  ordinary  civilian  travelling  from
    Baghdad to  the  IKR  by  air  to  Erbil  or  Sulaymaniyah.   The  SSHD
    acknowledged the Appellant would need  a  Civil  Status  Identity  Card
    (CSID) which he did not have and which  he  would  be  able  to  obtain
    through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy.

 5. The SSHD considered that in the light of  recent  improvements  in  the
    situation in the Applicant's home  area  there  was  no  real  risk  of
    indiscriminate  violence  such  as  to  engage  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC 29 April 2004.

 6. For the same reasons the Applicant's claims under Articles 2 and  3  of
    the European Convention were rejected.  The Appellant's claim based  on
    his private and family life protected by  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention relying only on his presence in the United Kingdom since  13
    January 2015 did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  or
    warrant consideration exceptionally outside the Rules.

 7. On 29 March 2018 the Appellant  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under  s.82
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).
     The grounds recite his history and refer to background  evidence  that
    Da'esh continued to commit gross human rights violations  and  that  he
    would be at risk on return to Iraq.  There was no  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision under Article 8 of the European Convention.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 8. By a decision promulgated on 6 September 2018 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal P  J  M  Hollingworth  allowed  the  appeal  on  international
    surrogate protection grounds.

 9. The SSHD sought permission to appeal which on 18 October 2018 Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Beach granted because it is arguable the  Judge
    had failed to give sufficient reasons for finding the Applicant was  at
    risk across the whole of Iraq including the IKR or that  he  could  not
    internally re-locate.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

10.  By a decision promulgated on 17 January 2019 I found  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision of 6 September 2018 contained a  material  error
    of law in relation to the assessment of the risk to  the  Applicant  on
    return and the availability of internal relocation such that it  should
    be set aside and re--made. For the reasons given at paragraphs  18  and
    19 of my earlier decision, I retained the re- hearing to myself in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

11.  The Applicant attended. Ms Fisher stated that she  did  not  intend  to
    call the Applicant to give oral  testimony.  A  court  interpreter  was
    available. I explained to the Applicant the purpose of the hearing  and
    how it would proceed on the basis of only submissions. The  interpreter
    was available throughout the hearing to  summarise  for  the  Applicant
    what was said. The SSHD's Country Policy and Information Note on  Iraq:
    Internal relocation, civil documentation returns of February 2019 (CPIN
    2019) was submitted.

Submissions for the SSHD

12.  Mr Kotas noted the passage of time since the appeal had been  heard  by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (17  August  2018)  since  which  time   the
    circumstances of ISIS/ Da'esh/the Islamic  Caliphate  had  dramatically
    changed but the basis of the Applicant's claim was the situation in the
    summer of 2015 when he had  left  Iraq.  The  issue  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal now was whether the Applicant could be returned to  Kirkuk  or
    the Kurdish Region of Iraq (KRI).

13.  At the time of the judgment in AA (Iraq) v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ.944
    Kirkuk had been a contested area but this was no longer  the  case.  He
    relied on paragraph 1.2 of the SSHD's Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note Iraq: Security and humanitarian situation of November  2018  (CPIN
    2018).

14.  Mr Kotas also relied on paragraph 2.3.20ff of  the  CPIN  2018  and  in
    particular  paragraph  2.3.30  that  since  2015  Da'esh's  territorial
    control  has   collapsed   and   their   operational   capability   has
    significantly degraded. He submitted there was no evidence  Da'esh  was
    re-grouping in Iraq. He emphasised  that  Country  Guidance  should  be
    followed unless there are  very  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
    evidence for not so doing: see paragraph 47 of SG (Iraq) v SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ. 940. He relied on paragraph 63 of the judgment in R (Amin)  v
    SSHD [2017 EWHC 2417 (Admin) in which Sir Ross Cranston stated:

         "... as far as  the  position  in  Kirkuk  is  concerned,  and  the
         requirement for the claimant to return there to obtain a CSID,  the
         Secretary of State was entitled to take the realities on the ground
         there into account. Kirkuk is no longer a  contested  area.  In  my
         view, country guidance cases must give  way  to  the  realities,  a
         point recognised by the Court of Appeal in SG.... at para.47. There
         are apparently still dangers there, but nothing like  the  position
         as when AA was decided."

15.  He turned to the decision  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-internal  relocation)
    Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal  had  found
    there were no international flights to the KRI  but  circumstances  had
    changed as evidenced in  CPIN  2019  paragraph  2.7  that  the  ban  on
    international flights to the  KRI  had  been  lifted  and  that  former
    residents of the KRI will be returned to the KRI. Voluntary returns can
    be made to either Erbil or  Sulamaniyah.  I  have  taken  it  that  the
    acronyms IKR and KRI referred to the same or very much the  same  area.
    He stressed that an individual's  refusal  to  return  to  the  country
    (area) of origin did not constitute grounds for a subsidiary protection
    claim.

16.  He continued that if the Applicant were to be returned to  Baghdad,  he
    would not be at risk in the light of the two  letters  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy in London referred to in paragraphs 2.7.5 and 2.7.6 to be found
    at Annex is A and B of CPIN 2019. These two letters give  rise  to  the
    concerns of the Upper Tribunal expressed at paragraph 111 of AAH, about
    the need for a valid Iraqi passport or a  Civil  Status  Identity  card
    (CSID) being required to leave Baghdad Airport by road and to negotiate
    the various checkpoints on the route to  the  IKR.  He  submitted  that
    significant weight should be attached to these letters and there was no
    evidence to show that the arrangements referred to in them were not  in
    place and working. On return to Baghdad the Applicant will be  able  to
    proceed onwards to Kirkuk or the KRI.

17.  The Applicant had been tight-lipped about his family  in  Iraq  and  he
    noted there was no  evidence  about  any  family  contact  since  2015.
    Alternatively, internal relocation would not be unduly harsh.

Submissions for the Applicant

18.  Ms Fisher relied on her skeleton argument. She accepted  the  situation
    in Kirkuk might now be  different  from  the  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision but, nevertheless,  the  situation  there  remained
    uncertain. It was a contested area in July 2018,  a  month  before  the
    appeal had been heard  in  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  SG  grounds  for
    departing from Country Guidance had not yet been met. It was clear that
    Da'esh was still causing problems. It should be noted that R (Amin) was
    heard in September 2017 almost 6 months before AAH. There was no cogent
    evidence to support the claim that there had been a  change  since  the
    decision in AAH and so justify a departure from AAH.

19.  She  referred  to  paragraph  7.1.5  of  CIPN  2019  dealing  with  the
    documents required by displaced persons to enter the KRI. According  to
    a journalist relied on in the joint report of April 2016 by the  Danish
    Refugee Council and Danish Immigration Service that those who originate
    from the KRI will not face problems on return there but  those  who  do
    not originate from there must travel to the home area from  which  they
    originally came after arrival at an airport in the KRI. She referred to
    paragraph 7.3 of CIPN 2019 noting that the Danish report observed  that
    Internally Displaced Persons were no longer allowed to  enter  the  KRI
    and many were  kept  waiting  at  border  checkpoints  and  there  were
    documentary requirements for admission to the KRI. The important  point
    to note was the Applicant had no connections to the KRI and even if  he
    gained entry, he would not be able to sustain himself.

20.  Additionally, she referred to paragraph 13  of  AAH  that  the  Kurdish
    Governate and the Iraqi government remained in territorial dispute over
    certain areas and particularly Kirkuk and its  oil  revenues  and  that
    "all observers agree that the future  is  uncertain  and  the  security
    situation remains precarious". Kirkuk remained an  issue  and  she  had
    identified the various paragraphs in AAH and CPIN 2019 at paragraphs 11-
    12 of her skeleton argument. The Applicant was not  from  the  KRI  but
    from the province of Kirkuk. Internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

21.  The Respondent had relied on the letters  from  the  Iraqi  Embassy  in
    London at annexes A and B to CPIN 2019 but there  was  no  evidence  to
    show that returnees are provided with the requisite documentation.  She
    highlighted the Embassy's use of the word "may" and  not  "will"  where
    the letters refer to returnees being issued  with  documentation.  Such
    documentation was the same as the  Upper  Tribunal  had  considered  at
    paragraphs 24-37 of AAH. There was no copy  of  the  letters  from  the
    Secretary of State which initiated these two letters from the  Embassy.
    She referred to paragraphs 5.4ff, 5.6.4ff, 6.1.9, 6.2 and 6.3  of  CPIN
    2019 which detail the contents and circumstances in which various Iraqi
    state documents such as a CSID or an  Identity  Card  or  passport  are
    issued and required to be produced. Paragraph  2.7.9  recorded  that  a
    laissez-passer was not to be confused  with  a  CSID.  It  may  not  be
    impossible for the Applicant to re-document himself but it would be  an
    extremely fraught and protracted process. Even if the Applicant reached
    Iraq he would be destitute without a CSID or family support:  see  CPIN
    2019 paragraph 2.6.2ff and this was conceded by the Secretary of  State
    as recorded at paragraphs 93ff of AAH.

22.  Mr Kotas for the SSHD had nothing further to add.

The Standard and Burden of Proof

23.  The standard and burden of  proof  in  relation  to  claims  under  the
    Refugee Convention, for humanitarian protection under the Qualification
    Directive 2004 and under the European Convention are for  all  material
    purposes one and the same; that is the Appellant must show  that  there
    are substantial grounds for believing that if returned to  his  country
    of origin he would be persecuted for a Refugee Convention reason or  if
    removed from the United Kingdom will be subjected  to  treatment  which
    for the purposes of humanitarian protection  as  defined  by  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules will amount to serious harm  or  will  be
    subjected to treatment which will violate his rights under the European
    Convention.  This is  known  as  the  lower  standard  of  proof.   The
    effective date for assessment of the evidence in support of each  claim
    is the date of the hearing.

Consideration and Conclusions

24.  I was referred to a considerable number of passages in CPIN 2019  which
    is recorded as updated on 22 January 2019. It does not appear  to  have
    been before the Upper Tribunal in AAH which relied very heavily on  the
    expert evidence of Dr Fatah. In addition to the  specific  passages  in
    CPIN 2019 to which I was referred, I have looked at paragraph 8 of CPIN
    2018 dealing with the security situation. Paragraph 8.1.2 refers  to  a
    statement by the US intelligence community to Congress in February 2018
    that although ISIS's exclusive control  over  distinct  territories  in
    Iraq had ended it has started  and  probably  will  maintain  a  robust
    insurgency. Paragraph 8.1.4 refers to  a  post  of  July  2018  by  the
    International Crisis Group that ISIS-related  insecurity  continued  in
    the Kirkuk, Diyala and Saladin provinces. Paragraph 8.1.6 refers to the
    Combating Terrorism Center highlighting  in  September  2018  that  the
    Hamril Mountains which straddle Kirkuk, Saladin and Diyala had  been  a
    safe haven for Da'esh and there was a risk that the focus  on  clearing
    these areas may 'ebb' because of the delay in the formation of the  new
    Iraqi government, finally completed in early October 2018. I also noted
    at paragraph 2.3.30 that the conflict had changed in nature  from  open
    conflict to periodic asymmetric  attacks  in  a  number  of  governates
    including Kirkuk.

25.  At paragraph 111 of AAH the Upper Tribunal noted "whilst  we  note  the
    evidence of Country Research Manager (...) that the  Iraqi  authorities
    have assured the Home Office they will "assist with any  onward  travel
    documentation" we have been shown no evidence  that  this  is  actually
    happened,  or  what  such  documentation  might  be.   (The   expert's)
    uncontested evidence was that a failure to produce  a  CSID-or  in  the
    environs of the airport a passport-would  likely  result  in  detention
    until such time as  the  authorities  could  be  satisfied  as  to  the
    individual's identity"

26.  I note the same report refers  to  other  sources  that  ethnic  Kurds,
    including Kurds from Kirkuk can freely enter the KRI, that ethnic Kurds
    with long residency in Kirkuk can gain access to the KRI possibly  even
    for settlement and somewhat inconsistently that ethnic Kurds with long-
    term residency in Kirkuk must follow the same procedure  for  entry  to
    the KRI as for all other Iraqi citizens.

27.  The Upper Tribunal in AAH had before  it  the  Embassy  Letters  to  be
    found in the annexes to CPIN 2019 and the concession made at paragraphs
    93ff re-appears at paragraph 2.6.20  of  CPIN  2019.  The  plethora  of
    sources on which it relies cannot be said to present  anything  like  a
    uniform or consistent view of the requirements for entry to the KRI  or
    the ease or difficulty with which the requisite  documentation  and  in
    particular a CSID might be obtained.

28.  The Applicant has not been forthcoming about his  family  remaining  in
    Iraq or the KRI. From the 2018 decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  it
    appears the Appellant has not been pressed for  information  about  his
    family. The information he gives about his family  appears  principally
    at interview replies  100-107  and  particularly  in  relation  to  the
    ability to contact them  at  interview  replies  109-111  and  the  age
    assessment report at page B13 of the SSHD's bundle.

29.  There has been no challenge to  the  Applicant's  claim  to  hail  from
    Kirkuk Province which is not within the KRI and is an area where  there
    is dispute  between  the  KRI  authorities  and  the  Iraqi  government
    particularly because of the oil resources in the province. There was no
    challenge to the Applicant's claim that he had contacted the Red  Cross
    with a view to tracing his family without success: see interview  reply
    105. The Applicant is unlikely to be able to obtain  information  about
    his family from Iraq to enable him in the normal  course  to  obtain  a
    CSID: see paragraphs 173-187 of AA (Iraq) and 100-107 of AAH.

30.  The Applicant is  unlikely  to  be  able  to  satisfy  the  documentary
    requirements for a laisser-passer identified at paragraphs  2.7.13  and
    2.7.15 of CPIN 2019. He will therefore have to rely on the arrangements
    outlined in the Embassy's two letters annexed to CPIN 2019. These  were
    the subject of some concern at paragraph 111 of AAH and  there  was  no
    relevant evidence before me to address the concerns voiced in AAH.  The
    evidence points to the Applicant not being able to obtain the  relevant
    documentation to move beyond Baghdad airport.

31.  The background evidence about the requirements for entry to the KRI  by
    an ethnic Kurd from Kirkuk province is unclear,  as  already  outlined.
    The general security  situation  in  Kirkuk  province  is  outlined  at
    paragraph 8 of CPIN 2019 and can be described at best as uncertain.  At
    paragraphs 8.1.2ff CPIN 2019 shows that ISIS is pursuing "hit and  run"
    tactics  and  continues  to  challenge  the  authority  of  the   Iraqi
    government and is waging an effective campaign to re-establish  durable
    support zones while raising funds  and  rebuilding  command-and-control
    over its remnant forces, so much  so  that  it  could  gain  sufficient
    strength to mount a renewed insurgency that  once  again  threatens  to
    overmatch local security forces in both Iraqi and Syria: see paragraphs
    8.1.5 and 8.1.7.

32.  For the reasons already given, I am satisfied  to  the  lower  standard
    that it is unlikely the Applicant can be returned to Iraq or  the  KRI.
    However, the impracticability of return is not grounds for the grant of
    refugee status.

33.  Looking at the evidence in the round,  I  am  satisfied  to  the  lower
    standard that return to his home area in Kirkuk  province  or  internal
    relocation anywhere in the KRI or indeed elsewhere  in  Iraq  would  be
    unduly harsh, particularly in the light of the SSHD's approach outlined
    at paragraph 2.6.20ff of the CPIN 2019 and the risk of destitution.

34.  The  Applicant  has  been  found  to  have  left  Iraq  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason. The SSHD has not pursued a  challenge  to  the  2015
    circumstances which the Applicant asserted  were  the  reason  for  his
    flight and the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  allowed  his  appeal  on
    Refugee Convention grounds. The consequence is  the  SSHD's  appeal  is
    dismissed and Applicant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds  and  for
    the same reasons under Article 3 of the European Convention.

Anonymity

35.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is required.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3)

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 26. iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE SSHD: FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed but no fee award may be made because no fee has
been paid.


Signed/Official Crest                                     Date 26. iii.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
