
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04239/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2018                      |On 5 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S Y S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:       Ms S Rogers, instructed by Immigration Advice
Centre Ltd

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
tier.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moran,  promulgated  on  17/07/2017
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on Humanitarian Protection and  article
3 ECHR grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 01/09/1983  and  is  a  national  of  Iraq.  On
18/04/2017 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.
The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Moran ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on Humanitarian Protection and article 3 ECHR grounds.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 06/10/2017  Judge  E  B  Grant  gave
permission to appeal stating

      1. The respondent has applied, in time, for permission to  appeal  the
      decision of the FTT J Moran promulgated on 17 July 2017.


      2. The grounds submit the FTT J erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
      likelihood of the appellant being unemployed upon return amounts to  a
      breach of A3.


      3. It is arguable that the FTT J has given inadequate reasons for  his
      findings that the appellant will not be able to find employment either
      in Baghdad or the IKR and has failed to take  into  account  the  high
      threshold of  A3  in  finding  that  the  appellant  "could  (not)  be
      confident of  readily  finding  work"  and  arguably  gave  inadequate
      reasons  for  finding  that  the  absence  of  family  support   makes
      relocation to Baghdad unduly harsh.


      4. The grounds may be argued.

The Hearing

6. For the respondent, Mr Petterson adopted the grounds of appeal. She  took
me to [31] of the decision and told me that, there,  the  Judge  finds  that
the appellant will be able to obtain entry to IKR for 10 days. She  told  me
that the Judge found that relocation is unreasonable  solely  on  the  basis
that the appellant would struggle to find employment. She told me that  that
finding is not supported by the evidence and is inadequately  reasoned.  She
told me that there was no reliable evidence that the appellant  is  expected
to leave IKR after being granted entry.

(b) Ms Petterson accepted that the Judge considers how  the  appellant  will
get to the IKR from Baghdad but told me that the Judge should  have  made  a
finding that the appellant could stay indefinitely in IKR. She told me  that
the Judge did not give adequate consideration to  the  employment  prospects
for a healthy young man. She told me that undue harshness was not  made  out
and was not adequately considered by the Judge.

(c) Ms Petterson told me that new country guidance on the situation  in  IKR
is expected from the Upper Tribunal soon. She asked me to  find  that  there
are material errors of law in  the  decision  and  to  remit  the  case  for
further consideration by the First-tier Tribunal.

7. For the appellant, Ms Rogers told me that the decision does  not  contain
errors of law. She told me that the decision is perfectly adequate and  that
the Judge properly dealt with the appellant's ability to enter  IKR  for  10
days and then remain beyond that 10  day  period.  Ms  Rogers  told  me  the
Judge's findings are in line with the objective materials. She  reminded  me
that the situation  in  IKR  is  deteriorating  because  of  the  number  of
displaced people there. She told me that the Judge properly  considered  the
reasonableness of relocation by looking at the prospect  of  employment  and
the ability of the appellant to survive.

(b) Ms Rogers told me that there was sufficient evidence placed  before  the
Judge to justify his conclusion that the appellant would  struggle  to  find
work in IKR within 10 days, and that the absence of work would mean that  he
would not be entitled to remain in IKR for more than 10 days.  She  told  me
that it is not disputed that the appellant does not have a sponsor and  does
not have family members within IKR. She told me that  the  Judge's  findings
are entirely in line with the country guidance given in AA (Iraq) CG  [2017]
EWCA Civ 944.

(c) Ms Rogers told me  that  the  Judge  made  reasoned  findings  that  the
appellant cannot return to Baghdad. She reminded me that it is not  disputed
that the appellant is Kurdish, that the appellant speaks  Kurdish  Kurmanji,
and that the appellant has no connection to Baghdad. She  told  me  that  is
not disputed that the appellant does not have a CSID. She reminded  me  that
the Judge found the appellant to be a credible witness who would have to  go
to Baghdad initially to try to renew his CSID. She told  me  that  the  only
reasonable conclusion to come to is  that  the  appellant  would  have  huge
difficulty travelling and  that  internal  relocation  is  unreasonable  and
unduly harsh. She urged me to dismiss the appeal and to allow  the  decision
to stand.

Analysis

8.  Between  [3]  and  [4]  of  the  decision  the  Judge   summarises   the
respondent's position. It is accepted that the appellant comes from  Nineveh
province in northern Iraq, but  the  respondent  argues  that  there  is  no
longer an article 15(c) risk there. In  any  event,  the  respondent  argues
that there is a viable option of internal relocation open to the appellant.

9. The grounds of appeal do not challenge the Judge's credibility  findings.
At [17] the Judge rehearses the appellant's  evidence.  At  [18]  the  Judge
sets out the respondent's challenges to the appellant's  evidence.  At  [20]
the Judge finds the appellant to be a straightforward and credible  witness.
At [21] the Judge draws a clear focus on article 15(c)  and  the  article  3
ECHR grounds of appeal.

10. The Judge's finding at [23] that there is an article 15(c) risk  to  the
appellant in Nineveh province  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  guidance
given in AA (Iraq) 2017. That finding is not challenged in  the  grounds  of
appeal. The grounds of appeal focus on the Judge's finding  in  relation  to
return  to  Baghdad  and  the  option  of  internal   relocation.   Although
submissions were made in relation to the Judge's  findings  that  (for  this
appellant) return to IKR is not possible because  the  appellant  would  not
find employment within this initial 10 days there,  that  is  not  something
raised in the grounds of appeal. The grounds of appeal focus  on  return  to
Baghdad only.
11. At [24] the Judge finds that the appellant speaks Arabic, that he  is  a
Kurd and his first language is Kurdish Kumanji. It is not disputed that  the
appellant is single  and  has  no  dependents.  The  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant has no family or other support network available  to  him  outside
Nineveh province. At [26] the Judge's finding that the  appellant  does  not
have a CSID card is not challenged.

12. At [28] the Judge draws this appeal clearly into  focus  by  identifying
the two potential areas for relocation to be Baghdad and the IKR.

13. The Court of Appeal has provided the following guidance in AA (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944.

    A.      INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE   15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


         1. There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
              certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
              militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
              ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called
              "contested  areas",  comprising  the  governorates  of  Anbar,
              Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is
              such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds
              for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
              account of his or her presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of
              being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
              serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
              Qualification Directive.

14. In making that finding the Court of Appeal adheres to what was  said  in
AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 0054 (IAC). The following guidance  is  also  found
in AA (Iraq) 2017

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).


    E.     IRAQI KURDISH REGION


    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.


    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.


    20.     Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  be  expected
        to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
        to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
        assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
        IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
        employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
        family and friends in the IKR.


    21.     As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a  home
        area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

15. This appeal concerns the Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  return  to
Baghdad. The focus is therefore on [29] of the decision. At [29]  the  Judge
finds that six of the seven factors to be considered at [15] of annex  A  to
AA (Iraq) 2017 mitigates  against  the  appellant  (the  seventh  factor  is
neutral)

16. At [30] and [31] the Judge deals with the  potential  of  relocation  to
IKR. At both [30] and [31] the Judge makes findings drawn from the  evidence
placed before him. At [31] the Judge finds  that  the  background  materials
indicate that the prospect of the appellant finding employment, which  would
enable him to remain in IKR, is remote.

17. The findings that the Judge makes are well within the range of  findings
reasonably available to the Judge. The findings are drawn from the  evidence
placed before the Judge. At [14] the Judge carefully takes correct  guidance
from AA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

18.  The  grounds  of  appeal  are  gathered  under  the  heading  "material
misdirection of law". In this case the Judge clearly took  correct  guidance
from AA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944. The grounds  of  appeal  do  not  really
drive at a misdirection of law but are just a disagreement  with  the  facts
as  the  Judge  found  them  to  be.  The  Judge  found   that   employment,
sponsorship, accommodation, a CSID and means of support  are  not  available
to the appellant. Those  findings  which  were  well  within  the  range  of
reasonable findings available to the Judge of  the  evidence  placed  before
him.

19. Having taken correct guidance in law  and  made  findings  of  fact  the
Judge reached his conclusion. It is not a  conclusion  that  the  respondent
likes but it is a conclusion which was reasonably open to the Judge  on  the
facts as he found them to be.

20. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

21 There is  nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he found  them  to  be.  The
respondent might not like the conclusion that the Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result of the correctly applied legal  equation.  The
correct test in law has been  applied.  The  decision  does  not  contain  a
material error of law.

22.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

23.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

24.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 17 July 2017, stands.


Signed        Paul Doyle
  Date 28 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



