

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/04708/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6th April 2018                         | On 1st May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     J S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel, instructed by A&P
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Oliver made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 2nd October 2017.

 2. The claimant, a 39 year old Sri  Lankan  man,  claimed  asylum  on  7th
    November 2016 and was refused on 8th May 2017.  He  appealed,  and  the
    appeal came before Judge Oliver.

 3. The claimant had served  a  bundle  of  background  documents  on  15th
    September 2017 but delayed serving the main bundle of  documents  until
    the day of the hearing itself.  These documents consisted, inter  alia,
    of  a  detailed  medical  report  and  a  witness  statement  from  the
    claimant's sister.

 4. The judge recorded that, at the outset of the hearing,  the  Presenting
    Officer sought an adjournment to consider the  late  served  documents.
    He said that he refused the request because the Presenting Officer  had
    had an opportunity to consider the papers over the  lunch  adjournment.
    He went on to allow the claimant's appeal.

 5. The Secretary of State subsequently sought permission to challenge  the
    judge's decision on the grounds that he had committed a  procedural  or
    other irregularity capable of  making  a  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the fairness of the proceedings by refusing the adjournment.

 6. She relied on the Presenting Officer's note, which said that he had not
    had the opportunity to look at the bundle before lunch. After lunch  he
    applied for the adjournment on the basis both of  the  late  submission
    and on the fact that, given the claimant was calling his sister to give
    evidence, her file ought to be called for and looked at.  He  had  only
    scanned the bundle and had not had an opportunity to read it  properly.
    It was argued that the  judge,  by  refusing  the  adjournment,  or  by
    refusing to give the Presenting Officer additional time to prepare, had
    unfairly disadvantaged the Home Office.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons set out in the grounds
    by Judge Lever on 29th December 2017.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow relied on his grounds  and  produced
    the original minute from the Presenting Officer, which states that  the
    bundle consisted of 140 pages, 108  of  which  was  new  material.  The
    Secretary of State was disadvantaged because there had been no time  to
    sift through the extensive bundle of documents to  establish  what  was
    relevant and what was not, and she had been deprived of an  opportunity
    to obtain the sister's file.

 9. Mr Paramjorthy recognised that the Presenting  Officer  was  put  in  a
    difficult position but submitted that all  representatives  had  to  be
    pragmatic and the Secretary of State had not established that  she  had
    in fact been disadvantaged.  She had not shown what  difference  having
    the sister's file would have made.  Late  service  in  itself  did  not
    necessarily amount to an error such that the decision  had  to  be  set
    aside.

10. I accept from the Presenting Officer's note that he considered that  he
    had been given inadequate preparation time as a consequence of the late
    service of these documents.  I am satisfied that the inability  of  the
    Presenting Officer to prepare is sufficient to establish  that  justice
    has not been seen to be done.

11. In spite of Mr Paramjorthy's robust defence of  the  determination,  it
    seems to me that the judge fell into a procedural error such  that  his
    decision has to be set aside.  It will have to be  remade  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Oliver at a date to be notified at Hatton Cross.






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




[pic]
Signed                                                       Date  30  April
2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

