
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA040542015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th May 2017                               |On 30th May 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Osman dida
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Radford of Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Callender Smith promulgated on 18 July 2016 (the "Decision"), in  which
    his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision refusing to  grant
    him asylum was allowed.  For ease, I shall refer  to  Mr  Dida  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent,  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 10  November  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan [see Annex for the decision in full] found a material  error  of
    law in the Decision as follows, "that the treatment by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge as to the evidence about the blood feud  was  materially
    flawed.  In particular, I  do  not  regard  that  there  is  sufficient
    analysis of the issues in the determination to support  the  conclusion
    that the appellant was at risk as a result of a blood feud"  (paragraph
    14).  This followed criticism of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  in
    that the findings made were  a  recitation  of  the  Appellant's  claim
    without evaluation of  the  evidence,  that  documentary  evidence  was
    considered to be reliable only because the Appellant was reliable and a
    failure  to  address  head-on  the  reliability  of  two   sources   of
    information  (the  certificate   of   conviction   and   the   Albanian
    authorities'  response  to  the  Respondent's   inquiry)   which   were
    conflicting.

 3. Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan  adjourned  the  hearing  to  allow  the
    Respondent to make enquiries from the Albanian authorities  as  to  the
    authenticity of the certificate of conviction, if she felt it right  to
    make such enquiries.  At the resumed hearing on  19  January  2017,  an
    adjournment was sought by the Respondent for further time  to  conclude
    those enquiries which was granted.

 4. Due to an internal administrative error, further evidence was submitted
    on time and in accordance with directions given on 19 January  2017  by
    the Respondent as to the authenticity of  conviction  but  it  did  not
    reach the appeal file.  Prior to sight of the evidence, directions were
    issued to the parties on 22 March 2017 that the issue to be  determined
    in the re-making of the decision was whether the Appellant is  at  risk
    on return to Albania as a  result  of  a  blood  feud.   The  re-making
    decision would be on the basis of evidence already available unless the
    parties wished to submit evidence as  to  the  Albanian  Criminal  Code
    which may be  relevant  as  to  the  findings  on  the  certificate  of
    conviction.  Neither party  had  given  any  indication  of  additional
    evidence that they wished to rely on.

 5. The appeal came before me on 4 May 2017  for  the  re-making  decision.
    Despite the  Respondent  re-submitting  the  further  evidence  of  her
    enquiries from the Albanian authorities following receipt of  the  last
    directions, that evidence had still not reached the file and was handed
    up.  There was also a further administrative difficult in that  Counsel
    for the Appellant had not had sight of the evidence or  the  directions
    until the night before the hearing, albeit that at least the latter had
    been received by those instructing her.  In the circumstances,  Counsel
    was in some difficulty as to preparation for the hearing.

 6. At the error of law hearing stage, Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan expected
    the results of any enquiries by the Respondent of  the  authorities  in
    Albania as to the authenticity of  the  certificate  of  conviction  to
    determine the credibility of  the  Appellant.   However,  although  the
    outcome of those inquiries was that the certificate  was  genuine,  the
    Respondent's position is that that is not necessarily inconsistent with
    her earlier evidence from the Albanian authorities that  there  was  no
    blood feud.  There  is,  in  my  preliminary  view,  support  for  that
    contention in the Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  1
    December 2015 by reference to the Albanian Criminal Code which includes
    specific provisions for blood feud related murders, which were not  the
    articles cited in the certificate of  conviction  in  this  case.   The
    matter is not therefore as straightforward for the determination of the
    Appellant's credibility as previously thought.

 7. In the circumstances where Counsel for  the  Appellant  expressed  some
    difficulty proceeding to deal  with  the  appeal  on  4  May  2017  (in
    particular on the Albanian Criminal Code point)  and  where  the  wider
    issue of the Appellant's credibility and risk on return to Albanian had
    to be determined (which was not as straightforward as anticipated),  it
    was agreed that this case was more suitable to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for fresh  determination  in  accordance  with  paragraph
    7.2(b) of the Senior President's Practice Statement 7.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions to the parties

 1. This appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  complete
    rehearing.  There are no preserved findings of fact.


 2. Any further evidence relied upon shall be  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than 14 days prior to
    the hearing of the remitted appeals.


 3. The Appellant is to file with the First-tier Tribunal  and  serve  upon
    the Respondent no later than 14  days  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
    remitted appeal a skeleton argument setting out relevant  issues,  with
    reference to evidence and case-law.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal may issue further directions as required.

Directions to administration

 1. The appeal is remitted and shall be heard at the Taylor  House  hearing
    centre on a date to be fixed by that centre.


 2. The remitted appeal is to be  listed  before  any  Judge  except  Judge
    Callender Smith.


 3. There is a time estimate of 3 hours for the hearing.

Signed   [pic]             Date     5th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

    ANNEX
[pic]
[pic]

[pic]

[pic]
