
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/04552/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                       |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 October 2017                     |      On 16 November 2017            |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Caseley, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 12 August 1985.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 June 2010 and claimed asylum on that
    day.  His claim was subsequently refused on 15 November  2013  and  his
    appeal dismissed on 10 January 2014.

 3. On 24 September 2014, further submissions were made on the  appellant's
    behalf.  These were refused on 31 July 2015, but following the  lodging
    of a judicial review claim, that  decision  was  withdrawn  and  a  new
    decision made rejecting the appellant's further submissions as a  fresh
    claim on 13 April 2016.  Following the lodging of  a  further  judicial
    review claim, that decision was  also  withdrawn  and  the  submissions
    reconsidered.  On 19 April 2017, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art  8
    of the ECHR.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Judge C J Woolley dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.  The judge accepted that the appellant would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution in his home area of Makhmur on the basis that he had worked
    for the coalition forces in Iraq.  However, the judge  found  that  the
    appellant could safely and reasonably internally relocate to  the  IKR.
    In reaching that conclusion, the judge applied and followed  the  Upper
    Tribunal's Country Guidance decision in  AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) ("AA").

 5. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying, in part, upon the subsequent decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 ("AA(Iraq)") which,  on  appeal
    from the Upper Tribunal, amended, in part, the country guidance set out
    in AA.

 6. Initially, permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    but, on 6 September 2017, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ  Pitt)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis that the judge had erred in
    law in finding that the appellant could relocate to the  IKR  following
    the Court of Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq).

 7. On 14 September 2017, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice  in
    which she contended that the judge had been correct to follow the Upper
    Tribunal's CG decision in AA.

 8. Thus, the appeal case came before us.

The Judge's Decision

 9. The judge made a  number  of  findings  favourable  to  the  appellant.
    First, he accepted that the appellant was at  risk  in  his  home  area
    because of his employment by the coalition forces.  Secondly, the judge
    found that in the appellant's home area there was an  Art  15(c)  risk.
    Thirdly, the judge found that the appellant  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected, as a Kurd, to relocate to Baghdad city.  However,  the  judge
    found that the appellant could safely and reasonably  relocate  to  the
    IKR.  His reasons are set out at paras 59-65 as follows:

         "Relocation to the IKR

         59.  AA (Iraq) went on to consider the reasonableness of relocation
             to the IKR. It is worth  noting  that  BA  (Baghdad)  did  not
             consider this point as it was narrowly focussed on returns  to
             Baghdad city. At paras 19 and 20 of the head  note  AA  (Iraq)
             considered the factors that should be considered in respect of
             a Kurd who did not originate from the IKR. Factors  identified
             as relevant include  an  assessment  of  the  practicality  of
             travel from Baghdad to the IKR, the likelihood of  the  person
             being able to  secure  employment,  and  the  availability  of
             assistance from family and friends in the IKR.

         60.  The possibility of relocation was considered by Judge  Osborne
             in his decision of 8th January 2014. As before, I take  these
             findings as a  starting  point.  Judge  Osborne  conducted  an
             assessment of relocation at paras 26 - 28  of  his  decision.
             Even though he relied on country guidance which has  now  been
             superseded he identified factors that  are  still  relevant -
             such as his Kurdish ethnicity; the fact that  the  lack  of  a
             sponsor  is  of  little   significance;   and   his   previous
             affiliation with the KRG through his language.  Judge  Osborne
             found that relocation to the IKR was reasonable and would  not
             be unduly harsh.

         61.  The evidence in the present appeal, and my  findings  on  this
             evidence, also throw up other relevant factors. I  have  noted
             that the KRG claims Makhmur as part of the  Erbil  Governorate
             and in  fact  provides  financial  assistance  to  that  area.
             Although the appellant is not from the IKR proper he  is  from
             the next best place as he comes from a region  which  the  KRG
             wants as its own and which it currently supports  financially.
             I find that the authorities in the IKR will be likely to  look
             more favourably therefore on the appellant as originating from
             this region. He is a Kurd from an area which, in the  eyes  of
             the KRG, belongs to  Erbil  and  I  find  that  therefore  his
             acceptance into the IKR will be facilitated.

         62.  In  contrast  to  Judge  Osborne  I  have  accepted  that  the
             appellant worked as a mechanic for the coalition forces.  This
             was over quite a considerable period and from  the  warmth  of
             the testimonials to him (and the fact that two Brigadiers  and
             a Major  were  prepared  to  write  in  support  of  a  junior
             civilian) I find that his work must have been highly valued. I
             find that a good mechanic will always be welcome in a  society
             such as the IKR that depends heavily on road transport for the
             functioning of its economy. He is likely, I find, to  be  able
             easily to gain employment in this field of work where  he  has
             already shown his skills.

         63.  It is true that he does not have any family  in  the  IKR  who
             might be able to support him. He was however in  contact  with
             many Kurds while working for the coalition forces and I do not
             accept that some of them are not  presently  in  the  IKR  and
             could not be contactable (via Facebook for  instance,  through
             which he  regained  contact  with  Major  A).  In  his  asylum
             interview he claims as a reason why he cannot go  to  the  IKR
             the problems he had with the H J family but I have found  that
             the land dispute is now far in the past and that  this  family
             have no interest in any ongoing feud with  the  appellant.  In
             fact I find that with the passage of time they are  likely  to
             have completely forgotten about him.

         64.  I have considered carefully the passages  in  the  appellant's
             bundle to which I was referred by Miss Caseley and have  noted
             above (and indeed have considered the whole of the appellant's
             bundle). I find however that despite all this evidence that it
             would be reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to the
             IKR. He will not be going there penniless but  will  have  the
             money from the resettlement grant available to him. With  this
             he will be able to afford the airfare  from  Baghdad  city  to
             Erbil and will not have to cross by any dangerous land routes.
             I note the county information  showing  the  frequent  flights
             between Baghdad International Airport and Erbil.  The  country
             information suggests that people arriving by air are  welcomed
             (as having more resources than those arriving  by  road).  The
             appellant with his skills as a mechanic will more particularly
             be welcomed as someone who will be able to contribute valuably
             to the economy. I note the requirements to register every  ten
             days but also remark that the country guidance does not reveal
             any undue effort to remove  those  who  have  overstayed.  The
             appellant as a Kurd from Makhmur, and working  in  a  valuable
             occupation,  will  I  find  be  under  no  pressure  from  any
             immigration requirements in the IKR.

         65.  I find that he can be reasonably expected to relocate  to  the
             IKR and that this relocation will not be unduly harsh for this
             particular appellant in his circumstances.   I  find  that  he
             will not be at risk of persecution or of serious harm  in  the
             IKR. I find therefore under Paragraph 339O that  he  does  not
             have a well founded fear of persecution, or of  serious  harm,
             in that part of Iraq."

Discussion

10. Ms Caseley's first, and main point, was that the judge fell into  error
    by applying the Upper Tribunal's Country Guidance ("CG") decision in AA
    when that decision, in some material respects, had been found to be  in
    error and had been amended by the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA(Iraq).   In
    particular, Ms Caseley placed  reliance  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    change in the guidance in relation to the relevance of a  Civil  Status
    Identity Document ("CSID") in determining whether  the  returnee  would
    have the ability to work  and  live  in  the  area  of  their  proposed
    relocation.  Ms Caseley submitted, correctly, that the Court of  Appeal
    had amended the guidance so that, in assessing an individual's case, it
    was necessary to decide whether he would have a CSID or would  be  able
    to obtain one within a reasonable period after  arrival  in  Iraq.   Ms
    Caseley placed reliance upon the amended paras  9-11  of  the  guidance
    which are as follows:

         "9.  Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A  CSID  is
             generally required in order for an Iraqi to  access  financial
             assistance  from  the  authorities;   employment;   education;
             housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family
             or other members  likely  to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
             support, P is in  general  likely  to  face  a  real  risk  of
             destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by  the  time  any
             funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to
             assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely
             that P will still have no CSID.

         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi
             passport (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does
             not have such a passport, P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID  may
             depend on whether P knows the page and volume  number  of  the
             book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
             ability to persuade the officials that P is the  person  named
             on the relevant page is likely to  depend  on  whether  P  has
             family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
             for P.

         11.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
             if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
             Governorate because it is  in  an  area  where  Article  15(c)
             serious harm is  occurring.  As  a  result  of  the  violence,
             alternative CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar and  Saluhaddin  have
             been established in Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does not
             demonstrate  that  the  "Central  Archive",  which  exists  in
             Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need
             of them.  There  is,  however,  a  National  Status  Court  in
             Baghdad, to which P could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of
             identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,  however,
             unclear."

11. As we understood Ms Caseley's point on the amended guidance, the  judge
    had failed to consider whether the appellant would be able to obtain  a
    CSID and its relevance to his relocation in the IKR.

12. For present purposes,  we  are  content  to  assume  that  the  amended
    guidance, if it had been in existence, would have been material to  his
    consideration of the issue of internal relocation to the IKR.

13. We do not, however, accept that the judge erred in law by applying  the
    Upper Tribunal's CG decision in AA.  At the date of the  hearing,  that
    decision was "authoritative" within  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Directions: Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal (10 February 2010  as  amended),  para  12.2  of
    which states:

         "A reported determination of the  Tribunal,  the  AIT  or  the  IAT
         bearing the letters 'CG'  shall  be  treated  as  an  authoritative
         finding  on  the  Country  Guidance   issue   identified   in   the
         determination, based upon the evidence before the  members  of  the
         Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT  that  determine  the  appeal.   As  a
         result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced by  any
         later 'CG' determination, or is inconsistent with  other  authority
         that is binding on the Tribunal, such a Country  Guidance  case  is
         authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:

         (a)  relates to the Country Guidance issue in question; and

         (b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence."

14. Then at para 12.4 the Practice Direction continues:

         "Because of the principle that like cases should be treated in like
         manner, any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently  applicable
         Country Guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the  case
         in question is likely to be regarded as grounds for an appeal on  a
         point of law."

15. In other words, the failure to follow a relevant CG decision is  likely
    to be an error of law.  That has been recognised by the Court of Appeal
    in a number of decisions (e.g. R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982  and
    SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940).  The view has been expressed  by
    the Court of Appeal that a CG decision of the Upper Tribunal is no less
    authoritative even if permission to appeal  has  been  granted  to  the
    Court of Appeal (see, SG (Iraq)).  However, a Tribunal will not err  in
    law by a failure to follow a Country Guidance decision that  post-dates
    the decision under challenge (see, AK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1117  and
    SA (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 683).

16. In SA (Sri Lanka), the Court of Appeal declined to find that the  Upper
    Tribunal had erred in law by applying the relevant CG decision  at  the
    time of  its  decision,  despite  a  change  in  the  country  guidance
    subsequently.  At [13], Patten LJ (with whom Laws and Moses LJJ agreed)
    said this:

         "It is therefore difficult to see how the  decision  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal in this case which was based on  a  consideration  of  the
         then most recent Country Guidance contained in TK, coupled with the
         case-specific evidence produced by  SA  himself,  can  be  said  to
         contain an error of law by reason of it not having  considered  the
         then unpublished material now set out in the  decision  of  GJ.   A
         fact-finding Tribunal may, of course, commit an error of law if  it
         bases a particular finding on no evidence or makes an assessment of
         the issue it has to decide which is contrary to the  only  possible
         conclusion which could be reasonably reached on the  basis  of  the
         admissible evidence ... that the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
         this case was clearly open to it on the factual  material  that  it
         had to consider and it is difficult to see how the  Upper  Tribunal
         can be said to have  fallen  into  error  by  failing  to  consider
         material that was not before it and which may in part relate  to  a
         state of affairs that post-dates its decision.  This is not a  case
         where there has been a material but subsequent change  in  the  law
         with the result that the decision of the lower Tribunal can now  be
         seen to have proceeded on the basis of  a  misdirection.   I  would
         therefore dismiss the appeal on the basis that there  has  been  no
         error of law."

17. The point being made is clear: a change in country guidance  subsequent
    to a Tribunal's decision cannot establish an error of  law  if  it  has
    properly applied the  extant  Country  Guidance  at  the  date  of  its
    decision.  The CG decision is, a "factual precedent" (see S and another
    v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 539 at [28]) which  -  to  the  extent  we  have
    indicated - remains authoritative  in  other  cases  raising  the  same
    factual issue about the particular country until it is changed. That is
    clearly authoritatively determined by the Court of Appeal in the  cases
    we have cited.  The position is no different if  the  country  guidance
    changes  (or  it  ceases  to  exist)  because  the  Court   of   Appeal
    subsequently overturns or, as here on appeal,  'amends'  the  guidance.
    The subsequent change in the country guidance is properly a matter  for
    further submissions and the  contention  that,  based  upon  the  "new"
    country guidance, the individual is making a fresh claim.

18. The country guidance in effect at the time of Judge Woolley's  decision
    was that set out in the Upper Tribunal's decision in AA.  He applied it
    and he was right to do so.  The subsequent change in that guidance does
    not show that he erred in law.  Indeed, Judge Woolley would have  erred
    in law if he had not followed AA as it was not suggested  to  him  that
    other evidence provided good reasons to depart from it.

19. For those reasons, therefore, we reject Ms Caseley's main submission.

20. The remainder of Ms Caseley's submissions focused on  specific  aspects
    of Judge Woolley's reasoning in paras 59-65 (which we set out above).

21. First, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge had been wrong in  paras  61
    and 64 to find that the appellant would be accepted into the  IKR  even
    though he came from an area, outside the IKR,  but  which  the  Kurdish
    authorities considered belonged to them.  Further, he had been wrong to
    find in para 64 that, as a Kurd, he would be welcomed  as  someone  who
    could contribute to the economy.

22. Ms Caseley placed reliance upon the  respondent's  Country  Information
    Guidance, Iraq: Return/Internal Relocation (August 2016).   She  relied
    on para 2.2.10 where it is stated:

         "In general, it may be possible for Kurds who do not originate from
         the KRI to relocate to  the  region.   Information  suggested  that
         ethnic Kurds are free to enter the KRI, although other sources  say
         this may depend on certain circumstances".

23. Further, she relied on para 8.1.1 which states that:

         "A letter from the British Embassy in  Baghdad,  dated  4  December
         2014, noted that for those arriving by air at Erbil or  Sulamaniyah
         airports were directed to report to the nearest Asayish  office  to
         regularise their stay. The letter noted: 'it is  worth  reiterating
         the point that admission does remain at the discretion  of  Kurdish
         immigration and border officials and  that  temporary  restrictions
         can be imposed and withdrawn without notice".

24. Finally, she relied on para 8.1.5 which provides:

         "Some of these sources, however, said that if an Iraqi citizen does
         not originate from KRI, the person must travel onwards to the  area
         he or she is originally from when arriving through  an  airport  in
         KRI."

25. Ms Caseley accepted that these matters were not raised in her  skeleton
    argument but she had raised them in her oral submissions.

26. It is clear to us that the judge had well in mind the country  guidance
    dealing  with  internal  relocation  to  the  IKR  and   Ms   Caseley's
    submissions in that regard is set out at para 21 of his decision.   The
    relevant guidance is found at paras 19-20 of the headnote in  AA  which
    was left intact by the Court of Appeal and is in the following terms:

         "19. A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
             entry for 10 days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can
             remain for longer, although K will need to register  with  the
             authorities and provide details of the employer. There  is  no
             evidence that the IKR authorities  pro-actively  remove  Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.

         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
             to avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that  city  by
             travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and  is  likely
             to involve an assessment of (a)  the  practicality  of  travel
             from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil  by  air);  (b)  the
             likelihood of K's securing employment in the IKR; and (c)  the
             availability of assistance from  family  and  friends  in  the
             IKR."

27. The CIG document does not, in  our  judgment,  materially  add  to  the
    relevant factors which the judge considered in the light of AA.  We see
    no basis upon which it can be said that the judge failed adequately  to
    consider whether the appellant would  be  able  to  enter,  and  remain
    within, the IKR in order to internally relocate.

28. Secondly, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge had erred by  failing  to
    give reasons why the appellant would be able to  secure  employment  in
    the IKR notwithstanding the economic situation in the IKR.   The  point
    is, however, unsustainable.  Again,  the  judge  clearly,  consistently
    with the country  guidance,  considered  in  determining  the  internal
    relocation issue the importance of whether the appellant would be  able
    to  obtain  employment.   The  judge  noted  the  appellant's  previous
    experience as a "good mechanic" and was entitled  to  find  that  those
    skills would assist him in obtaining employment as someone who would be
    able to "contribute valuably to the economy".   That  finding  was  not
    contradicted by any specific evidence and  was  properly  open  to  the
    judge rationally to conclude.

29. Finally, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge had failed to explain  why
    the appellant would be  able  to  obtain  assistance  from  family  and
    friends in the IKR.  As the judge explained in para 63 of his decision,
    whilst the appellant had no family in the  IKR,  he  had  a  number  of
    contacts amongst Kurds who had been working for the  coalition  forces.
    The judge also noted that the claimed family feud with  another  family
    was "far in the past" and was not "ongoing".  The issue of support from
    family and friends was only "one" of the factors that the judge had  to
    take into account in assessing, in  accordance  with  AA,  whether  the
    appellant could reasonably relocate to the IKR.  The  judge's  findings
    in para 66 were properly open to him  on  the  evidence  and  were  not
    irrational.  However, in any event, the judge, in  effect,  found  that
    the appellant would be likely to find employment and therefore be in  a
    position to support himself without assistance.

30. For these reasons, we reject Ms Caseley's submissions (in ground  2,  3
    and 4) that the  judge's  factual  finding  that  the  appellant  could
    reasonably be expected to relocate to the IKR was legally flawed.

Decision

31. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds did not involve the making of  an
    error of law.  That decision stands.

32. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            15 November 2017



