
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04487/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th April 2018                            |On 23rd April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     rkk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk of Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge  Swinnerton  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the  FTT)  promulgated  on  4th  July  2017.   The
    Appellant is a female citizen of the DRC born 23rd  August  1993.   She
    has a son born in the UK on 24th June 2015 who is a  dependant  in  her
    appeal.

 2. In brief the Appellant's immigration history is that she left  the  DRC
    on 24th April 2015 and travelled to the  UK  using  a  French  passport
    provided by an agent. She entered the UK on 24th April 2015 posing as a
    French national and claimed asylum on 27th April 2015.

 3. The Appellant claimed international protection  on  the  basis  of  her
    imputed political opinion, claiming  that  the  DRC  authorities  would
    regard her as a political opponent.  The asylum and human rights  claim
    was refused on 20th April 2016.  The appeal was  heard  on  26th  April
    2017 and dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The FTT found that the Appellant had  given  a  credible  account,  and
    accepted that she feared that she would suffer persecution if  returned
    to the DRC, but found that her fear was not well-founded  and  she  had
    not proved she  would  be  unable  to  seek  protection  from  the  DRC
    authorities.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The Appellant's claim is summarised in the grounds  seeking  permission
    to appeal.  It was contended that the Appellant and  her  husband  were
    politically active against the DRC government with her husband being  a
    member of the ACAJ Party and they distributed leaflets and  attended  a
    demonstration.  The Appellant's husband was arrested and detained and a
    few days later the Appellant was also arrested and detained  for  three
    months.  While in detention she suffered repeated  sexual  abuse.   She
    escaped by payment  of  a  bribe  and  fled  the  DRC.   Her  husband's
    whereabouts remain unknown and the Appellant has been unable to contact
    any family in the DRC.

 6. Included in the grounds seeking permission to appeal are  the  findings
    made by the  FTT  to  the  effect  that  the  FTT  found  credible  the
    Appellant's account  of  distribution  of  anti-government  literature,
    attendance at an  anti-government  demonstration,  the  fact  that  her
    husband had been arrested  and  detained  as  had  the  Appellant,  the
    Appellant was detained for three months  and  physically  and  sexually
    abused as evidenced by scarring  and  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD,  and  the
    Appellant was released after payment of a bribe.

 7. It was contended that the FTT had erred in  law,  having  accepted  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account, and objective evidence  of  how
    the authorities in the DRC  deal  with  political  opposition,  by  not
    applying the lower standard of proof and finding that the Appellant had
    not demonstrated to the required standard that she has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution.  It was further contended that the  FTT  erred  by
    accepting that the Appellant was subjected to persecution  by  the  DRC
    authorities, but finding that the Appellant had not  demonstrated  that
    she was unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to  avail  herself  of
    the protection of the authorities.  It was further contended  that  the
    FTT had erred by having found the Appellant to  have  been  politically
    involved, by making an inconsistent finding  at  paragraph  44  to  the
    effect that the Appellant had not been active in politics either in the
    DRC or UK.  It was further contended that the FTT erred at paragraph 44
    by finding that the Appellant travelled  to  the  airport  in  the  DRC
    without difficulty, but failed to have regard to the fact that she  was
    travelling on a false passport provided by an agent.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
    who found in particular, that the FTT had  arguably  erred  in  law  by
    having expressly accepted the credibility of the Appellant's  claim  to
    have suffered past persecution, by failing to  apply  the  judgment  in
    Demirkaya [1999] EWCA Civ 1654 at [20] - [22].

Error of Law

 9. On 13th December 2017 I heard submissions from both parties in relation
    to error of law.  The Respondent contended that there was  no  material
    error.  The Appellant relied upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.

10. I found that there was a material error of law in the FTT decision  and
    set that decision aside but preserved some findings which had not  been
    the  subject  of  challenge.   Full  details  of  the  application  for
    permission, the grant of  permission,  the  submissions  made  by  both
    parties, and my conclusions are contained in my error of  law  decision
    and directions promulgated on 22nd December  2017.   I  set  out  below
    paragraphs 17 - 22 which contain my conclusions and reasons for setting
    aside the FTT decision:

         "17. In my view the FTT erred  in  law  by  failing  to  adequately
             consider the principles in Demirkaya which are now set out  in
             paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules  which  for  ease  of
             reference I set out below;

                  'The fact that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
                  persecution or serious harm, or to direct threats of  such
                  persecution or such harm, will be regarded  as  a  serious
                  indication  of   the   person's   well-founded   fear   of
                  persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless
                  there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution
                  or serious harm will not be repeated.'

         18.  The FTT does not adequately explain what good reasons exist to
             indicate  that  persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not   be
             repeated.

         19.  At paragraph 33 the FTT makes the following findings;

                  'In this case the issue  was  credibility.   If  what  the
                  Appellant claims is established to the lower  standard  of
                  proof then she will be at risk of serious harm in DRC  and
                  the question is then,  whether  she  can  safely  relocate
                  within that country and whether it would  be  unreasonably
                  harsh to expect her to do so.'

         20.  The FTT found the Appellant to be credible.  At  paragraph  34
             the  FTT  found  that  the  Appellant  had  distributed  anti-
             government leaflets,  attended  at  a  demonstration  on  19th
             January  2005,  and  had  subsequently  been  imprisoned   and
             subjected to physical and sexual abuse.  At paragraph  36  the
             FTT found that she was released after payment of a  bribe,  as
             an army officer was sympathetic to her because they were  from
             the same tribe.  Having stated in paragraph  33  that  if  the
             Appellant is credible she would be at serious  risk  of  harm,
             the  FTT  does  not  adequately  explain,  having  found   the
             Appellant to be credible, why she would  not  be  at  risk  of
             serious harm.

         21.  At paragraph 42  the  FTT  finds  that  the  Appellant  has  a
             subjective fear of state persecution and  finds  she  has  not
             proved that  she  would  be  unable  or  owing  to  such  fear
             unwilling to avail herself of state protection.  I  find  that
             inadequate reasons have been  given  for  finding  that  there
             would be state protection available to  the  Appellant,  given
             the FTT findings she was arrested by the authorities, detained
             for three months and physically and sexually abused throughout
             the detention.  For the above reasons,  I  conclude  that  the
             decision of the FTT does contain a material error of  law  and
             must be set aside.   The  Respondent  did  not  challenge  the
             credibility findings made  by  the  FTT  and  therefore  those
             findings are preserved.  Preserved findings are to be found at
             paragraphs 34-41.

         22.  There will be a further hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  to
             consider, taking into account the preserved findings,  whether
             the Appellant would be at risk if returned to the DRC."

Re-making the Decision

11. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Fraczyk confirmed that no further
    evidence would be called and I therefore proceeded to hear  submissions
    from both representatives.

12. On behalf of the Respondent Mrs Aboni relied upon the refusal  decision
    dated 20th  April  2016  although  it  was  accepted  that  there  were
    preserved findings  made  by  the  FTT.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had not established that she would be of adverse interest  to
    the authorities in the DRC, and the Appellant had not proved  that  she
    fell within the risk categories set out in BM  and  Others  (returnees-
    criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC).

13. Mrs Aboni submitted that the Appellant was not  subject  to  an  arrest
    warrant in the DRC or any court proceedings.  There was  no  reason  to
    believe she would be at risk because of her husband.  I  was  asked  to
    dismiss the appeal.

14. Mr Fraczyk relied upon his skeleton argument dated 15th April 2018.  In
    brief summary it was submitted that the principle in Demirkaya  applies
    in  the  Appellant's  favour.   Reliance  was  also  placed  upon   the
    Respondent's latest CPIN on  political  opposition  in  the  DRC  which
    although stating that being  a  rank  and  file  opponent  of  the  DRC
    government would not generally put  an  individual  at  risk,  a  fact-
    sensitive approach is required and consideration must  be  given  to  a
    person's profile and activities.  It was  submitted  that  taking  into
    account the Appellant's previous detention and rape while in detention,
    and the fact that she had only been released after payment of a  bribe,
    meant that  she  would  at  risk  if  returned.   The  Appellant  is  a
    vulnerable individual suffering from PTSD.  She has had no contact with
    her husband since 2015.

15. Reliance was also placed upon BM and  Others  in  particular  paragraph
    88(iv) which confirms  that  individuals  who  have  unexecuted  prison
    sentences in the DRC, or are alleged to have committed  document  fraud
    offences when departing the DRC, would be at risk of  imprisonment  for
    lengthy periods and hence treatment proscribed by Article 3 of the 1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. The Appellant would be entitled to asylum if she proves she has a well-
    founded fear of persecution by  reason  of  her  imputed  or  political
    opinion, and  she  is  unable  or  owing  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution unwilling  to  avail  herself  of  the  protection  of  the
    authorities in the DRC.

18. The Appellant also relies upon Article 3 of  the  1950  Convention  and
    must therefore prove that there are substantial grounds  for  believing
    that returning her to the DRC would create a real risk that  she  would
    be  subjected  to  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading   treatment   or
    punishment.

19. In relation to risk on return the burden of proof is on  the  Appellant
    and can be described as a reasonable degree of likelihood  which  is  a
    lower standard than  the  normal  civil  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

20. It is appropriate at this point to set out the  preserved  findings  of
    the FTT at paragraphs 34-41;

         "34. The Appellant is a national of DRC.  This is accepted  by  the
             Respondent.  She is alone in the UK with her child and has  no
             family in this country.  Taking her evidence in the round, and
             also taking account of the Country Information I  decided  her
             account of events in DRC including about her  distribution  of
             anti-government leaflets, attendance  at  a  demonstration  on
             19th January 2015 and her subsequent imprisonment and physical
             and sexual abuse is credible.  I considered that her  evidence
             including in the asylum interview, in  her  written  statement
             and at the Tribunal has remained consistent overall.   I  also
             decided that her detailed account of events  in  DRC  and  the
             sexual and physical abuse  she  was  subjected  to  whilst  in
             captivity is consistent with the medical  evidence  about  her
             mental health condition as included in her GP records.   Also,
             the history of claimed events that she gave to the doctor  who
             examined her, Dr  Kiernan  is  consistent  with  her  evidence
             including in the asylum interview.

         35.  I am aware that the report from the medical  practitioner,  Dr
             Kiernan, which relates to both the  Appellant's  physical  and
             mental health contains  the  doctor's  clinical  findings  and
             opinion.  That opinion being that some of the scarring on  the
             Appellant's body is  consistent  with  her  account  of  being
             pushed against a door  whilst  detained.   I  also  noted  the
             doctor's  opinion  about   the   Appellant's   mental   health
             condition, its effect on her currently, and its  being  caused
             by her being sexually abused and raped by her captors.   I  am
             aware that the doctor is expressing an opinion, based  on  her
             medical examination of the Appellant  and  assessment.   I  am
             fully aware that it is for me, not  the  doctor  to  make  any
             findings in this  case.   I  was  persuaded  by  the  doctor's
             opinion.   Her  report  is   thorough   and   detailed.    Her
             conclusions are consistent with the Appellant's own  evidence,
             her medical history in the UK  and  treatment  including,  the
             evidence in the Appellant's GP records and the fact  that  she
             has been referred for further treatment  for  PTSD  which,  is
             awaited.

         36.  I also found the Appellant's claims that she was released from
             captivity after a bribe was paid  to  Captain  Cherry  by  her
             uncle  to  be  plausible  taking  into  account  the   country
             information about DRC.  Also  plausible  was  her  claim  that
             Captain Cherry became sympathetic towards her when he realised
             that they were from the same tribe.

         37.  Although not a member of a political  group  herself,  at  the
             request of her husband, a member of the AJAC she gave out anti-
             government leaflets in January 2015 because she felt  strongly
             about the proposed changes to the country's constitution.   It
             is  for  that  reason  that  she  also  attended  the   public
             demonstration  on  19th  January  2015   in   Kinshasa.    Her
             explanation that she did so because she was aggrieved  because
             of the implications of this one particular issue is plausible.

         38.  Her evidence that both the  Appellant  and  her  husband  were
             arrested after the demonstration is also consistent  with  the
             country information.  This  includes  the  report  from  Human
             Rights Watch, World Report 2017: Democratic Republic of Congo,
             12th January 2017.   This  indicates  that  in  DRC  there  is
             political violence and  government  repression  (which  became
             more intense in 2016 after President Kabila clung  to  power).
             The latter occurring after the Appellant had left DRC.

         39.  The report indicates that in DRC the security services seek to
             prevent demonstrations and that there are unlawful  detentions
             by the Congolese army including of children.  During the  week
             of December 19th, 2015, heavy fighting broke  out  in  various
             parts of DRC.  This is consistent with the Appellant's account
             of events.

         40.  I decided that the Appellant's claims that she was detained by
             government  forces  for   approximately   three   months   and
             physically abused (i.e. she was scarred  after  being  injured
             when pushed against some metal door whilst in  detention)  and
             also  sexually  abused  to  be  consistent  with  the  country
             information.

         41.  I took the view that the Appellant's failure to  claim  asylum
             when she arrived at Heathrow Airport  with  the  intention  of
             coming to the UK to do so does affect  her  credibility  under
             section 8 but not so as to materially undermine  her  evidence
             about events in DRC when the evidence is taken in the  round."



21. In considering this appeal, I do take into  account  the  principle  in
    Demirkaya and paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules.   I  also  take
    into account the lower standard of proof.

22. I find that the Appellant would be at risk if returned.  I do not  find
    that there are good  reasons  to  consider  that  the  persecution  and
    serious harm previously encountered  by  the  Appellant  would  not  be
    repeated.  It is not the case that the Appellant has  been  politically
    active in the UK.  She would in my view be questioned when she returned
    to the DRC.  She would not be at risk simply because she  is  a  failed
    asylum seeker.  I find that she would be at risk if she disclosed  when
    questioned, and she cannot be expected to lie, that she had  previously
    been detained and released following payment  of  a  bribe.   Paragraph
    88(iv) of BM and Others DRC  CG  sets  out  the  following  as  country
    guidance;

         (iv) The DRC authorities have  an  interest  in  certain  types  of
             convicted  or  suspected  offenders;  namely  those  who  have
             unexecuted prison sentences in DRC or in respect of whom there
             are unexecuted arrested warrants or who  supposedly  committed
             an offence, such as document fraud when departing  DRC.   Such
             persons are at risk of imprisonment for lengthy  periods  and,
             hence, treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.

23. The Appellant left  DRC  using  a  false  passport,  which  amounts  to
    document fraud.  There is a risk that she would be regarded  as  having
    an unexecuted prison sentence in that she was released after payment of
    a bribe.  The Appellant is  not  a  leader  or  a  spokesperson  of  an
    opposition party to the authorities in DRC.  It is however  made  clear
    in BM and Others that each case is fact-sensitive, and I must therefore
    take into account the previous detention of the Appellant and the  rape
    and ill-treatment she suffered while in detention.  Taken together with
    the fact that she was released after payment of a bribe, and  left  the
    DRC using false documents,  I  find  that  she  would  be  at  risk  of
    detention if she returned to the DRC, and  she  would  be  at  risk  of
    treatment proscribed  by  Article  3,  taking  into  account  that  she
    previously suffered such treatment.

24. I therefore conclude that the Appellant has proved that she has a well-
    founded fear of persecution on  the  basis  of  her  imputed  political
    opinion.  She would not be able to seek protection from the authorities
    as her fear is of the authorities.  I do not find  that  there  is  any
    reasonable  internal  relocation  option  within  the   DRC,   as   the
    Appellant's fear is of the authorities.

25. I therefore conclude that the Appellant  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of
    asylum, and her appeal also falls to be allowed pursuant to  Article  3
    of the 1950 Convention.

26. In addition I find that the appeal falls to be allowed  with  reference
    to Article 8.  I find that the Appellant satisfies the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in that there are very significant obstacles to
    her integration into the DRC.  I also take into account that she has  a
    diagnosis of PTSD.  I have considered section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.  The Appellant  has  not
    demonstrated that she can speak English  and  she  is  not  financially
    independent.  Little weight should be given to a private life formed by
    a person who is in the UK unlawfully or with a  precarious  immigration
    status.

27.  The  above  considerations   do   not   assist   the   Appellant   but
    notwithstanding those considerations, the fact that  she  would  be  at
    risk if returned  to  the  DRC,  and  the  fact  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration, mean that I  conclude  that
    to expect her to establish a private and family life in the  DRC  would
    be disproportionate, and therefore removal from  the  UK  would  breach
    Article 8.  The best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  infant  son  are
    considered as a primary consideration.  Because of  his  age  his  best
    interests are to remain with his mother, and  given  the  risk  to  his
    mother, it would not be in his best interest to be removed to the DRC.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law
and was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision as follows.

The appeal is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds with  reference  to
Articles 3 and 8.  Because the Appellant is entitled to asylum  she  is  not
entitled to humanitarian protection.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 17th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 17th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
