
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: PA/04956/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2017                            |On 19 December 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     S a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rendle, instructed by Wai Leung Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant,  SA,  was  born  in  1999  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M R Oliver)
    against a decision of the respondent dated  16  May  2017  refusing  to
    grant him asylum.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 25 July 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In granting permission, Judge Taylor, wrote:

         The renewed grounds argue with merit that the  Immigration  Judge's
         determination is not adequately reasoned, both in relation  to  his
         assessment of the credibility of  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
         relevance  of  the  brother's  claim  and  the  issue  of  internal
         relocation to Kabul bearing in mind that the appellant is a minor.

 3. Before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Miss  Fijiwala,  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State, agreed that the judge had erred in law in  both  of
    the respects indicated by Judge Taylor. She did  not  seek  to  support
    Judge Oliver's decision.  In  the  circumstances,  I  set  aside  Judge
    Oliver's decision.  None of the findings of fact  shall  stand.   There
    needs to be a new fact-finding exercise which is  better  conducted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is now remitted.



Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  25
    July 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The
    appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  M  R  Oliver)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 18 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

