
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/04175/2016
     PA/05408/2016
     PA/05410/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8th May 2017                       |On 14 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     s s
                                     m m
                                     e m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss A Bhachu, Counsel instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Gambia.   The  first  Appellant  was
    born on [ ] 1985 and is the mother of the remaining two Appellants born
    on [ ] 2007 and [ ] 2009 respectively.  The Appellants  have  something
    of an immigration history.  Suffice it to say that the first and second
    Appellants first came to the United Kingdom on 17th December 2008  when
    they were  given  leave  to  enter  as  the  dependants  of  the  first
    Appellant's husband, a Tier 1 (Student) Migrant, until 8th April  2013.
    On 28th March 2013, after the birth  of  the  third  Appellant  in  the
    United Kingdom, they all applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  same
    capacity which  after  a  successful  appeal  was  granted  until  15th
    December  2017.   However,  following  the  separation  of  the   first
    Appellant and her husband,  on  12th  March  2015  all  the  Appellants
    applied for asylum.  Those applications were refused  for  the  reasons
    given in the Respondent's letter of 14th April  2016.   The  Appellants
    appealed, and their appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Row
    (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 26th October 2016.  He decided  to
    dismiss the appeals for the reasons given in his  Decision  dated  29th
    October 2016.  The Appellants sought leave to appeal that decision, and
    on 29th November 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contain an error on  a
    point of law so that it should be set aside.  The Judge  dismissed  the
    appeals on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds  because  he  was
    not satisfied that  the  Appellants  were  at  risk  on  return.   That
    decision has not  been  contested  in  this  appeal.   The  Judge  also
    dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  particular
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 and Appendix R-LTRP of Appendix FM of HC 395
    because he found that there were no  significant  difficulties  to  the
    first Appellant integrating on return to Gambia and that it was in  the
    best interests of and reasonable to expect the remaining Appellants  to
    accompany their mother there.  Finally, the Judge dismissed the  appeal
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  because
    although he was satisfied that the Appellants had a family and  private
    life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  any  interference  thereto  would   be
    proportionate.

 3. At the hearing before me, Miss Bhachu referred to her Skeleton Argument
    and submitted that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in  coming  to  these
    conclusions as the Judge had erroneously not  accepted  the  report  of
    Ticky Monekosso as being that of an expert and had  therefore  attached
    no weight to his report.  Further, the Judge had  failed  to  make  his
    decision on reasonableness  in  accordance  with  the  decision  in  MA
    (Pakistan) v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.   The  Appellants,  and  in
    particular the third  Appellant,  had  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    and therefore there was no need to consider the other  requirements  of
    Section 117B.  Further, the Judge had made no findings as to the nature
    of the private life of the Appellants, particularly that of  the  third
    Appellant who was autistic.  The Judge had failed to  engage  with  the
    contents of the letters concerning the third Appellant nor of the first
    Appellant's statement.  The Judge had failed to consider  properly  the
    disruption to the life of the third Appellant of his removal  from  the
    UK.  The Judge had come to an unbalanced and unsubstantiated decision.

 4. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there were no such  material  errors  of  law.   The  Judge  had  given
    adequate reasons for his  decision  to  attach  little  weight  to  the
    purported expert report at paragraphs 40 and 41 of  the  Decision.   It
    was up to the Judge to decide what weight to attach to  this  evidence.
    As regards the issue of reasonableness, the Judge  had  considered  all
    the relevant evidence in the round and  in  particular  the  length  of
    residence of the second and third Appellants in the United Kingdom.  He
    had made findings as to the impact upon them  of  their  removal.   The
    Judge had accepted the evidence of the third Appellant's GP as  to  the
    extent of his autism.  This evidence and that of the school revealed no
    significant problems.   The  third  Appellant  only  required  teaching
    assistance which was available in Gambia.

 5. I find no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  Judge  which
    therefore I do not set aside.  As regards paragraph 276ADE and Appendix
    FM, the Judge correctly found that it was in the best interests of  the
    minor Appellants that they remain with their mother.  It was  only  the
    youngest Appellant who had any sort of medical problem.  The Judge  was
    satisfied that that problem could be  handled  effectively  in  Gambia.
    The Judge was also satisfied that all the Appellants would  not  be  at
    risk of harm on return to Gambia, and the  Judge  correctly  considered
    all of the factors set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  The  Judge
    carried out a thorough analysis  of  the  Appellants'  situations  from
    paragraphs 50 to 64 inclusive of the Decision and came to a  conclusion
    which was open to him on the evidence before him and which he explained
    satisfactorily.  The Judge's decision that it would be  reasonable  for
    all of the Appellants to return together to Gambia cannot  be  faulted.
    The Judge made no error  in  her  treatment  of  the  report  of  Ticky
    Monekosso.  The Judge considered this person's curriculum vitae and  it
    was open to the Judge to be satisfied that the author of the report was
    not to be treated as an expert.  In any  event  at  the  conclusion  of
    paragraph  41  of  the  Decision  the  Judge  described  some  of   the
    conclusions of this evidence as not controversial.  The  Judge  engaged
    with and dealt  with  all  of  the  relevant  evidence  in  the  appeal
    including the statement of the first Appellant and  the  correspondence
    from the third Appellant's school which is referred to at paragraph  37
    of the Decision.  It was open to the Judge to prefer  the  evidence  of
    the third Appellant's GP.

 6. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of  the  Judge
    and I dismiss the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of all  the
Appellants did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside those decisions.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons as those given by the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date   13th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

