

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/04008/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                         |
|On 14 March 2018                      |         On 09 April 2018           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                             MR SALWAN SULAIMAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Bart-Stewart dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He is a Sunni from Baghdad.
      Before leaving Iraq in 2015 he worked as a drummer in a night club.
      He claimed he left because he feared the Shia militia which killed his
      father because his father had been a member of the Ba'ath Party.  The
      militia targeted the appellant not only because of his father but also
      because the appellant was Sunni and a drummer.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not find the appellant's
      evidence credible.  The appellant was not of interest to the
      authorities in Iraq when he left and he would not be of interest on
      return.  There were no other grounds on which his appeal would
      succeed.

   4. It is pointed out in the grant of permission to appeal by the Upper
      Tribunal that the appellant did not in the grounds challenge the
      rejection of his protection claim.  The challenge was brought under
      Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and Article 8 of the
      Human Rights Convention.  According to the grant of permission, claims
      under each of these provisions were dismissed by the Judge of the
      First-tier tribunal in very brief terms and arguable the judge's
      reasoning was inadequate.


Submissions
   5. At the hearing before me, Mr Caskie began by acknowledging an error in
      the application for permission to appeal, in which it was stated that
      the appellant was from Mosul.  He was in fact from Baghdad.  He had
      family support there and would be able to access a CSID(Civil Status
      Identity Document), in accordance with the guidance in AA (Iraq)
      [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  The appellant was an Arabic speaker and not a
      member of a minority group.  Accordingly the appellant was no longer
      seeking to rely on Article 15(c).  In addition, there was no challenge
      to the judge's adverse credibility finding.


   6. Mr Caskie continued that the challenge was to the judge's conclusion
      at paragraph 35 of the decision on respect for the appellant's private
      life.  Mr Caskie submitted that in terms of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of
      the Immigration Rules there were very significant obstacles to the
      appellant's integration into Iraq.  There was a lot of evidence before
      the judge in relation to this.  The appellant was seventeen and a half
      years old when he arrived in the UK.  He had been here for two and a
      half years.  Baghdad was now a very different city, with up to half a
      million internally displaced persons (IDPs) having arrived there.  Mr
      Caskie questioned whether the appellant would be able to make a life
      for himself in Baghdad.  Would he, for example, be able to find
      employment there, considering he has no skills?  The reasoning in
      paragraph 35 of the decision was inadequate.

   7. For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien contended it was necessary to look at
      the arguments put before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal did not go into great detail on conditions in
      Baghdad but there was an issue of materiality.  Mrs O'Brien referred
      to the appellant's skeleton argument.  Reliance was only now being
      placed on paragraph 276ADE after the appellant had been completely
      disbelieved.  The appellant would have family support in Baghdad and
      access to a CSID.  To succeed under paragraph 276ADE would require
      very specific circumstances relating to the appellant as well as
      reliance on the background evidence.

   8. In response Mr Caskie submitted that the relevant issues were raised
      in the skeleton argument.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did
      not make a record of submissions in the decision.  There had been no
      rule 24 notice from the respondent and it was not open to the
      respondent to say the point had not been argued.

   9. Mr Caskie continued that so far as the appellant's circumstances and
      the country information were concerned, the appellant had no skills
      and was poorly educated.  He referred to a March 2017 Note by the Home
      Office on the security and humanitarian situation in Iraq.  Mr Caskie
      was not able to say that this report was before the First-tier
      Tribunal.  The purpose of referring to the March 2017 Note was to
      assist the Upper Tribunal by gathering together the information.
      There was no analysis by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal of the
      material which had been before the Tribunal.  There was no analysis of
      the obstacles to integration.  Mr Caskie continued by saying that the
      situation in Iraq was dynamic.  There might be a further flashpoint
      with Isis.  There was a need for up-to-date evidence on the current
      situation and, in particular, on unskilled men and their ability to
      integrate.


   Discussion
  10. I was not referred to any authorities on the interpretation of
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and, in particular, the meaning of the term
      "very significant obstacles" to integration.  Paragraph 276 ADE is
      intended to give effect to the right to respect for private life in
      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  Having regard to the nature
      of the human rights protected under the Convention, it seems to me
      that the term "very significant obstacles" might apply to factors such
      as discrimination or destitution, and disability or linguistic ability
      might also be relevant, but it would be unlikely to apply to issues of
      unemployment or education where these did not arise from complete
      destitution.


  11. On the facts found in this appeal, the appellant would not be
      returning to a position of destitution.  He would have family support
      and access to a CSID.  He might face a period of unemployment and he
      might have to improve his skills, using whatever means might be
      available, but difficulties like these are not unusual aspects of
      migration and do not amount to very significant obstacles to
      integration, even having regard to the very difficult circumstances
      currently prevailing in Baghdad.

  12. For these reasons there was no prospect of the appellant succeeding in
      reliance on paragraph 276ADE.  Whether or not it was argued, there was
      no need for the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to devote detailed or
      extensive reasoning to this point.  There is no error of law in the
      decision.


Conclusions
  13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.


  14. The decision is not set aside.
  15. The decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and I see no reason of substance for
doing so.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
           4th April 2018

































