
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04589/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 23 June 2020                      |On 14th July 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 S S (iraq)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shahnawaz Khan of Counsel, instructed by Leonard
                    Cannings Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of S S who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

                         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS [A]

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who  appealed  successfully  against
    the decision of the First-tier Judge  Raymond,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision on 21 March 2019 by the respondent to  refuse  him
    refugee protection, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The hearing of this appeal took place by telephone over  BTMeetMe.   Mr
    Khan, Mr Melvin, and the appellant  himself,  were  all  present.   All
    parties confirmed that they were in a private and quiet space and  that
    no unauthorised persons were present.

 3. I explained to the parties, including to the appellant, that it  is  an
    offence under sections 85B and 85C of the Courts Act 2003,  as  amended
    by the Coronavirus Act 2020, for any  party  to  make  an  unauthorised
    recording of the hearing and all confirmed that  they  understood  this
    requirement. The Upper Tribunal recorded the hearing for the record.

 4. There were no technical  difficulties  during  the  hearing  and  I  am
    satisfied that this was a fair hearing.

 5. The appellant is a Sunni Muslim and of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   He  comes
    from Mosul.  He does not speak Arabic and has  never  been  to  school,
    spending  his  time  at  home.   He  has  serious  facial  deformities,
    following a road accident, despite a number of  surgical  interventions
    to repair extensive deformities in his face and nose caused by  a  road
    traffic accident.  He has produced psychological evidence of  suffering
    a significant  degree  of  cognitive  impairment,  which  affected  his
    ability to recall information and express himself in detail.

 6. The applicant's account is that his family were all  killed  before  he
    left Iraq and that, after staying with an uncle, he came to the  United
    Kingdom for safety.   He says he has no contact with family in Iraq now
    and that he no longer has a CSID.

 7. The appellant is  being  supported  by  Michael  Woolley  from  Friends
    without Borders (http://www.friendswithoutborders.org.uk/),  a  charity
    which  supports immigration detainees and destitute asylum  seekers  in
    the Portsmouth area.  The appellant has no settled address and is 'sofa
    surfing':  it does not appear that he has benefited  from  the  efforts
    made to get homeless people into accommodation during the pandemic.

First-tier Tribunal decision (2011)

 8. The appellant made an asylum claim in 2007 which was unsuccessful: at a
    hearing in 2011, Judge Raymond found the appellant's  account  to  lack
    credibility and dismissed the appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge in
    2011 was the same  Judge  who  heard  the  present  appeal  (First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raymond) although he says in his decision that he had no
    recollection of the earlier hearing or decision.

 9. Appeal rights on that claim were exhausted in February  2015  when  the
    Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal.  The 2011 decision,  which
    was not successfully challenged, remains the Devaseelan starting  point
    for remaking the 2019  decision,  including  the  negative  credibility
    findings there made.

First-tier Tribunal decision (2019)

10. The present appeal is a fresh claim based on the factual matrix  today.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge took his  own  earlier  decision  as  the
    Devaseelan starting point.  He had offered to recuse himself during the
    hearing, once it became apparent that he had also been the Judge in the
    2011 hearing.  The parties did not object to his continuing to hear the
    appeal.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not believe the  appellant's  account
    and found that there was no new evidence for  which  he  should  depart
    from his 2011 decision which was the Devaseelan  starting  point.    He
    considered the appellant to be a dishonest witness and did not  believe
    that he would be unable to obtain a laissez passer or passport on which
    to return to Iraq.  He continued to disbelieve the appellant's  account
    of his inability to trace the uncle who took him in after his  family's
    deaths.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal  and  the  appellant
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Anonymity

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge refused to grant anonymity 'in a  context
    where a previous determination found that the appellant relied upon  an
    asylum narrative that was not credible'.  That is not a  proper  reason
    for refusing anonymity, which is not a prize for good  evidence  but  a
    protection against  creating  a  sur  place  risk  or  a  risk  to  the
    appellant's family members based on his having  made  an  asylum  claim
    here.  The Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity direction  of  its  own
    motion.

Upper Tribunal proceedings

14. By a decision  dated  4  October  2019,  I  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's 2019 decision.  I did not  do  so  on  the  issue  of  Judge
    Raymond having heard both appeals, since  that  had  been  put  to  the
    parties at the hearing  and  no  objection  raised.   That  was  not  a
    procedural error by the Judge, still  less  one  which  amounted  to  a
    material error of law.

15. I set aside Judge Raymond's 2019 decision by reason of  a  misdirection
    of fact at the level of an error of law in relation to the location and
    significance of Mosul.  Contrary to Judge Raymond's findings  in  2019,
    Mosul is in Ninewah Governorate, not the IKR, and is not the capital of
    the IKR.

16. The remaking decision  in  this  appeal  was  adjourned  to  await  the
    forthcoming country guidance decision on conditions in Iraq, which  has
    now been published as SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)
    CG Iraq [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC).

17. On 27 February 2020,  the  appeal  came  back  before  me  for  a  case
    management review and directions were agreed, including a  14-day  time
    limit for amended grounds of appeal and/or further  evidence  from  the
    applicant, with which he did not comply.  That was before the  pandemic
    lockdown.

18. On 21 April  2020,  Leonard  Cannings  solicitors,  who  represent  the
    appellant, served on the Upper Tribunal two Red  Cross  letters,  draft
    amended grounds of appeal and a document described as  'submissions  in
    lieu of witness statement'.  They were  without  instructions  and  had
    been in that unfortunate position since 21 April 2020.

19. In an email dated 12 June 2020, Leonard  Cannings  explained  what  had
    happened.  The appellant was difficult to reach because he had no fixed
    address  and  slept  at  different  friends'  houses  each  night.   In
    addition, due to COVID-19 restrictions  during  the  lockdown,  he  was
    unable to travel from Portsmouth where he lives  to  Southampton  where
    his solicitors are based, to give them face-to-face instructions, which
    Leonard Canning considered desirable.

20. Leonard Cannings have now been able to take instructions on the  appeal
    and by an email dated 12 June 2020, they applied for  leave  to  adduce
    additional evidence, a witness  statement  and  some  photographs,  and
    asked for a Kurdish interpreter to enable the appellant  to  give  oral
    evidence.  The witness statement  and  photographs  did  not  reach  Mr
    Melvin for the respondent before today's hearing.

21. That was the basis on which this appeal came before me today.    Having
    heard submissions from both parties  as  to  the  proper  way  forward,
    having regard to  the  overriding  objective  and  the  need  for  oral
    evidence, I have come reluctantly to  the  conclusion  that  given  the
    amount of time which  has passed, and  the  new  guidance  in  SMO  and
    others, there is no alternative but to remit this  application  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for remaking afresh, with no findings  of  fact  or
    credibility from  the  2019  decision  preserved.   The  2011  decision
    remains the Devaseelan starting point for the  next  judge  considering
    this appeal.



Decision

22. The First-tier Tribunal's determination in this appeal  dated  10  July
    2019 is set aside.

23. The decision in this appeal will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on a date to be fixed. A Kurdish interpreter will be required.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     23 June 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


