
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/04180/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 18 January 2019                   |On 13 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JAMAL AJRAM
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Rutherford
                    Sheridan, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD has permission to appeal to the UT on the  grounds  stated  in
    the application dated 6 June 2018.

 3. In a rule 24 response filed on 27 July 2018 the appellant submits  that
    the grounds disclose no material error of law in the decision, and that
    in any event the appeal should have been allowed under article 8 of the
    ECHR.

 4. Mrs O'Brien submitted further to the grounds along these lines:

      i) Focusing firstly on [33 (i) - (iii)] of the decision, none of those
         reasons justified departure from  the  earlier  decision  of  Judge
         Handley - (i), because it  went  beyond  belief  to  say  that  the
         appellant's claim did not  materially  overlap  with  that  of  his
         mother, when both were based on  domestic  abuse  within  the  same
         household and by the same person, the husband  and  father  in  the
         family;

     ii) (ii), because it was speculative to  consider  that  the  appellant
         (then aged 11) could have given evidence in  his  mother's  appeal,
         and might have added cogency to what she said - that was a decision
         made by his mother, with the benefit of advice, which was  not  for
         the judge to revisit; and

    iii) (iii), because the medical information going to the credibility  of
         his mother had also been before Judge Handley - his decision  stood
         as the resolution of her credibility, and  it  was  not  for  Judge
         Green to take that information as justifying him in taking  another
         view.

     iv) [33] was the bedrock of Judge Green's decision  and  its  reasoning
         was legally inadequate, to the extent that it at least bordered  on
         perversity.

      v) The decision at [34] was confused and self-contradictory,  and  did
         not justify the conclusion that the appellant had been a victim  of
         domestic violence at the hands of his father.

     vi) The decision at [38] held that the  appellant  had  sufficiency  of
         protection.  The risk being abrogated, there was no reason to go on
         at [39 - 41] to allow the appeal on grounds of internal relocation.

    vii) The finding at [38] was effectively that the appellant was  not  at
         risk on return.

   viii) As the decision turned on legal  errors,  there  were  no  findings
         which might survive, to permit a favourable  outcome  in  terms  of
         article 8, which the judge  had  not  considered  (the  alternative
         sought in the rule 24 response).

 5. Mr Winter expanded upon the rule 24 response:

      i) Judge Green at [30 - 32] directed himself accurately and in  detail
         about how to approach earlier decisions.

     ii) Having set out the tests, he gave clear reasons for departure.

    iii) It might be "loose language" to  say  at  [33  (i)]  there  was  no
         material overlap between the claims, but no worse than  that.   The
         decision as a whole showed that the judge was  well  aware  of  the
         content of both claims.

     iv) At [33 (iii)], Judge Green was entitled  to  look  at  whether  the
         mental  condition  of   the   appellant's   mother   affected   her
         credibility, because case law had moved on in the interim,  and  it
         did not appear that Judge  Handley  had  factored  in  the  medical
         evidence in that way.

      v) As to [34], it was  notable  that  the  appellant  was  not  cross-
         examined about events in Lebanon.

     vi) There was no challenge to the finding at [36] that the  appellant's
         account put him in the Refugee Convention  category  of  particular
         social group.

    vii) There was no error in the finding that the  appellant  had  been  a
         victim of domestic violence in the past.

   viii) Past persecution was an indicator of future risk.

     ix) It was implicit in the decision that the appellant had  been  found
         to be at risk on return.

      x) The decision at [38] was mistakenly phrased.  The judge meant  that
         there was no legal sufficiency of protection.  That was why he went
         on to decide the case in terms of internal relocation.

     xi) There was no error of law.

    xii) Even of  there  had  been  legal  error,  it  did  not  affect  the
         favourable credibility findings, and these should be preserved,  if
         the decision were to be remade.

 6. I indicated that the decision erred in such respects that it fell to be
    set aside.

 7. The decision is  plainly  a  careful  and  indeed  a  painstaking  one.
    However, at [38] it goes astray:

         "... The appellant was a victim of domestic violence as a child but
         he is now an adult and I do not think it could be said  that  there
         is evidence of insufficient protection  because  of  his  childhood
         experiences.   On  the  face  of  it,  there  will  be   sufficient
         protection for the appellant to return safely to Lebanon."

 8. Past persecution is an indication for the future, but that  is  not  an
    automatic presumption.  It applies, in terms of paragraph 339K  of  the
    rules, "unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution
    ... will not be repeated."  There is no justification in  the  decision
    for any finding of risk on return.  No such finding is implicit.

 9. The point is well caught by [7] of the grounds and by  the  submissions
    of Mrs O'Brien.

10.  The  Judge  has  become  concerned  with  Devaseelan  issues,  Refugee
    Convention categorisation,  sufficiency  of  protection,  and  internal
    relocation, but unfortunately has overlooked that absent a  finding  of
    risk on return, these are irrelevant matters.

11. The grounds and  submissions  stopped  short  of  contending  that  the
    reasoning at [33] is perverse.  However, the reasons  given  are  weak,
    and the grounds and submissions are strong.  The overall  challenge  to
    the decision is such that those reasons are legally inadequate, and  no
    findings should stand.

12. There is therefore no route at this stage to remaking the  decision  on
    article 8 grounds.

13. Mrs O'Brien did not contend that even on the most  favourable  findings
    of primary fact for which the appellant could hope (as reached by Judge
    Green) his claim was bound to fail.  She submitted that the appropriate
    outcome was an entirely fresh hearing in the FtT.

14. The decision of the FtT stands only as a record of what was said at the
    hearing.

15. It is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

16. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Green.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      21 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




