
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04927/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th November 2018                         |On 18th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  Usman [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood of Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1st  January  1999.
    The Appellant left Afghanistan around March/April 2015 making  his  way
    via Turkey and  European  countries  before  arriving  in  Calais.   He
    arrived in the UK on 28th June 2015 in the back of a lorry and  claimed
    asylum on arrival.  The Appellant's claim for asylum  was  based  on  a
    well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  Afghanistan  on  the  basis  of
    interest shown by the Taliban.  That application was refused by  Notice
    of Refusal dated 11th May 2017.

 2. The Appellant's appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Burns
    sitting at Taylor House on 19th  February  2018.   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 26th February 2018 the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant lodged grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those
    grounds initially came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes  who  on
    27th March 2018 refused  permission  to  appeal.   Renewed  Grounds  of
    Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 15th May 2018  and  on  8th
    October 2018 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Chapman noted that the Grounds of Appeal  asserted  that
    the judge erred materially in law in:

      i) in making irrational findings in respect of the risk of harm to the
         Appellant in his own village;

     ii) in failing to consider  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  mother
         recorded by Claire Murphy;

    iii) in  making  findings  without  evidence  at  paragraph  43  of  the
         determination in respect of the Appellant's family members;

     iv) in failing to consider relevant country evidence as to the risk  in
         Baghlan from the Taliban;

      v) at paragraph 32 of the decision in  failing  to  consider  relevant
         case law/guidance, namely the  authority  of  AA  (Afghanistan)  CG
         [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC);

     vi) in taking an unlawful approach to relocation at paragraph 41; and

    vii) in taking an unlawful approach to the Article 8 claim.

 4. Judge Chapman noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had accepted the
    basis of the Appellant's claim that his father had been murdered by the
    brother  of  a  Taliban  commander  who  had  then  been  arrested  and
    imprisoned as a result of which threats were made to the Appellant  and
    his family as recited at paragraph 28.  Judge Chapman  considered  that
    it was arguable that the judge had  erred  materially  in  law  in  his
    assessment of risk on return, internal  relocation  and  Article  8  in
    light of the fact that the Appellant's brother's asylum claims have not
    yet been determined.

 5. There is no Rule 24 response.  It is on  that  basis  that  the  appeal
    comes before me to determine whether or not there is a  material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel Mr Sellwood.  The Appellant does  not
    appear in person.  Mr Sellwood believes that the Appellant is  detained
    at home where he has responsibilities for looking after his two younger
    brothers.  The Secretary of State appears by his Home Office Presenting
    Officer Mr Clarke.

Submission/Discussions

 6. There are, I note, seven grounds upon which the Appellant relies and in
    considerable  detail  Mr  Sellwood  takes  me  through   these   cross-
    referencing and referring to the paragraphs in the decision.  Mr Clarke
    in similar vein goes  into  considerable  detail  and  very  thoroughly
    presents a contrargument.  It is fair  to  say  that  both  submissions
    involve an assessment of what is set out in the  decision  particularly
    at paragraphs 27 through to 42.  They have addressed the paragraphs  as
    set out in order in the Grounds of Appeal albeit they acknowledge  that
    some paragraphs are of greater significance than others.

 7. Mr Sellwood's starting point is that the judge's findings at  paragraph
    32 that there would not be an ongoing risk of harm in  the  Appellant's
    home village and that the  Appellant  wished  to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom for economic reasons  as  set  out  at  paragraph  45  was  not
    sustainable on the  basis  of  it  being  irrational.   The  judge  has
    concluded that the Appellant would not be at risk in his home area  and
    Mr Sellwood submits that that  is  an  unreasonable  and  unsustainable
    finding.  He points out that it has been accepted that the Taliban  had
    made inroads into the state and that the Appellant's  family  had  been
    punished.  The judge accepts at  paragraph  28  that  the  Taliban  had
    killed the Appellant's father and submits that the Appellant  was  also
    at immediate risk as a result.  However, he points out that  the  judge
    has relied on a perceived misconception, set out at paragraph 21,  that
    the Appellant's siblings remain in Afghanistan.  He  acknowledges  that
    that is actually what is said in the Appellant's witness statement  but
    reminds me firstly that the Appellant was  a  minor  when  making  that
    statement and secondly, and importantly, that was  made  in  2015  when
    such facts were correct.  He reminds me that the  Appellant's  brothers
    fled Afghanistan in 2016.  He submits that it is irrational that having
    accepted past threats and past persecution that the  judge  finds  that
    there would not be an ongoing risk particularly  given  the  prevalence
    and  methods  used  by  the  Taliban.   Further  he  submits  that  the
    suggestion that is made by the judge at paragraph 29 that  the  dispute
    is a local dispute does not sit well with the background evidence,  the
    factual matrix and the evidence provided to the Tribunal by  Ms  Claire
    Murphy.  In concluding that the Appellant's brothers had lived  in  the
    village after the attack he fails to take into account their subsequent
    fleeing and Ms Murphy's evidence  and  submits  that  his  findings  at
    paragraphs 31 to 33 do not take  into  account  Ms  Murphy's  evidence,
    which he submits fundamentally undermines what he ultimately concludes.



 8. He  turns  to  the  evidence  of  Claire  Murphy.   He  emphasises  the
    importance  of  her  evidence.   He  points  out   that   she   was   a
    representative  of  the  Refugee's  Council  who  had  spoken  to   the
    Appellant's mother and he makes reference to her evidence at  paragraph
    27 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   In  particular  the
    telephone conversation that she had  with  the  Appellant's  mother  in
    Afghanistan.  He points out that the Appellant's mother confirmed  that
    her daughters and mother-in-law and  her  own  brother  reside  in  the
    vicinity of her village and that the situation therein is not good.  He
    submits that these factors and the evidence of  Ms  Murphy  are  highly
    relevant to the continuing risk and whether  the  suggestion  that  the
    family could relocate is unduly harsh or practical.  He submits that on
    her own evidence it would have  been  very  hard  for  the  Appellant's
    mother to go anywhere else and that had the judge given full and proper
    consideration to the evidence as produced by Ms Murphy  he  would  have
    come to a different conclusion.

 9. Thirdly, he looks at the evidential findings and submits that there  is
    nothing in the determination which creates a summary of the evidence at
    the hearing and that there is no suggestion in the  witness  statements
    produced as to the position of the three brothers.  However, he  points
    out that if their claim was based on the  same  factual  basis  as  the
    Appellant, if his claim fails theirs would too.

10. He notes that the judge has failed to consider the risk of harm to  the
    Appellant and his position under Article 15(c)  and  that  he  has  not
    considered, nor applied the authority of AA and indeed  has  only  made
    passing reference at paragraph 44 to the fact that the Appellant  would
    be relocating as an unattached and unaccompanied  minor  (now  a  young
    adult).  He points that it would be  necessary  for  the  Appellant  to
    return through Kabul and that there are problems in reaching  his  home
    village and that it is highly material to note that the  Appellant  had
    never been to  Kabul  so  the  question  of  whether  he  would  be  an
    unattended minor is relevant and therefore the Appellant is entitled to
    seek protection under the country guidance authority of AA.

11. He takes me to paragraphs 33 and 34 of the decision which relate to the
    Country Policy  Information  Note  on  Afghanistan.   What  however  he
    submits the judge has not done is to apply  an  unreasonably  harsh  or
    reasonableness test and to analyse the evidence.  He  remines  me  that
    the Appellant has never lived in Kabul, that he  is  a  minor,  has  no
    education, has hearing disabilities, has had  no  work  experience  and
    that his mother is uneducated.  He submits that if the UNHCR Guidelines
    had been considered it would be appropriate for the Appellant if he  is
    to relocate to be in a safe, accessible and practical area where  there
    are support mechanisms.  He submits that this is exactly what Ms Murphy
    indicated but the judge has  failed  to  consider  this.   As  such  he
    considers that there are material errors of law.

12. Finally, he addresses the situation with regard to Article 8 and whilst
    accepting that the Appellant has been in the UK for a relatively  short
    period of time he submits if  a  proper  balancing  exercise  had  been
    carried out that the judge would have come to a different decision.  He
    asked me to find that there are several errors of law in  the  decision
    and to set it aside and to remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal for
    rehearing.

13. Mr Clarke adopts a similar attitude in that he approaches  this  matter
    by looking at the various submissions made in the  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    He submits that at paragraph 42 of the decision the judge has indicated
    that if his  findings  are  not  accepted  at  paragraph  32  that  the
    Appellant's relocation as part of his family would be appropriate.   He
    submits consequently there  is  not  a  great  deal  of  merit  in  the
    submission made by Mr Sellwood challenging the Appellant's  ability  to
    get to his home area.  He also challenges the finding on  irrationality
    referring to paragraphs 29 to 32 and submits that there has been a very
    specific risk looked at to this particular Appellant and that there was
    no evidence before the Tribunal of harm coming to his brothers and they
    did, he reminds me, stay with his mother  for  some  period  after  the
    Appellant left.  He submits that the decision was one that was open  to
    the judge and is not perverse.

14. Mr Clarke submits that paragraphs 33 to 46 of the decision are ones  in
    which the judge has looked at relocation  and  has  failed  to  make  a
    finding of fact regarding that.  He points out that the judge finds the
    family are of relatively low profile and considers their relocation  to
    Kabul.  He accepts that the judge does not look  at  the  evidence  for
    Kabul being somewhere where the whole family can reside but  if  it  is
    accepted he submits that there is risk in the home  area  then  such  a
    failure to address this issue would fall away.  In reality  he  submits
    that if they do relocate to Kabul there would be, as is  shown  in  the
    country guidance authority of AS (albeit that this  relates  to  single
    adult males) employment, housing and money available to  secure  short-
    term accommodation and he submits that there was no evidence before the
    Tribunal to say that the family was  destitute.   He  submits  that  it
    would not be irrational for the judge to have made the findings that he
    did and that the findings were open to the judge on the evidence.

15. So far as Article 8 is concerned  he  submits  that  a  proportionality
    assessment has been carried out.   He  points  out  that  paragraph  49
    submits that the submission is an artificial one and he  endorses  that
    and that there has been a proportionality assessment.  He submits  that
    it has been shown that the Appellant cannot succeed under the Rules and
    the question is are there any matters outside  the  Rules  which  would
    enable the Appellant to succeed.  He submits that  there  are  not  and
    that there has been a full and detailed analysis  carried  out  by  the
    judge.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

16. In brief response Mr Sellwood submits that it  is  fundamental  if  any
    error of law is identified for it to be  shown  and  to  say  that  any
    submissions made are immaterial would  in  this  instant  case  not  be
    correct.  As a matter of generality, he submits  that  no  findings  of
    fact overall have been  made  looking  at  the  evidence.   He  further
    submits that it is not appropriate  to  analyse  the  authority  in  AS
    retrospectively and that all the evidence must  be  considered  in  the
    round.

The Law

17.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

19. What I have listened to here is to two  extremely  competent  advocates
    arguing about the manner in which the First-tier Tribunal Judge has set
    out his decision and they have gone into some  considerable  detail  in
    looking at each and every paragraph.  There is  however  a  paucity  of
    reference to the evidence provided by Ms Murphy.   Ms  Murphy  had  the
    opportunity of recording a conversation with the Appellant's mother and
    it has been accepted that that was broadly consistent with the  account
    given by the Appellant.  I agree however with the submission made by Mr
    Sellwood that in failing to consider the evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    mother or at least in failing to  set  it  out  that  has  demonstrated
    ongoing threats to the family and that evidence has been documented  by
    Ms Murphy and fails to demonstrate that the family have  been  able  to
    live without risk since the Appellant's departure from Afghanistan.   I
    consider that the failure to give appropriate  weight  to  Ms  Murphy's
    statement is an error of law and that overall the judge has failed,  so
    far as the question of materiality is concerned, to  make  findings  of
    fact looking at all the evidence.

20. I do not consider paragraph 33 where the Appellant states he fears  the
    Taliban in our area but did not say he would be  at  risk  anywhere  in
    Afghanistan to be adequate and it is not  appropriate  to  analyse  the
    authority of AS retrospectively.  All evidence must  be  considered  in
    the round.  Further, at paragraph 42 to make the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant relocating with  his  family  would  be  appropriate  is  not
    sufficient in that the full facts of this case has  not  been  analysed
    and generalities are not appropriate.  I am consequently persuaded that
    there are errors of law in the manner in which this judge  has  reached
    his conclusions and that as a result the decision should be  set  aside
    and reheard.

21. So far as Article 8 is concerned, I  accept  that  there  has  been  no
    consideration of any compelling circumstances and further there has not
    been any analysis of what may be or may not be in the best interests of
    the Appellant.  In reaching all these conclusions this is  not  to  say
    that on a rehearing of this matter that another judge would not come to
    exactly the same conclusions as the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Decision and Directions

22. I consequently find that there are material errors of law and set aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I  make  the  following
    directions:

      1) That the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
         Taylor House on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH
         of three hours.

      2) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

      3) That the appeal is  to  be  before  any  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Burns.

      4) That there  be  leave  to  either  party  to  submit  such  further
         objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek  to  rely
         at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

      5) That the Appellant do attend the restored hearing for  the  purpose
         of cross-examination.

      6) That a Pushtu interpreter be in attendance.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 18 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

