
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04619/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|(remote hearing)                     |                                     |
|On 22 January 2021                   |On 12 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     MAY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnick, Counsel instructed by Citywide
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties and neither party expressed any concern with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By my decision dated 7 October 2020 (a copy of which is appended to
    this decision) I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I
    now remake that decision.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 2 June 1994. He left
    Somalia at the age of nine and entered the UK in 2006, aged twelve, on
    a family reunion visa. In 2010 he was issued a Refugee Convention
    travel document valid until 30 October 2020.

 3. Since entering the UK the appellant has not returned to Somalia.

 4. The appellant has been convicted twice for criminal offences involving
    drugs. In 2013 he was convicted of possession of a class B drug.  In
    2017 he was convicted and sentenced to 42 months' imprisonment for
    possession with intent to supply a class A drug.

 5. The appellant lives with his mother and cousin.

 6. A deportation order was made against the appellant pursuant to section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Section 32(5) is subject to the
    exceptions specified in Section 33. One of the exceptions is that
    deportation will breach the UK's obligations under the ECHR or the
    Refugee Convention.

 7. The appellant made representations to the respondent arguing that his
    deportation would breach articles 3 and 8 ECHR. The appellant's
    arguments were rejected by the respondent.

 8. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Bulpitt. Judge Bulpitt dismissed the appeal, finding that
    deporting the appellant to Somalia would not be incompatible with his
    rights under either article 3 or article 8 ECHR.

 9. In my decision dated 7 October 2020 I upheld the decision of Judge
    Bulpitt in respect of article 3 ECHR, but found that he had erred in
    law in respect of his consideration of article 8 ECHR. I limited the re-
    making of the appeal to article 8 ECHR. I also preserved the findings
    of fact made by Judge Bulpitt in paragraphs 20 - 31 of his decisions.

Legal framework and issues in dispute

10. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the
    2002 Act"), considered together with the rest of Part 5A of the 2002
    Act, provides the framework to evaluate whether deporting a foreign
    criminal will breach article 8 ECHR.

11. Section 117C provides:

         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where- (a) C has been lawfully resident in
         the United Kingdom for most of C's life, (b) C is socially and
         culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and (c) there would be
         very significant obstacles to C's integration into the country to
         which C is proposed to be deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

12. The relationship between the Exceptions in sections 117C(4) and (5) and
    section 117C(6) was explained succinctly in paragraph 36 of NA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department & Ors [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662 (cited with approval in paragraph 30 of HA (Iraq) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176):

         "In relation to a medium  offender,  first  see  whether  he  falls
         within Exception 1 or Exception 2. If he does, then the Article  8
         claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next stage is to  consider
         whether there are 'sufficiently compelling circumstances, over  and
         above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2'. If  there  are,  then
         the Article 8 claim succeeds. If there are not, then the Article  8
         claim fails."

    The reference to a "medium offender" is to a foreign criminal, as
    defined in section 117D of the 2002 Act, who has been sentenced to less
    than four years imprisonment. The appellant is a medium offender.

13. Accordingly, if either Exception 1 or 2 applies, that will be
    determinative of the appeal. In the event that neither Exception
    applies, it will be necessary to proceed to consider Section 117C(6).

14. Exception 2 is not applicable to the appellant.

15. In respect of Exception 1, it was common ground that sub-paragraphs (a)
    and (b) are satisfied; that is, that the appellant has been lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of his life and that he is socially and
    culturally integrated in the UK. The sole area of contention was sub-
    paragraph (c):  whether there would be very significant obstacles to
    his integration into Somalia. The appellant was born in - and if
    deported will be returned to - Mogadishu. It is therefore the obstacles
    (if any) that he will face integrating into Mogadishu that are relevant
    in this appeal.

16. The meaning of very significant obstacles to integration is not defined
    in the 2002 Act. A clear explanation of how integration should be
    understood, however, was given by Sales LJ in paragraph 14 of Kamara v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813, [2016]4
    WLR 152 (cited with approval in paragraph 58 of Akinyemi v The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2098). He
    stated:

         "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

17. In Parveen v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA
    Civ 932 at paragraph 9 the Court of Appeal commented on what is meant
    by "very significant". It is stated:

         "It is fair enough to observe that  the  words  "very  significant"
         connote an "elevated" threshold, and I have no difficulty with  the
         observation that the test will not be met by "mere inconvenience or
         upheaval". But I am not sure that saying that  "mere"  hardship  or
         difficulty or hurdles, even if  multiplied,  will  not  "generally"
         suffice adds anything of substance. The task of  the  Secretary  of
         State, or the Tribunal, in any given case is simply to  assess  the
         obstacles  to  integration  relied  on,  whether  characterised  as
         hardship or difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they
         regard them as 'very significant'"

18. The two issues to be determined, therefore, are:

      a. First, whether there will be very significant obstacles to the
         appellant's integration into Mogadishu. If this is decided in the
         appellant's favour that will be determinative of the appeal as he
         will satisfy all of the conditions of Exception 1.

      b. Second, whether there are sufficiently compelling circumstances
         over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2. This will
         only need to be considered if the appellant does not fall within
         Exception 1.

The hearing

19. I heard oral evidence from the appellant, his mother and his cousin. In
    advance of, and at, the hearing Mr Karnick highlighted that the
    appellant's mother is vulnerable and that this should be taken into
    account. Mr Walker acknowledged this and his (brief) cross-examination
    of her was conducted in an appropriate way that did not give rise to
    any concerns.

20. The focus of Mr Walker's cross-examination of the three witnesses was
    on whether the appellant would receive any financial support from the
    UK and whether he would receive assistance from any family (or anyone
    else) living in Somalia. The consistent evidence of the witnesses was
    that they have no family (or any other contacts/connections) in
    Somalia. The evidence of the appellant's cousin was that she is in low-
    paid part-time employment and is a student and therefore will not be in
    a position to send funds to the appellant. The evidence of (and in
    respect of) the appellant's mother was that she is dependent on
    benefits and therefore would not have income available to send to the
    appellant.

21. In response to questions asked about the assistance and care provided
    by the appellant to his mother, the response from the witnesses was
    that he provides her with day-to-day assistance, for example with
    shopping, cleaning, preparing food and running errands.

22. In his submissions, Mr Walker described the oral evidence of the
    witnesses as credible. He accepted that the appellant would be unlikely
    to receive remittances from the UK and would not have the support of
    any relatives or friends in Somalia. He also observed that the
    appellant is from a minority clan and that this would be to his
    disadvantage in Mogadishu as explained in MOJ & Ors (Return to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC). He acknowledged that in
    the light of these factors the appellant would face challenges
    integrating in Somalia but submitted that the threshold of very
    significant obstacles to integration was not reached. He also argued
    that in the overall Article 8 balancing exercise very significant
    weight must be given to the criminal offence and this is not outweighed
    by the factors weighing in the appellant's favour.

23. Relying on the respondent's recent Country Background Note on Somalia
    dated December 2020 and Country, Policy and Information Note on the
    security and humanitarian situation in the south and central Somalia
    dated November 2020, Mr Karnick argued that situation in Mogadishu has
    worsened since MOJ. He drew attention to the description in these
    reports of extreme poverty, food and housing insecurity, and
    discrimination faced by members of minority clans.

Finding of Fact

24. The findings of fact preserved from the First-tier Tribunal include the
    following:

      a. The appellant was born Mogadishu and is from the Ashraf minority
         clan. He left Somalia at the age of nine and entered the UK at the
         age of 12 with his mother.

      b. The appellant committed a serious drugs offence.

      c. The appellant is willing and able to work, and has experience in
         retail and warehouse work. He has some basic qualifications,
         including in IT.

      d. He speaks Somalian.

      e. He does not have any surviving family in Somalia.

      f. He has a close relationship with his disabled mother but has
         exaggerated its extent and depth. He does not provide her with day-
         to-day care and did not live with her before going to prison.

      g. The appellant's mother is in receipt of benefits.

25. I make the following further findings of fact, having considered all of
    the evidence before me. This includes the witness statements and oral
    evidence of the appellant, his mother and his cousin, the documents in
    the appellant's supplemental bundle submitted prior to this hearing,
    and the respondent's reports on Somali referred to by Mr Karnick. My
    findings are:

      a. The appellant and his mother do not have any family or other
         connections in Somalia and the appellant will not have anyone to
         assist him in Somalia.

      b. The appellant will not receive any remittances from the UK. The
         only people in the UK who potentially might send him funds are his
         mother and cousin. However, neither are likely to be in a position
         to provide funds to him given his mother relies on benefits and his
         cousin only works part-time and is a student.

      c. There is significant poverty and unemployment in Mogadishu and it
         is a particularly challenging environment for someone who lacks
         family or other support.

      d. The appellant will face an additional challenge because he is from
         a minority clan.

Analysis

26. There are several reasons why the appellant is likely to experience
    significant difficulties in Mogadishu. These are that:

      a. He has no family or social support in, or links to, Mogadishu and
         there is no one in the city who will assist him with finding
         employment and accommodation.

      b. He has no knowledge or experience of Mogadishu, having left at the
         age of nine and not having had any connection to the city since
         then.

      c. He will not receive remittances from abroad.

      d. He is from a minority clan.

27. This combination of obstacles/difficulties was found in MOJ to make
    relocation to Mogadishu unrealistic because of a real risk of
    destitution. The headnote states:

         "[R]elocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with  no
         former links to the city, no access to funds and no other  form  of
         clan, family or social support is unlikely to be realistic  as,  in
         the absence of means to establish a home and some form  of  ongoing
         financial  support  there  will  be  a  real  risk  of  having   no
         alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation  within  an  IDP
         camp where there is  a  real  possibility  of  having  to  live  in
         conditions   that   will   fall   below   acceptable   humanitarian
         standards."

28. This passage from MOJ is relevant because although it concerns
    relocation to - rather than integration into - Mogadishu, the factors
    identified as making relocation "unlikely to be realistic" are also
    relevant to the difficulties a person is likely to face integrating in
    Mogadishu.

29. The difficulties identified above in paragraph 26 are mitigated to some
    extent because the appellant speaks Somalian and is physically and
    mentally able to work. However, given the conditions in Mogadishu as
    described in MOJ, I am satisfied that even with these mitigating
    factors the difficulties the appellant will face, when considered
    together and cumulatively, reach the elevated threshold of very
    significant obstacles to integration. The appellant therefore meets all
    of the conditions of Section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act.

30. As the appellant meets the conditions of Section 117C(4) of the 2002
    Act, it follows that his article 8 claim succeeds and there is no need
    to consider Section 117C(6) and undertake a full proportionality
    assessment. See paragraphs 29-30 of HA.



Decision

     31. The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

D. Sheridan

Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan   24 January 2021


                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04619/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     MAY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnick, Counsel instructed by Citywide
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties and neither party expressed any concern with the process.

At the end of the hearing, I invited Mr Karnik and Mr Walker to make
written submissions in respect of the jurisdiction issue that I raised at
the hearing. Mr Karnik made written submissions, which I considered before
deciding the appeal.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Bulpitt ("the judge") promulgated on 14 August 2019.

The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born in Mogadishu who came to the UK
in 2006, aged 12, with his mother on a family reunion visa to join his
father, who had been granted asylum.  His immigration status is unclear.
What is known is that in 2010 he was issued a Refugee Convention travel
document valid until 13 October 2020.

The appellant has committed two criminal offences involving drugs. In 2013
he was convicted of possession of a class B drug.  In 2017 he was convicted
and sentenced to 42 months' imprisonment for possession with intent to
supply a class A drug.

On 9 December 2017 he was served with notice of a decision to deport him.

On 10 January 2018 representations were made by the appellant's
representatives arguing that Article 3 and 8 ECHR would be infringed by the
appellant's removal.  It was not argued that his removal would breach the
Refugee Convention.

On 20 January 2019 an asylum screening interview was held.  On 28 February
2019 further submissions were made by the appellant's representatives
stating that the appellant maintained that removal would infringe Article 3
and that he should be granted humanitarian protection in lieu of full
refugee status.  On 5 March 2019 the appellant's asylum interview took
place.

On 30 April 2019 the respondent sent the appellant a decision refusing his
protection and asylum claim on the basis that none of the exceptions in
Section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied to him.  The respondent's
position was that the appellant had committed a serious crime and
constituted a danger to the community and therefore the presumption under
Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
Act") had not been rebutted.  The respondent accepted that the appellant is
a member of the minority Ashraf clan and that he has a genuine subjective
fear of return to Somalia, but not that his fear is objectively well-
founded. Relying on the country guidance case MOJ & Ors (Return to
Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), the respondent concluded
that the appellant was not entitled to protection as a refugee or under
articles 2 and 3 ECHR.  The respondent also took the view that the
appellant's removal would not be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

At no point did either party raise the question of, or identify as an
issue, whether the appellant already had refugee status in the UK.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Bulpitt.  In a decision
promulgated on 14 August 2019 he dismissed the appeal.

The appellant limited his protection claim to Article 3 ECHR.  At paragraph
16 of the decision the judge stated:

"At the outset of the hearing I confirmed with Mr  Bassi  and  Ms  Delbourgo
that the issues in the appeal  were  those  previously  identified  in  this
document.  In particular Ms Delbourgo confirmed that the  appellant  is  not
appealing against the decision to refuse a protection claim but  (consistent
with his case throughout the process) was arguing that his  deportation  was
unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998."

The judge went on to find that removal to Mogadishu, where the appellant
was born, would not breach Article 3.  The judge noted that the appellant's
representatives did not argue for a departure from MOJ and that no other
evidence about the current conditions in Mogadishu was adduced.  The judge
found that although the appellant is unlikely to have any family or
contacts in Mogadishu to help him  - and even though he is vulnerable
because of his alcohol and drug misuse, as well as his depression - he
would be able to rely on remittances from his mother, cousin and father in
the UK and would be relatively well placed to secure a livelihood.  The
judge concluded that the appellant would not suffer inhuman or degrading
treatment on his return such that deportation would breach Article 3.

The judge then considered Article 8 ECHR.  Applying Exception 1 in Section
117C of the 2002 Act the judge found that the appellant has been lawfully
resident in the UK for most of his life and that he is socially and
culturally integrated. However, the judge found that there would not be
very significant obstacles to his integration in Somalia.  The reasons
given for this conclusion parallel those given in respect of Article 3:
that although the appellant would not have family to assist him and has a
history of drug and alcohol misuse, he speaks Somalian, would have
financial support from family in the UK and would have the benefit of
education and work experience obtained in the UK.  For the same reasons,
the judge found there were not very compelling circumstances.

Grounds of Appeal

The appellant advanced two grounds of appeal.

The first ground relates to the protection claim and is in three parts.

      a) Firstly, it is argued that the judge failed to address the
         appellant's current status in the UK.  It is argued that the
         evidence points to it being likely that the appellant was granted
         refugee status in line with his father.  Reference is made to the
         respondent's policy on revocation of refugee status, where it is
         stated:

             "In the case of dependants granted under  the  family  reunion
             provisions  caseworkers  must  check  and  establish  if   the
             dependant was granted refugee status as well as leave in line.
              The previous policy on family reunion was  to  grant  refugee
             status and leave in line as a matter of  course....Caseworkers
             must review the  reasons  for  the  grant  of  asylum  to  the
             principal applicant and take this into account when  reviewing
             the case."

         It is acknowledged that the appellant's status was not raised
         before the First-tier Tribunal but it is argued that this is a
         matter that goes to the heart of the appeal and needed to be
         considered by the judge nonetheless.

      a) Secondly, it is also argued that the judge erred by not addressing
         Section 72 of the 2002 Act.

      b) Thirdly, it is argued that the judge erred by not considering
         article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

The second ground of appeal concerns the judge's assessment of Article 8
ECHR and contends that the judge erred in his approach to the assessment of
Section 117C(4)(c) of the 2002 Act by not carrying out a broad evaluation.
Reliance is placed on paragraph 14 of SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813,
where it is stated:

"The concept of a foreign criminal's integration into the country  to  which
it is proposed that he be deported, as set out  in  Section  117C(4)(c)  and
paragraph 399A, is a broad one.  It is not confined to the mere  ability  to
find a job or to sustain life while living in the other country.   The  idea
of integration calls for a broad  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  as  to
whether  the  individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider  in   terms   of
understanding how life in the society in that other country  is  carried  on
and a capacity to participate in it so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity
to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day  basis  in  that
society and to build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of  human
relationships to give  substance  to  the  individual's  private  or  family
life."

The grounds also maintain that the judge erred by not factoring into the
assessment of very significant obstacles that the appellant is a member of
the Ashraf minority clan and as such, as recognised in MOJ, would face
disadvantages.

It is also argued that there was nothing to suggest the appellant has
Somali language skills that are advanced beyond that of a small child.

It is also argued that there was no evidential foundation for the finding
that the appellant would receive remittances from his mother given that she
is disabled and unemployed, or for finding that there are other people able
and willing to provide him with ongoing financial support.

Permission to Appeal

Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on the basis
that even though it did not appear to have been argued before the First-
tier Tribunal that the appellant's protection claim should have been
considered in the context of revocation of his refugee status it was
nevertheless arguably important for the appellant's precise status to be
clarified.

The Protection Claim

As is apparent from paragraph 16 of the decision, as well as correspondence
sent by the appellant's solicitor to the respondent prior to the hearing in
the First-tier Tribunal (for example, the letter of 28 February 2019
stating that the appellant maintained that deportation would infringe
article 3 and humanitarian protection should be granted in lieu of full
refugee status), the appellant explicitly and unambiguously limited the
scope of his claim to articles 3 and 8 ECHR and did not claim that his
removal from the UK would breach either the Refugee Convention or Article
15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

Parties are entitled to choose the legal strategy they wish to pursue. This
includes the freedom to decide which claim to advance and which to not. If
a party does not advance a claim, unless there is an obvious point of the
type referred to in R-v- SSHD ex p Robinson [1998] QB 929, it is not the
role of a judge to question this and a judge will not ordinarily fall into
error by not addressing (or raising with the parties) a claim or argument
that neither party made. See GS (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at [89]
and BM (Iran) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 491 at [17].  There was no "Robinson
obvious" point in this appeal. The appellant, who had the benefit of legal
representation, consistently maintained prior to the hearing that he was
not relying on the Refugee Convention. There may - or may not - have been a
good reason for this (perhaps he did not want to address the presumption
under section 72 of the 2002 Act?), but it was not "Robinson obvious" that
there was not a good reason. It was therefore not for the judge to look
behind (or over-ride) the choice made by the appellant.

As the Refugee Convention was not relied on, there was no reason for the
judge to consider - and the judge therefore did not err by not considering
- whether or not the appellant already had status as a refugee. Likewise,
the absence of any consideration of section 72 of the 2002 Act was not
erroneous as this would only have been relevant if protection under the
Refugee Convention was at issue. Similarly, as Article 15(c) of the
Qualification Directive was not raised, the judge did not err by failing to
consider it.

Mr Karnik, relying on an observation of Haddon-Cave LJ in SSHD v JS
(Uganda) EWCA Civ 1670 at [89], argued that the Upper Tribunal can hear
fresh points of law not argued below. That is indeed the case, but it does
not follow from this that a judge in the First-tier Tribunal falls into
error by not considering a claim or argument that a party chose not to
pursue. This issue was considered by Laws LJ in GS (India) at [88] - [96].
Laws LJ recognised that an appellate court can consider a legal argument
not raised previously but found that this did not extend to circumstances
where a point in contention had in terms not been pursued in the tribunal
below. He observed at [90] that:

         "To allow such a state of affairs would, at the appellant's choice,
         turn every appeal into an argument at large."

The reasons given above are sufficient to dispose of the first ground of
appeal. However, there is a further reason the judge did not err by failing
to consider whether the appellant has status as a refugee such that there
would need to be a decision to revoke his status before he could be
deported. This is that there was no jurisdiction to consider this issue.

Under section 82(1)(c) of the 2002 Act there is a right of appeal against a
decision to revoke a person's protection status. Under section 84(3) the
ground upon which an appeal under section 82(1)(c) must be brought is that
the decision to revoke protection status breaches the UK's obligations
under the Refugee Convention or in relation to a grant of humanitarian
protection.

Mr Karnik advanced a persuasive argument in respect of whether the
appellant is likely to currently have refugee status. He noted, in
particular, that at the time the appellant came to the UK refugee status
was typically granted to members of a minority clan from Somalia and that
the appellant was issued with a Refugee Convention travel document.
Considering these factors alongside the respondent's policy on revocation
of refugee status (cited above at paragraph 14(a)), I agree with Mr Karnik
that the appellant may well have been granted refugee status in line with
his father.

However, whether or not the appellant was granted, or currently has,
refugee status does not determine whether he has a right of appeal. The
right of appeal lies against a decision of the respondent to revoke a
person's protection status, not a failure to acknowledge the existence of
such a status. This is analogous to human rights claims where, as explained
in MY (refusal of human rights claim) Pakistan [2020] UKUT 00089 (IAC), for
a right of appeal under section 82(1)(b) to arise, there must have been a
decision to refuse the human rights claim. If it was legally erroneous for
the respondent, in the context of considering whether the appellant fell
within the exceptions set out in section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007, to
not consider whether the appellant currently has refugee status, that might
be judicially reviewable on public law grounds. However, it would not give
rise to a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Mr Karnik's response to this was to argue that the First-tier Tribunal had
jurisdiction to consider the revocation issue because the respondent made
an appealable decision which served as a "gateway".  Section 82(1) of the
2002 Act provides for rights of appeal against three types of decision by
the respondent: refusal of a protection claim, refusal of human rights
claim, and revocation of protection status. Mr Karnik maintained that once
the respondent makes a decision in respect of any one of these a "gateway"
is opened to enable an appellant to appeal against any or all of them. He
submitted that the cases of Robinson v SSHD [2019] UKSC 11 and SM (Algeria)
v ECO [2018] UKSC 9 support the "gateway" approach as they demonstrate that
a broad view of the jurisdiction should be taken.

The difficulty with Mr Karnik's argument is that there is nothing in the
cases he cites to support his "gateway" theory, or the notion that sections
82(1)(c) and 84(3) should be interpreted otherwise than in accordance with
their clear and plain meaning, which is that for there to be a right of
appeal under section 82(1)(c) the respondent must have made a decision to
revoke protection status. As, in this case, no such decision has been made,
it follows that the appellant does not have a right of appeal under section
82(1)(c).

The Article 8 Claim

The central issue before the judge was whether there would be "very
significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration into Somalia. At
paragraph 38 of the decision the judge gave three reasons why, despite the
length of time the appellant has been away from Somalia, his drug and
alcohol misuse,  and that he would not have "nuclear family accompanying
him", he was satisfied that there would not be very significant obstacles
to integration. These are (a) that he speaks Somalian, (b) that he would
have financial support from family in the UK, and (c) that he would have
the benefit of education and work experience obtained in the UK. Earlier in
the decision (at paragraph 34) the judge stated that the appellant would be
able to rely on remittances from his mother, cousin and father in the UK.
However, as submitted by Mr Karnik and acknowledged by Mr Walker, it is not
apparent from the decision how the judge reached the conclusion that the
appellant will in fact receive remittances from family in the UK.

The judge referred to three family members: the appellant's mother, cousin
and father. The appellant's mother is disabled and dependent on benefits.
It is not clear - and the judge has not addressed - how she would be in a
position to provide ongoing financial support to the appellant. In respect
of the appellant's father, the appellant's evidence, which does not appear
to have been challenged, was that his father moved out and left him and his
mother soon after they arrived in the UK and that he has seen him only
occasionally. There is nothing in the decision to indicate that this
evidence has been considered before reaching the conclusion that the
appellant's father would provide financial support. Likewise, the judge has
not explained why he concluded that the appellant's cousin would be able
and willing to provide ongoing financial support to be appellant. I
therefore accept Mr Karnik's argument that the judge erred by failing to
explain how the evidence supported his conclusion that the appellant would
receive financial support from family in the UK.

Given the weight the judge attached to his finding that the appellant would
receive financial support from relatives in the UK (which is unsurprising
given the significance of such support, as explained in MOJ: see paragraph
ix of the headnote), the error was clearly material. The decision in
respect of article 8 ECHR is therefore not sustainable and must be set
aside.

The judge made clear findings of fact at paragraphs 20 - 31. Apart from the
finding at paragraph 29 that the appellant speaks Somalian, these findings
were not challenged in the grounds of appeal. The challenge regarding the
appellant's language ability has no merit as the judge gave clear reasons
for concluding that the appellant speaks Somalian: that he grew up in a
household with only his mother (and therefore was likely to have
communicated with her in Somalian); and that he did not adduce any
evidence, even from himself, to support the contention that he is unable to
speak Somalian. Accordingly, as the findings of fact in paragraphs 20 - 31
of the decision are not undermined by any error of law, they are preserved.



Notice of Decision

With respect to the appellant's protection claim:

      i) the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of an error of law; and

     ii) the appeal is dismissed.

With respect to the appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR:

        iii) the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of
             an error of law and is set aside;

         iv) the decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal; and

          v) the findings of fact at paragraphs 20-31 are preserved.

DIRECTIONS

The remaking of this decision will be limited to the appellant's Article 8
claim with findings of fact preserved as set out in paragraph 35 above.

I have reached the provisional view that the hearing for the remaking of
this decision can and should be held remotely, by Skype for Business.

No later than 7 days after these directions are sent by the Upper Tribunal:

      a) the parties shall file and serve by email any objection to the
         hearing being a remote hearing at all/by the proposed means; in
         either case giving reasons; and

      b) without prejudice to the Upper Tribunal's consideration of any such
         objections, the parties shall also file and serve contact/join-in
         details, were the hearing to take place remotely by the means
         currently proposed.

If there is an objection to a remote hearing, the Upper Tribunal will
consider the submissions and will make any further directions considered
necessary.

If there is no objection to a remote hearing, the following directions
shall apply.

      b) The parties shall, when complying with these directions, have
         regard to the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber,
         Presidential Guidance Note No.1 2020: Arrangements during the COVID-
         19 Pandemic.

      c) The appellant shall, within 21 days of the date of this notice
         being sent, file with the Upper Tribunal and serve on the
         respondent any further evidence upon which he intends to rely at
         the resumed hearing along with a list of witnesses (if any) who
         will be giving oral evidence.

      d) The parties shall file with the Upper Tribunal and serve on each
         other skeleton arguments at least 7 days before the resumed
         hearing.

      e) The appellant shall be responsible for compiling and serving an
         agreed consolidated bundle of documents which both parties can rely
         on at the hearing. The bundle should be compiled and served in
         accordance with paragraphs 23 - 26 of the Presidential Guidance
         Note at least 7 days before the resumed hearing.

The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these directions, giving
reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties in complying.

Documents and submissions filed in response to these directions may be sent
by, or attached to, an email to [email] using the Tribunal's reference
number (found at the top of these directions) as the subject line.
Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.  This address is not generally available
for the filing of documents.  Service on the Secretary of State may be to
[email] and to the original appellant, in the absence of any contrary
instruction, by use of any address apparent from the service of these
directions.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan   7 October 2020

