

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04606/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |Determination issued                 |
|on 31 May 2017                        |On 2 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    [J A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Miss L McCrorie, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P A Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 30 December 2016.

 2. The grounds aver that the judge  overlooked  the  appellant's  evidence
    about the number of marriage proposals he made; how often and  went  he
    was beaten; his knowledge of the work hours of his lover's husband; and
    his reasons for not eloping with his lover.

 3. Permission was granted by the FtT on the view that the judge's  adverse
    credibility findings were briefly stated, and arguably were  inadequate
    and failed to have regard to the appellant's evidence  in  response  to
    the refusal decision.

 4. The Presenting Officer conceded that the  grounds  disclosed  error  of
    law, such that the decision should be set aside.  Miss McCrorie  agreed
    that the outcome should be as follows.

 5. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  None  of  its  findings  are  to
    stand, other than as a record of what was said at the hearing.

 6. The nature of the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  in  terms  of
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement  7.2  to
    remit the case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 7. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge P A Grant-Hutchison.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            31 May 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




