
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04075/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2017                           |On 31 January 2018            |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MORRIS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    t a n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss R Kotak, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
     (Oxford)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal, brought with permission, by the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department ("the Secretary of State") against  a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman promulgated on 11  July  2017  ("the
    FtT decision").   By the FtT decision the judge allowed the  appeal  of
    TAN (to whom I refer as "the appellant") against two decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State, first a deportation order dated 15 September  2016;
    and secondly, her decision dated 12 April 2017 refusing the appellant's
    asylum and human rights claim.  The FtT Judge allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal, both  in  relation  to  the  application  for  asylum  and  the
    deportation order.  The Secretary of State now appeals to this Tribunal
    on the grounds that the FtT Judge erred in her assessment of the issues
    of sufficiency of protection.  That assessment, it is submitted, was so
    inadequate as to constitute a material misdirection and thus  an  error
    of law.

 2. The factual background is that the appellant is aged 25 and a  national
    of Vietnam.  He claims to have left Vietnam in 2005  with  the  aid  of
    traffickers and travelled to Russia.  He spent seven years  working  in
    Russia and then travelled  to  Germany  and  subsequently  France.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 15 March 2016.

 3. On 7 July 2016 he pleaded  guilty  to  one  offence  of  production  of
    cannabis and was sentenced to four months' imprisonment.   We  note  in
    passing the observations made by the FtT Judge at paragraph 124 of  the
    FtT decision  setting  out  the  sentencing  judge's  comments  in  his
    sentencing remarks stating effectively that  the  offence  was  at  the
    bottom scale of seriousness and also commenting that the appellant  had
    been honest with the court from the start.

 4. On 27 July 2016 the appellant was detained  in  immigration  detention.
    As I have said, on 15 September 2016 the Secretary of  State  made  the
    deportation order.  On 20 October 2016 the  appellant  claimed  asylum.
    That application was initially refused but was reconsidered following a
    finding by the Secretary of  State  dated  23  January  2017  that  the
    appellant had indeed been the victim of trafficking.  By  the  decision
    dated 12 April 2017 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  in  a
    detailed 13 page decision.  The appellant appealed and that appeal  was
    allowed by the FtT decision.  The Secretary of State has  now  appealed
    to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  The relevant provisions and  legislation
    on this case are set out in detail in the FtT decision at paragraphs  9
    to 16.

The FTT Judgment

 5. In a detailed and well-written judgment running to some 131 paragraphs,
    the FtT  Judge  essentially  concluded,  at  paragraph  118,  that  the
    appellant qualified as a refugee under  the  1951  Convention  because,
    first, there was not sufficiency of protection  for  the  appellant  in
    Vietnam; and secondly, there is no internal relocation alternative.  As
    regards sufficiency of protection the judge considered the risk of  the
    appellant being abused or  retrafficked  upon  return  to  Vietnam  and
    directed herself by reference to the case of  Nguyen  [2015]  UKUT  170
    where the factors to be taken into account included an outstanding debt
    due to the traffickers, the absence of any supportive family willing to
    take the victim back into the family unit, no  other  support  network,
    mental health conditions, financial deprivation or little education  or
    vocational skills.  I refer to paragraph 101 of the FtT decision.

 6. The FtT Judge held as follows: First,  the  respondent  had  no  family
    support in Vietnam.  He had previously lived with his grandmother.   He
    had not had contact with either his mother or his father for many years
    before the death of his grandmother;  applying the case of  Nguyen  she
    said "it is clear that the appellant does not have a supportive  family
    willing to take him back into the family  unit"  (see  paragraph  108).
    Secondly, at paragraph 109 the FtT Judge concluded that the appellant's
    mental health was "one factor, but a limited factor that  I  take  into
    account".  Thirdly, at paragraph 110, she found that the appellant  had
    little education; he did have some vocational skills given that he  had
    worked in a garment factory in Russia.  Fourthly, at paragraph 111  she
    found that it was extremely significant in the case that not  only  had
    the appellant been a victim of traffickers from Vietnam to Russia,  but
    "he has also been further trafficked from Russia to Germany and then it
    appears from Germany to France and then again from France to the United
    Kingdom.  He clearly has a genuine fear that the traffickers could find
    him.  It is not disputed that he has had some  repeated  experience  of
    being trafficked into different exploitative situations, during some of
    which he feared for his life".

 7.  The  judge  concluded  at  paragraph  112  that  there  would  not  be
    sufficiency of protection upon return to Vietnam, taking  into  account
    the following factors: first, the repeated history of being  trafficked
    over a period of twelve years; secondly,  a  lack  of  family  support;
    thirdly, mental health problems; fourthly, limited  state  support  and
    involvement; fifthly, lack of education; and sixthly, the fact that  he
    may have an outstanding debt to the traffickers.

 8. Then, as regards internal relocation, the judge found at paragraphs 115
    and 116 that because of the system of household registration in Vietnam
    and the computerised ID registration card system in Vietnam, his former
    traffickers might be able to find or track him, both when  he  returned
    to Vietnam and, if and when he relocated, when he relocated.

 9. In relation to the decision to deport the FtT Judge held, at paragraphs
    125 to 130, that exception  1  to  Section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  applied  to  the  appellant's  case
    because,  "there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration into Vietnam if he was to be deported".  In  reaching  that
    conclusion the FtT judge relied upon the same  factors  as  she  relied
    upon in relation to the asylum claim.

The Grounds of Appeal

10. The Secretary of State puts forward two essential  grounds  of  appeal:
    first, that the FtT Judge materially misdirected herself in respect  of
    all the bases upon which the appeal  had  been  held  to  succeed;  and
    secondly, the FtT Judge did not explain the basis upon  which  she  had
    accepted the credibility of the appellant's evidence  in  circumstances
    where he had a criminal conviction.

11. Dealing with the second ground first, we consider that this  ground  is
    not well-founded for two reasons: first, it is clear that the Secretary
    of State herself in the decision had made a positive finding as to  the
    appellant's credibility, and thus the appellant's credibility was never
    in issue in the case.  Secondly, insofar as the Secretary of State  now
    seeks to rely on the fact that the appellant had a criminal  conviction
    as grounds for impugning his credibility, we refer in particular to the
    sentencing comments of Judge Henderson  which  the  FtT  Judge  herself
    recorded, that not only was the criminal conviction at  the  bottom  of
    the end scale of seriousness, but that the judge had gone  out  of  his
    way to comment upon the appellant's honesty with  the  court  from  the
    outset.

12. As regards the first ground, the Secretary of State seeks to impugn the
    findings of the FtT Judge on the following  five  elements  or  factors
    which she took into account.  I will enumerate them first and then deal
    with them each in turn:-

      i) Relevance of onward trafficking within Europe.

     ii) Lack of family support.

    iii) Mental health problems.

     iv) Lack of education.

      v) Outstanding debt.

13. Turning to relevance of onward  trafficking,  the  Secretary  of  State
    submits that there is no evidence that the persons who  had  trafficked
    the appellant within Europe had any connections  with  or  presence  in
    Vietnam.  In response the appellant submits that  throughout  the  case
    and the evidence placed before the First-tier Tribunal, there was never
    any suggestion other  than  that  the  appellant  had  been  trafficked
    throughout by one and the same network of traffickers.  In her argument
    Miss Kotak refers to particular paragraphs in the  FtT  decision  which
    she says, and we accept, support the proposition that  there  was  only
    ever one network of traffickers.  In this regard we refer to paragraphs
    21 and 22 of the FtT decision from which it  is  clear  that  there  is
    reference to the traffickers, and in paragraph 22 that it was the  same
    traffickers as before who had trafficked the appellant from Germany  to
    France.

14. We also note in paragraph 111 that the FtT Judge again  refers  to  the
    appellant having a genuine fear that the traffickers  could  find  him,
    and similarly in paragraphs 115 and 116 it is also clear that  what  is
    being considered are one group of traffickers (I refer in particular to
    the last  sentence  of  paragraph  116).   In  those  circumstances  we
    consider that the FtT Judge was entirely entitled to take into  account
    the fact (as being extremely significant) that the appellant had been a
    victim  of  trafficking,  not  only  from  out  of  Vietnam  but   also
    subsequently within Europe, and that that fact was highly  material  to
    his risk of retrafficking on return.

15. The second ground, lack of  family  support:  the  Secretary  of  State
    submits that the finding of lack of family support was not made out  on
    the evidence.  She refers in particular to  paragraph  45  of  the  FtT
    decision where it is recorded that in cross-examination at the  hearing
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  put  to  the  appellant  that
    initially he had stated that he had lived with his mother and not  with
    his grandmother.  The answer that the appellant gave to that  was  that
    he had always said that he had lived with his grandmother and that  the
    statement in his initial statement that he had lived  with  his  mother
    may have been an error of the interpreter.  Miss Kotak submits, and  we
    accept, that with the exception of that first initial  statement  which
    was no more than one page long, his evidence throughout had  been  that
    he had been living with his grandmother and the first  time  that  that
    was questioned was in cross-examination before the FtT Judge.   In  our
    judgment, given that credibility was not apparently in issue, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to accept the appellant's evidence  in
    this regard based on his credibility  and  that  his  answer  given  in
    paragraph 45 was one that he was entitled to accept  and  that  he  was
    consistent with all the other evidence that  the  appellant  had  given
    throughout other than in that first statement.   In  our  judgment,  in
    this regard, there was no material misdirection amounting to  an  error
    of law on the part of the FtT Judge.

16. As regards the third factor, mental health problems, the  Secretary  of
    State submits that there is a conflict between paragraph 109 of the FtT
    decision where the judge concluded that the appellant's  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and depression was only a limited factor  to  be  taken
    into account, and paragraph 112 of the decision where  the  judge  took
    account as one of  his  factors  "his  mental  health  problems".   The
    Secretary of State submits that the judge should not have given  weight
    to those mental health problems in paragraph 112 in the  light  of  his
    previous finding in  paragraph  109.   In  our  judgment  there  is  no
    substance to this ground of appeal.  Paragraph 112 merely  states  that
    the judge has taken into account the appellant's mental health problems
    and is identified as only one of the  factors  he  took  into  account.
    That finding is not inconsistent with a  finding  that  those  problems
    might be a relatively limited factor.  In our  judgement  there  is  no
    inconsistency between paragraph 109 and paragraph 112.

17. Fourthly, the Secretary of State submits that the judge  was  wrong  to
    take into account lack of education as a factor likely to increase  the
    risk of retrafficking.  First, the judge recognised (so  the  Secretary
    of State submits) that the  appellant  has  significant  experience  of
    working in a textiles  factory  (see  paragraphs  20  and  110  of  the
    decision).  The judge failed to take that into account and also  failed
    to take into account that it is well-known that the textile industry in
    Vietnam is one of the single, biggest employers.  Secondly,  the  judge
    failed to explain why lack of education  would  prevent  the  appellant
    from accessing a livelihood in Vietnam.  In our judgment  it  is  plain
    that at paragraph 110 of the decision the FtT Judge did take account of
    the fact that the appellant had  some  vocational  skills.   Vocational
    skills and education are two distinct factors.  We do not  accept  that
    it necessarily follows that having worked for seven years in Russia  in
    the conditions which were described by  Miss  Kotak  as  conditions  of
    slavery would necessarily give him sufficient or relevant experience to
    obtain employment in Vietnam in the textile industry, as to which there
    is no evidence before the Tribunal; and secondly, in our judgment,  the
    FtT Judge was entirely entitled to take  into  account  distinctly  his
    lack of education, not least taking account of the  fact  that  he  had
    left Vietnam when he was 13.

18. Finally, the Secretary of State refers to the finding in relation to an
    outstanding debt.  At paragraph 112  the  FtT  Judge  relied  upon  the
    possibility of an outstanding debt to the traffickers.   The  Secretary
    of State submits that it was not clear in the decision  how  the  judge
    could conclude that such a debt remained outstanding given the evidence
    of the appellant recorded at paragraph 50  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant had never known his level of debt.  In respect of this ground
    we do not consider that the precise amount of  the  debt  is  relevant.
    More importantly, in the  decision  at  paragraph  112  the  FtT  Judge
    accepted that the appellant "may"  have  an  outstanding  debt  to  the
    traffickers and that was  one  of  the  factors  that  was  taken  into
    account.  He was prepared to accept the evidence of the appellant given
    at the appeal hearing on that matter.  In our judgment  the  FtT  Judge
    was entitled to take that into account as one of  the  factors  and  he
    neither misdirected himself nor was there any error of law in  relation
    to that finding.  The only point we would add in parenthesis is that in
    paragraph 112 there is a reference to the judge dealing with  the  debt
    further on in the judgment and it appears that in  fact  there  was  no
    further consideration after 112 of the debt issue.

19. Accordingly, we conclude that there was no material misdirection by the
    FtT Judge in relation to any of these matters.  The FtT Judge carefully
    considered the evidence and made findings of fact based on the evidence
    before her and findings which were available  to  her,  and  for  those
    reasons we would dismiss this appeal.  We would in any event have found
    that if there was indeed one single error or  two  single  errors  they
    would not have been material errors given the overall  conclusions  and
    the comprehensive manner in which the appeal was dealt with.  For those
    reasons the appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge will stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   The
decision is anonymised owing to the sensitive nature of the appeal.

|                |[pic]                     |
|Signed          |Mr Justice Morris         |
|Dated           |30 January 2018           |



