
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/04456/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 22 January 2018                    |            On 12 February 2018       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    Mr AT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 20 June 2017, First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  M
    A  Khan  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  appellant,  a   national   of
    Afghanistan, against the decision made by the respondent on 11 May 2017
    refusing him international protection.  The appellant has permission to
    challenge the judge's decision.  It is unnecessary to set  out  details
    because  Ms  Fijiwala  confirmed  that  in  light  of  the  appellant's
    application to amend and expand the grounds,  the  respondent  did  not
    oppose the appellant's grounds.   The  appellant's  grounds  contended,
    inter alia, that the judge had failed  to  treat  the  appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness as required by  AM  (Afghanistan)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1123.

2.   In the nature of the judge's errors it is necessary to  set  aside  his
    decision and remit it to the FtT to be heard  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge M A Khan.

3.   There is one matter on which it may be appropriate for me  to  make  an
    observation, since it may arise in the next hearing as a point in issue
    between the parties.  It is noted by the judge that in the Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter the respondent accepted that the appellant had  given  a
    credible account.  The judge took a different view.   It  is  open,  of
    course, to the Presenting Officer at the next hearing to  maintain  the
    positive e view  of  credibility  taken  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    decision; but if at the new hearing the respondent chooses to  withdraw
    or qualify the view taken therein, then credibility will properly be in
    issue, so long as the appellant has been given notice of this fact.

4.   Accordingly, I direct that within fourteen days of this decision  being
    sent  the  respondent  inform  the   Tribunal   and   the   appellant's
    representatives whether at the new hearing there will be any  challenge
    to the credibility of the appellant's account.

5.   For the above reasons:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge M A Khan).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
         [pic]                      Date: 7 February 2018
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

