
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04653/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|(Skype for Business)                 |On 09 March 2021                     |
|On 27 November 2020                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Saeed, Aman Solicitors Advocates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge I Howard  promulgated  on  3  December  2019,
    allowing MH's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  made
    on  22  October  2018  to  deport  him  pursuant  to  Section   3(5)(a)
    Immigration Act 1971.  The judge dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds but allowed it on human rights grounds.

 2. The respondent was born in Fallujah, Iraq, in  1989.   He  lived  there
    until 2002 with his mother, father, two brothers and sisters.  He is  a
    Sunni Muslim.  The appellant's father was in the Iraqi Army  from  1981
    to 1988.

 3. In 2002 the respondent and his parents fled Fallujah.  The rest of  the
    family remained  including  older  siblings,  the  father  fearing  the
    actions of the American Forces due to his previous service in the Iraqi
    Army.  The family then travelled to Turkey and then to Libya where they
    remained for three years.  The appellant was forced into servitude on a
    farm there but escaped.  He lost contact with his parents in 2012  once
    in Libya, then made his way back to Turkey, then on to Europe, arriving
    in the United Kingdom in 2006.

 4. The appellant had heard nothing from his family since it fell to  Daesh
    and fears that if returned to Iraq, being from Fallujah,  he  would  be
    targeted as a Daesh sympathiser by pro-Iranian  Shia  Muslims  who  now
    control the country.

 5. Although he says he arrived in the United Kingdom in January  2006  the
    appellant was not encountered by the authorities until 15  March  2009.
    He has a number of convictions for shoplifting and common  assault  and
    on 17 July 2018 was sentenced to a total of nine  months'  imprisonment
    for three offences of shoplifting subsequent to a conviction on 26  May
    2018 and two convictions for shoplifting and common assault  for  which
    he was sentenced to four months' imprisonment.   It was only after that
    incident that the respondent claimed asylum.

The Secretary of State's Case

 6. The Secretary of State accepted that the respondent  is  a  citizen  of
    Iraq but did not accept an account of how he was nearly raped by people
    who were targeting Sunni Muslims, nor did she accept that he is  wanted
    by both the Iraqi and American governments.  With respect to the latter
    she noted inconsistencies in his accounts of when and how he learnt his
    father was wanted, nor did she accept that the authorities  would  have
    an adverse interest in him or that he would subsequently be targeted by
    the Hashid al-Shabi, a militia group.

 7. The Secretary of State did not consider it credible that the respondent
    and his parents would not have endeavoured to maintain contact with the
    siblings who remained living in Fallujah and with his  uncle.   It  was
    not considered credible either that he  had  a  genuine  fear  for  his
    parents' life if he had not made a call to the Libyan government, as he
    said he intended to do, in over seven years but that  "nonetheless  the
    benefit of this doubt has been given to this element of your claim".

 8. The Secretary of State drew inferences adverse to the  respondent  from
    his failure to claim asylum en route to the  United  Kingdom  and  from
    failing to claim asylum until 2019.  She  concluded  this  damaged  his
    credibility pursuant to Section 8(4)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

 9. Having had regard to paragraph 339L, the Secretary of State  considered
    the respondent was not entitled to the benefit of the  doubt  principle
    and did not accept he was no longer in contact with his family.

10. Assessing his claim in line with AA (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT
    544, she concluded that it  was  not  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
    reunite with his family with whom he had had a very caring relationship
    and there would not be a real risk  for  him  travelling  from  Baghdad
    Airport to the southern governorates.  She considered also that as  the
    respondent was in possession of an expired Iraqi ID card  he  would  be
    able to use this and obtain a laissez-passer to return anywhere in Iraq
    and thus it was feasible for him to return there.  She did not consider
    either that he was entitled to humanitarian protection there  being  no
    real risk of serious harm on return nor was she satisfied that  he  was
    entitled to leave on Article 3 or Article 8 grounds.

11. The judge heard evidence from the respondent  who  was  cross-examined.
    He also heard submissions from both representatives.   The  judge  also
    had before him a medical report from Dr Beeks and an expert report from
    Dr Allen George.  The judge directed himself that the primary issue was
    to determine the credibility of the respondent's account  [26].   While
    accepting the medical evidence that there had been violent assaults  on
    him, he did  not discount that the violence was  perpetrated  upon  him
    elsewhere than Fallujah [35] given the  inconsistencies  identified  in
    the core account and did not accept the account of the violent  assault
    on him at the age of 10 in Fallujah, noting he had lived on the margins
    of society in several countries as an adult and had been attacked there
    also.

12. Given he did not accept the respondent's account of what  had  happened
    to him at about the age of 10, the judge was not satisfied the  parents
    did in fact leave Iraq when they did [37].

13. The judge then went on to consider returning  the  respondent  to  Iraq
    [41], considering that he would travel first back to Baghdad  remaining
    in the "Baghdad belt" discounting him travelling east  of  Fallujah  as
    that remains as a contested area [42].  Noting that the respondent  had
    an expired Iraqi ID card [44], he concluded he would be able to  obtain
    a laissez- passer to allow him to travel to  Baghdad  which  would  not
    assist him beyond arrival at the airport.  He concluded the  respondent
    would need other documentation to make the  journey  such  as  an  INC,
    passport or an Iraqi CSID.  He noted that without that  card  he  could
    not travel away from Baghdad as  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212.  The judge
    directed himself that given the breakdown in  effective  administration
    between 2014 and 2017 the only way that a CSID card can be obtained  by
    the attendance of male relatives at the civil registry armed with their
    own CSID and a willingness to vouch  for  the  appellant.   Noting  the
    respondent would be in Baghdad and his  relatives  elsewhere  in  Iraq,
    possibly Fallujah or elsewhere in the Al Anbar province  which   placed
    him in a legal limbo, he found [47] it was not clear whether he had  to
    be able to leave the airport, referring to AAH  at  paragraph  40.   He
    noted also further that Fallujah was  under  Daesh  control  from  2016
    until 2018 it remaining unclear if any of the Iraqi state was  able  to
    function in that area or whether the records needed to be  accessed  by
    the appellant's family to secure his CSID would be obtainable at all.

14. Turning then to AA, the judge concluded having regard to Section  E  of
    the country guidance [52] that the  respondent  is  one  of  the  small
    number of people for whom it is not reasonable to relocate  to  Baghdad
    [55].

15. The judge  then  concluded  the  respondent  had  not  shown  he  faced
    persecution for a qualifying reason if returned to Iraq [57] then that:



         "I am satisfied that the [respondent] has  established  substantial
         grounds for believing that if returned to Iraq he would face a real
         risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or owing to  such  to
         risk, is unwilling to avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  that
         country."

16. The judge then concluded that the  respondent  was  not  excluded  from
    humanitarian protection by paragraph 339D but then wrote simply:

         "The case advanced by  the  appellant  is  not  one  that  warrants
         consideration of subsidiary protection."

17. The judge then wrote that the respondent had not advanced on Article  8
    before him, dismissed the appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds but allowed it on human rights grounds.

18. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred by not:

      i) specifying under which articles he had allowed the appeal on  human
         rights grounds and in failing to give reasons for doing so;

     ii) making any findings with regards to Article 8;

    iii) giving adequate reasons as to why the appellant would not  be  able
         to obtain a CSID on return to Iraq or that his treatment on  return
         to Iraq would be to Articles 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Act.

19. On 17 January 2020 Resident Judge JFW Phillips issued a notice  stating
    that he proposed to set aside the decision under Rule 35, for it to  be
    dealt with again by the First-tier Tribunal because,

         having found at paragraph 57 that the respondent's  removal  "would
         not be in breach of the Refugee Convention or the Qualifying  (sic)
         Directive, the judge goes on at paragraph  59  (to  find  that  the
         appellant would face a real risk of suffering serious harm).   This
         is contradictory.  Further, having made these  findings  the  judge
         goes on to dismiss the  appeal  both  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
         protection as granted then to allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
         grounds.  In doing so not only does he not articulate  why  he  has
         allowed the appeal on human rights grounds or, having dismissed the
         appeal under the Qualification  Directive,  which  article  of  the
         Human  Rights  Convention  is  nevertheless  engaged.   This  is  a
         material error of law.

20. The respondent's representatives did not, however, accept there was  an
    error of law and thus permission to appeal was granted.   Also,  on  19
    March 2020, Judge Howard provided a note stating that as it was not his
    intention to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds but to
    allow it on Article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,  his  decision
    could not be remedied by operation of Rule 31.

21. Subsequent  to  this  and  directions  issued  at  various  times,  the
    respondent has provided a Rule 24 response.

22. I heard submissions from both representatives.

23. Mr Whitwell submitted first, that although the judge  directed  himself
    that credibility was an issue, there appeared to be no  explanation  or
    findings as to whether the respondent was still in contact with  family
    in Iraq despite this having been put in issue in  the  refusal  letter.
    Having proceeded on the basis that the respondent had  an  expired  INC
    card, the judge has not sufficiently engaged with AAH at  paragraph  27
    as to how his CSID card was obtained.  He submitted that the  Secretary
    of State was unable to determine from the decision why  the  judge  had
    accepted, as appeared to  be  the  case,  that  the  appellant  had  no
    relatives to assist him in obtaining a CSID card.  He submitted further
    that these defects were amplified by the judge's  failure  to  properly
    explain how he had got from there  being  no  CSID  card  available  to
    allowing the appeal on Article 3  without  having  to  go  through,  in
    detail, the relevant country guidance without which much  of  what  the
    judge said made little sense.

24. Mr Saeed submitted that the findings  with  regard  to  the  CSID  were
    sustainable given that personal attendance of the relevant  office  was
    required and  that  the  records  would  have  been  in  Fallujah.   He
    submitted relying on the country guidance case that the  reasoning  was
    sustainable as regards the CSID cards.

25. Mr Saeed submitted that probably there was no deficiency  of  reasoning
    with regard to the CSID card.  He submitted further that there  was  no
    need for there to be any discussion regarding whether  the  appeal  was
    allowed on Article 8 grounds given that it was  expressly  stated  that
    the respondent was relying on  these.   That  had  been  clear  in  the
    skeleton argument and thus presented to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    thus the parties were clear about the issues.

26. Mr Saeed submitted further that on a proper  examination  of  the  risk
    factors identified in the relevant country guidance, there were  proper
    reasons given for the finding that the appellant would be destitute and
    therefore had reached the risk  of  an  Article  3  breach.   Mr  Saeed
    submitted further that the respondent's identity document  was  out  of
    date.  Without a CSID he could not travel  away  from  Baghdad  and  in
    order to obtain one a number of other documents were required  or  that
    he would require the attendance of male relatives at the civil registry
    armed with their  own  CSID  and  the  willingness  to  vouch  for  the
    respondent.  He submitted that in this case given what had happened  in
    Fallujah it is not clear whether the records needed to be  accessed  to
    secure a CSID at all.  Further, he submitted that based on the most up-
    to-date country guidance in SMO, KSP and IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 that the respondent would  qualify
    for a humanitarian protection (see paragraph 7  to  19)  and  thus  the
    appeal should be allowed on that basis.

27. I bear in mind that this is expressly a reasons challenge.  I  bear  in
    mind also as was noted in KB (Jamaica) that care has to be exercised in
    overturning decisions of  the  first  fact-finding  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

28. The challenges to the judge's findings fall into two categories:

      a) That the reasoning behind the finding that the respondent would not
         be able to get a replacement CSID is flawed; and,

      b) That the basis on which there would be a breach of Article 3 of the
         Human Rights Convention is not properly explained.

29. There is, I consider, a sufficient basis in the grounds of challenge to
    permit the Secretary of State to argue that insufficient  reasons  were
    given regarding the inability to obtain a CSID in the sense that  there
    were, as Mr Whitwell submitted, no findings regarding relevant  members
    of the family.  That  does  not,  however,  mean  that  the  error  was
    material.

30. In fairness to the Secretary of State I do note that the judge,  having
    made findings with regard to the  respondent's  credibility,  does  not
    make any specific findings, although this was clearly put in  issue  in
    the refusal letter  which  stated  it  had  not  been  shown  that  the
    respondent is still in contact with his family.  The only findings that
    the judge reached is with regard to the respondent's account as to  the
    timing and circumstances of  his  departure  from  Fallujah.   He  does
    accept that he left Fallujah but does not make any findings as to when,
    nor does he make any findings as to whether there was any truth in  the
    account of the family having left with him.  That said, it  is  evident
    that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom since at least  2009.
     But it is necessary to have regard to what is said about the CSID  and
    how it can be obtained as is set out in AA (Iraq) and AAH  (Iraq).   It
    is worth noting also that the issue first arose in MK (Iraq) CG  [2012]
    UKUT 126.  Irrespective of whether this is still country guidance there
    is nothing to suggest that the details that  he  gave  as  to  how  one
    replaces a lost CSID is to be done.  The headnote makes it  clear  that
    the general position is they are required to return to their home  area
    to do so, in this case Fallujah.  That is implicit also in AA  and  AAH
    hence the need for personal attendance by family members who can  vouch
    for an individual and who also have a valid CSID (see AAH at  paragraph
    179).

31. In considering the then relevant Country Guidance at the  time  of  the
    decision, it must be recalled that Fallujah is in Anbar (see paragraphs
    104 and 105 of AA (Iraq)).  It is also necessary to consider  paragraph
    25 of AAH:


    25.  Dr Fatah states to  his  knowledge  the  documents  that  must  be
    produced in order to apply for a CSID within Iraq are:


    i)                  Application form
    ii)                 Birth certificate
    iii)              A 'housing card' or a letter from  the  local council
             confirming the applicant's residence
    iv)               (In the IKR) a recommendation from the mukhtar
    v)                 PDS card
    vi)                Two photographs of the  applicant  (or  in  the IKR,
four)
     This information broadly accords with that reproduced by Landinfo
    (December 2015), who confirm this list but add that the ID card of a
    close relative would also be required. Dr Fatah has been told by
    practitioners in the IKR that a person returned to Iraq from abroad who
    wishes to replace his CSID would, before making his application, also
    require a certificate from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

32. The judge rightly directed himself at [41] in respect of  the  relevant
    country guidance.  That he applied that guidance is implicit from  what
    he says at 42 to 47 although it might have been easier if this had been
    clearer more clearly expressed.

33. The judge states at [46] the difficulties in obtaining a CSID.   It  is
    evident the judge considered, rightly, that the respondent  would  have
    significant difficulties in actually going from Baghdad to Fallujah  to
    present himself.  Even with  the  assistance  of  relatives.   That  is
    consistent with the then applicable guidance on contested and  formerly
    contested areas, and travel without documents. It is also evident  that
    the respondent would not be able to provide the documents listed by  Dr
    Fatah to be able to get the CSID on his own.

34. It does appear at [51] that the judge found the respondent's family and
    friends would not be in Baghdad but would be in  and  around  Fallujah.
    There is little or no reasoning behind that, but it is to  be  recalled
    that the respondent had been out of Iraq for at least 10 years by  that
    point, living on the margins in various countries.

35.  Absent  a  finding  about  family  contact,  is  the  judgment   still
    sustainable?  It is evident that the judge did not discount all of  the
    respondent's account as at [35] he accepted that he had spent  a  large
    number of years living on the margins of society in countries including
    Libya.

36. It is in that context also relevant to consider whether,  even  if  the
    respondent  were  in  contact  with  relatives,  he  could   obtain   a
    replacement CSID.

37. In AA (Iraq) at point 13 of the country guidance it says this:

    13. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered if P
    is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of  P's  Governorate
    because it is in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring.
    As a result of the violence, alternative CSA Offices for  Mosul,  Anbar
    and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in  Baghdad  and  Kerbala.  The
    evidence does not demonstrate that the "Central Archive", which  exists
    in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those  in  need  of
    them. There is, however, a National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P
    could apply for formal recognition of identity. The  precise  operation
    of this court is, however, unclear.

38. In that context, whether or not  the  appellant  had  relatives  is  of
    limited assistance or relevance in determining whether or not he  could
    obtain a CSID and accordingly, it not being suggested  that  the  judge
    erred in concluding by following AAH that  it  would  be  difficult  to
    return to Fallujah which is in Anbar, that  part  of  the  decision  is
    sustainable.

39. The question then becomes whether on that basis  the  appellant  is  at
    risk of an Article 3 breach; there is no  effective  challenge  to  the
    findings at paragraph 51 of the decision.

40. The judge does, however, appear to have misunderstood Section E  quoted
    in paragraph 52.  A careful reading of AAH makes  it  clear  that  this
    relates to entry into the IKR.  But this is not a point prayed  in  aid
    in the grounds by the Secretary of State.  There is no challenge to the
    fact that the respondent is Sunni and of Kurdish origin and  came  from
    the area of Fallujah which, as is accepted, was under Daesh control for
    a significant period.  As was noted in BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq  CG
    [2017] UKUT 18, at [107]:

    Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves  create  a  real
    risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a real  risk
    for the purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive or Article 3 of  the  ECHR  if  assessed  on  a
    cumulative basis. The assessment will depend on the facts of each case.
41. Similarly, in AA (Iraq)
    151. The Respondent's position is that, save for those returnees in the
    category identified below, it would in general be reasonable,  and  not
    unduly harsh, to expect a person to relocate to Baghdad city  if  there
    is an Article 15(c) risk in their home  area.  The  exception  to  this
    generality is identified by the Respondent as being:


         "A person returned to Iraq who was unable to  replace  their  Civil
         Status ID Card or Nationality Certificate [who would] be likely  to
         face  significant  difficulties  in  accessing   services   and   a
         livelihood and would face destitution which is likely to reach  the
         Article 3 threshold. [6]"


    152.     Having considered the entirely of the evidence before  us,  we
    have come broadly to the same conclusions as the Respondent - save that
    we observe that there will undoubtedly be persons who  do  not  have  a
    CSID and who have been returned with a passport or an expired  passport
    who will not be destitute in Baghdad, and for whom there are  no  other
    reasons why relocation there would not be reasonable. In  this  regard,
    whilst Dr Fatah provides evidence, which we  accept,  that  a  CSID  is
    required to access income/financial assistance, employment,  education,
    housing, a pension, and medical  committee  documents,  there  will  be
    persons who do not have a CSID but who nevertheless have access  to  an
    adequate support mechanism in Baghdad; for example those  persons  with
    family or friends in Baghdad who are willing and able to  provide  such
    assistance to them. Such  matters  will,  of  course,  require  careful
    consideration of the evidence, and a reasoned finding to  be  made,  in
    each case.


    153.     The number of persons for whom it is not  reasonable,  or  for
    whom it would be unduly harsh, to relocate to  Baghdad  is,  we  think,
    likely to be small.

42. This is implicitly the guidance followed by the judge at  [55]  of  his
    decision.

43. Pulling all these  strands  together,  while  the  reasoning  could  be
    clearer, it is adequate and sustainable when seen through the  lens  of
    the relevant country guidance; it is clear that the judge followed  it,
    and the Secretary of State is also fully aware of that guidance. It  is
    sufficiently clear that the judge concluded  that  there  would  be  an
    article 3 breach, following Country Guidance and that his finding  that
    the respondent would not be able to obtain a CSID was sustainable, even
    if the findings as to family contact were  not  sustainable  given  the
    other difficulties there would be  in  the  respondent  attending  with
    those relatives in Fallujah, even assuming that the records there  were
    extant.

44. Given it was common ground before the judge  that  article  8  was  not
    being pursued, it is sufficiently clear that the appeal was allowed  on
    the grounds that the respondent's article 3 rights  would  be  breached
    and that the reason for that followed country guidance. To that extent,
    there  is  no  merit  in  the  observation  that  there  is  no  proper
    explanation for the judge's decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

45. But what that does not do is explain why if  there  was  an  Article  3
    risk, as Resident Judge Phillips noted, that  such  a  threat  did  not
    engage the Refugee Convention.  Further, an Article 3 breach  in  these
    circumstances would inevitably amount to serious  harm  within  Article
    15(b) of the Qualification Directive which would in itself entitle  the
    respondent to humanitarian protection.

46. Further, and as Mr Whitwell accepted, the respondent would appear to be
    entitled to humanitarian protection if the  finding  of  an  article  3
    breach is sustained.

47. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error  of  law  as
    averred by the Secretary of State.

48. I do, however, observe that as Judge  Phillips  noted,  the  respondent
    ought to  have  been  recognised  as  being  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection

49. For that reason, I issued a decision on  15  December  2020,  proposing
    that the appeal be disposed of by substituting a decision allowing  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds  rather  than  human  rights
    grounds, stating my preliminary view that the findings  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  should  be  upheld,  save  for  the  finding  that  the
    respondent is not entitled to humanitarian protection and that a  fresh
    decision  should  be  issued,  allowing  the  appeal  on   humanitarian
    protection grounds, without the need for a further hearing.

50. I also directed that any objection to that proposed  course  of  action
    must be made in writing within 14 days of the issue of this decision.

51. The respondent has  agreed  to  the  proposed  course  of  action;  the
    Secretary of State has made no response.

52. Accordingly, I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not involve the making of an error of law, save for  the  finding  that
    the appeal should be allowed  on  human  rights  grounds,  rather  than
    humanitarian protection grounds.  Subject  to  that  substitution,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld



    Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. For the reasons given above, I  substitute  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision with a decision allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds, as well as on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 4 March 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



