
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04950/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|On 2 April 2019                          |On 1 May 2019                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Miss S Sanders instructed by Nebula Law Solicitors.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        Tier Tribunal Judge Turnock who, in a decision  promulgated  on  18
        July 2018, allowed AA's appeal pursuant to article 3 ECHR.






Background


     2. The above respondent, AA, is a male citizen of Iraq born on 3 April
        1980. The Judge sets out his immigration history between [2  -  14]
        of the decision under challenge. At [47] the  Judge  notes  AA  was
        sentenced to 18 months imprisonment on 1 July 2011 for  seeking  to
        obtain leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  by  deception.  The
        Judge sets out the sentencing  remarks  in  this  paragraph.  As  a
        result a deportation order was made against AA.
     3. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [68]  in  which  there  is
        reference at [87] to the country guidance case  of  AAH.  The  core
        findings are set out between [102 - 106] and [108  -  110]  in  the
        following terms:


             102.     There is no doubt that the Appellant's credibility is
                  damaged by the previous findings  and  by  virtue  of  the
                  criminal  offence,  particularly  taking  account  of  the
                  nature of the offence. However, it does not follow that he
                  cannot be believed about anything he says. Account can  be
                  taken of the fact that his criminal offence was  committed
                  in 2006  and  that  he  has  not  committed  any  offences
                  subsequently.


             103.     The Appellant has now been away from Iraq for some 18
                  years during which time the country has been in a state of
                  turmoil and upheaval. It is entirely plausible that he  is
                  no longer aware of the whereabouts  and  circumstances  of
                  his uncle in Dohuk. There  has  never  been  any  evidence
                  presented to suggest that he was in possession of  a  CSID
                  card and I accept that he does not have one. I also accept
                  that he does not have any wider family in Iraq.


             104.     With regard to the suggestion that he might  be  able
                  to obtain a replacement CSID card that is far from being a
                  straightforward  matter.  As  was  explained  in  AAH  (at
                  paragraph 20) an individual is considered to be 'from' the
                  Governate or district where  his  family  registration  is
                  held. Where that is, subject to certain  exceptions,  will
                  usually be where his or her father was registered.


             105.     Therefore, even though the  Appellant's  most  recent
                  address in Iraq was in  Dohuk  his  registration  district
                  would remain Mosul. A replacement card would  have  to  be
                  sought from there. As was further  explained  in  AAH,  at
                  paragraph 28, the only way  that  a  totally  undocumented
                  Iraqi could realistically hope to obtain a new  CSID  will
                  be the attendance at the Civil Registry of a  male  family
                  member prepared to vouch for him or her. The production of
                  a CSID from, for instance,  an  uncle,  would  enable  the
                  Registrar to trace back through  the  record  to  find  an
                  individual's father, and in turn him.


             106.     There would be a number of problems  associated  with
                  that arrangement. Apart from the need to return to an area
                  to which the Respondent concedes the Appellant  cannot  be
                  returned. If he did return, he would  be  faced  with  the
                  difficult of trying to establish the necessary details  to
                  enable a replacement card to be issued. Under ISIL control
                  all recording of official  events  was  banned,  and  some
                  civil register  offices,  such  as  that  in  Mosul,  were
                  damaged or destroyed. In Mosul alone there are 1.5 million
                  Iraqis who will need their records updated. [See paragraph
                  30 of AAH].


             ...


             108.     Considering the Country Guidance issued  in  AAH  and
                  the Appellants evidence, I make the following findings:


                  The Appellant does not have any form of  documentation  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register.


                  The location of the relevant civil registry office  is  in
                  Mosul which was under the control of  ISIS  who  undertook
                  destruction of the records.


                  The Appellant does not have any male members who would  be
                  able to attend the civil registry with him.


             109.     I  find  that  the  Appellant  would  fall  with  the
                  category of those described in paragraph 9 of the  Country
                  Guidance and in particular those at 9 (iii) who would have
                  to resort to a critical shelter arrangement  for  housing.
                  He would be unable to work as he would be without a  CSID.
                  He has no family connections. He is from an  area  with  a
                  marked association with ISIL although he left the  country
                  so many years ago  that  he  should  not  fall  under  any
                  suspicion because of that association. He does  have  some
                  skills acquired in the UK but the unemployment rate is  so
                  high and the absence of a CSID  means  that  there  is  no
                  realistic prospect of securing employment.


             110.     I conclude that the Appellant is, accordingly in need
                  of humanitarian protection and internal relocation is  not
                  an option. If I were wrong in that assessment I would find
                  that his removal would be in breach of  his  rights  under
                  article 3 of the ECHR.


     4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  which  included
        an application to lodge the appeal out of time. On 7 September 2018
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell refused the application  in  the
        following terms:


             1.  The  respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal  against  a
                decision which was made by Judge Turnock on 18  July  2018,
                allowing the appellant's appeal against the refusal of  his
                protection and human rights claims.
             2. The application is brought significantly out of  time.  The
                decision was sent on 18  July  and  an  appeal  was  to  be
                brought on or before 1 August 2018. The grounds  of  appeal
                lodged on 28 August. There is not a reasonable  explanation
                for the delay. Part B of the  IAFT-4  reproduces  an  email
                exchange between the civil servants in the Home Office  and
                HMCTS that contains no explanation of how it bears on  this
                case. It appears that some decisions, including  this  one,
                were re-promulgated. I am not even told, however, when  the
                respondent   first   received   this   decision.   In   the
                circumstances, I do not consider there to be an adequate or
                reasonable explanation for the delay. I  have  nevertheless
                considered all relevant circumstances, including the public
                interest in reinforcing compliance with the  Rules.  Having
                done so, I decline to extend time.
             3. I would nevertheless have refused permission to appeal. The
                Judge was clearly cognisant of the guidance in  AAH  (Iraq)
                and the fact that his assessment of the appellant's ability
                to obtain  a  CSID  took  place  against  the  backdrop  of
                previous   credibility   findings   and   the   appellant's
                criminality. He nevertheless accepted that an  appellant  -
                who originates from Mosul - would not be able to  obtain  a
                CSID. The  reasoning  process  by  which  he  reached  that
                conclusion was demonstrably thorough,  and  the  respondent
                fails  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  engage  with   the
                fundamental reasons that the Judge so concluded.  In  light
                of  the  extant  country  guidance,  that  conclusion   was
                determinative of the appeal in the appellant's favour.
             4. In the circumstances, I refuse to  extend  time  and  would
                have refused permission to appeal.


     5. The Secretary  of  State  renewed  the  application  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal in  which  it  is  now  confirmed  the  determination  was
        received by the Specialist Appeals  Team  on  18  August  2018  and
        responded to within 10 working days.
     6. Permission to appeal was granted by Dr H H Storey  on  21  November
        2018 in the following terms:


             "It is arguable that the Judge erred in failing to consider in
             light of his adverse findings on the  appellant's  credibility
             that the appellant would in fact be able to obtain a CSID with
             help  from  his  wider  family  and  that  he  had  not  taken
             reasonable steps to demonstrate he could not. No  reasons  are
             given at paras 102-103 save for the abstract proposition  that
             just because someone's credibility is damaged  does  not  mean
             they cannot be believed about anything. The  grounds  disclose
             an arguable error of law."



Error of law


     7. In relation to the time issue, the Secretary of State has  provided
        evidence supporting the contention he did not receive the  decision
        when  originally  promulgated  from  which  time   was   originally
        calculated, but in fact only received a proper copy when  the  same
        was  re-promulgated  on  18  August  2018.  The   application   for
        permission to appeal was lodged within the permitted time from  the
        re-promulgated  document  being  sent  and  the   application   for
        permission to appeal shall  therefore  be  treated  as  an  in-time
        application.
     8. The Secretary of State refers to the fact  that  AA  has  not  been
        believed for a number of years and argues  the  Judge's  conclusion
        that AA is not in contact with anyone in Iraq who could assist  him
        was not made out and that the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
        credibility issues as part of the overall assessment. The Secretary
        of State's case is that although return to the IKR or  Baghdad  may
        be problematic it was  not  impossible.  It  is  accepted  the  key
        consideration will be whether AA could obtain a  CSID,  as  without
        one he would face significant difficulties, but it is  argued  that
        in light of AA's poor credibility and given  his  poor  immigration
        and criminal history the Judge fails to give clear  reasons  as  to
        why he would be unable to locate family and  friends  in  Iraq  who
        could then assist in obtaining a replacement CSID  instead  finding
        AAs account entirely plausible regarding the loss of  contact.  The
        grounds assert AA has made no attempt through the Red Cross or  Red
        Crescent to try to locate his uncle  or  family  who  arranged  his
        journey to the UK and  failed  to  demonstrate  he  had  taken  all
        reasonable  steps  to  obtain  documentation  before  it  could  be
        concluded removal was not feasible. The grounds assert AA failed to
        provide any details of attempts to contact the Iraqi Embassy  as  a
        result of which the Secretary of State argues he should not succeed
        on article 3 or Humanitarian Protection grounds.
     9. In behalf of AA it was argued decision and findings are based  upon
        the evidence received by the Judge. The Judge considered the issues
        and country guidance case law and makes findings in relation to the
        same in accordance with the evidence. It was argued the decision is
        adequately reasoned. The Judge recognised AA has been in the United
        Kingdom for 18 years with a finding at [103] that it  is  plausible
        he no longer has any knowledge of the whereabouts or  circumstances
        of an uncle with no evidence of wider family in Iraq.
    10. It is noted there is reference in the Secretary of  States  grounds
        to AA finding or producing a death certificate for his  mother  but
        the Judge's finding is that  the  appellant  has  no  contact  with
        family members and as noted by AA's advocate the  country  guidance
        clearly refers to the  presence  of  a  male  family  member  being
        required and not a female family member.  As  it  was  accepted  AA
        could not go to Mosul by the Secretary of State is not clear how it
        is expected he could obtain this or other documentation.
    11. The Judge was aware of previous negative credibility findings [102]
        and it is not made out the Judge ignored or failed  to  factor  the
        same into the decision-making process.
    12. Having considered the competing arguments,  evidence  available  to
        the Judge, and the decision under challenge in some detail, I  find
        that no arguable legal error has been  made  out  material  to  the
        decision to allow  the  appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper
        Tribunal interfering further in this matter. The  reason  for  such
        finding is that the Judge was clearly  aware  of  relevant  country
        information and the country guidance case  law  and  undertook  the
        assessment of the merits of the appeal in light  of  the  same  and
        facts as found. This included previous credibility findings and the
        appellant's criminality. The core finding that the appellant  could
        not obtain a CSID is adequately reasoned and has not been shown  to
        be a finding outside the range of those reasonably available to the
        Judge on the evidence. Whilst the Secretary of State  may  disagree
        with the Judge's reasoning it is not made out the same was  in  any
        way perverse, irrational, or contrary to the evidence. The lack  of
        a CSID,  in  light  of  current  country  guidance  case  law,  was
        determinative of the  merits  of  the  appeal  in  the  appellant's
        favour.


Decision

    13. There is no material error of law  in  the  Judge's  decision.  The
        determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 April 2019

