
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04180/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 20 December 2017                |On 21 December 2017                     |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                ROMA PAKHRAJ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by M-R Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  Carroll  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  12  June   2017,
        dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
        dated 10 April 2017 refusing her asylum and human rights claims.








   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, date of birth  21  October
        1984. The following is a summary of her protection claim. Following
        the death of her mother, on or around 29 June 2015, the appellant's
        brother, Ben Hur, became the family's 'decision-maker'. In February
        2016 he decided that the appellant should marry his friend,  Daniel
        Peter, and that the marriage should take place in  August  of  that
        year. The appellant did not wish to marry Mr Peter as he  was  much
        older than her and had previously been married. After  refusing  to
        agree to the marriage the appellant was beaten by her brothers  and
        cousins "on numerous occasions" and even locked in a room.  On  one
        occasion she was burnt with a heated  life.  The  appellant's  aunt
        eventually managed to persuade her brother to agree to allow her to
        leave the house and go to work, although her salary was retained by
        her brother and a "pick and drop service" was used to pick  her  up
        and drop her to and from work in order to control and  monitor  her
        routine. The appellant's mental state began to deteriorate and  she
        began to self-harm. She eventually decided to leave  Pakistan.  She
        researched details of a religious seminar taking place  in  Poland.
        She used the Internet to make a  visa  application  to  the  Polish
        embassy, gave  all  the  relevant  paperwork  to  the  embassy  and
        collected her visa on 26 July 2016. She left Pakistan  on  29  July
        2016. She spent 3 days in Poland before making her way  to  France.
        Shortly after arriving in France she lost her passport. She  met  a
        Pakistani man who got her a job caring  for  an  elderly  woman  in
        Paris. She worked there for approximately  3  months  before  being
        given a United Kingdom passport to which she was not entitled,  and
        advised to travel to the  UK.  The  appellant  was  encountered  in
        Belfast on 21 October 2016 in possession of this  UK  passport  and
        claimed asylum.


     3. While accepting that she was Pakistani, and that women in  Pakistan
        constitute a  particular  social  group,  the  respondent  was  not
        satisfied that the appellant's account was credible. The respondent
        identified inconsistencies in the appellant's account and  did  not
        accept that the appellant's brother had the influence she claimed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     4.  The judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness. His
        adverse credibility findings are contained in paragraph 14  of  his
        decision, at (a) to (e). the judge  found  there  was  no  credible
        reason for the appellant's failure to claim asylum in either Poland
        or France. The judge also held against the appellant her failure to
        take any steps to obtain a new passport from the Pakistani  embassy
        in Paris. The judge held against the appellant the absence  of  any
        medical evidence to support her claims to have been burned  with  a
        knife and to have self-harmed. The judge did not find  it  credible
        that the appellant would be allowed to go to work  if  her  brother
        had a real interest in controlling her activities. The  judge  drew
        an adverse inference  from  an  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
        asylum interview (questions 186 and 187) as  she  initially  stated
        that she returned home on the  day  she  left  Pakistan,  but  then
        changed her evidence and claimed she went straight from work to the
        airport. The judge finally  drew  an  adverse  inference  from  the
        absence of any evidence from a man who accompanied the appellant to
        the hearing and who was described by the appellant's Counsel as her
        'brother', but by the appellant as a 'friend', on the  basis  that,
        "whether the individual is a brother or a friend, he can reasonably
        be expected to know a great deal about the appellant situation  but
        he has not submitted any evidence in support of the appeal."


     5. Having concluded that the appellant was not credible, the judge did
        not go on to to consider whether the authorities would be  able  to
        offer a sufficiency of protection, or whether she would be able  to
        avail herself of the internal relocation alternative.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

     6. The grounds of appeal criticise the judge's  credibility  findings.
        They submit, inter alia, that the judge failed to  have  regard  to
        the appellant's explanation for not claiming asylum  in  France  or
        Poland,  that  the  judge  impermissibly   required   corroborative
        evidence in respect of the claimed beatings, that the judge  failed
        to have regard to the appellant's  description  of  the  manner  in
        which her brother controlled her activities despite allowing her to
        work, that the judge failed to put some of his adverse  credibility
        findings to the appellant  at  the  hearing,  and  that  the  judge
        impermissibly drew an adverse inference from  the  absence  of  any
        evidence  from  the  person  present  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing.


     7. Permission was granted with  reference  to  the  adverse  inference
        drawn by the judge in respect of the attending  male  who  gave  no
        evidence. There was however no  restriction  on  the  grounds  that
        could be argued.


     8. At the  error  of  law  hearing  Mr  Gajjar,  who  represented  the
        appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, stated that could not  recall
        whether  he  described  the  man  attending  the  hearing  as   the
        appellant's "brother". He submitted that, regardless of whether  he
        (Mr Gajjar) misunderstood the relationship  or  whether  the  judge
        misunderstood him, this point was never put to  the  appellant  and
        the man was never invited to clarify his  relationship.  There  was
        insufficient information about  the  man's  relationship  with  the
        appellant to entitle the judge to draw  an  adverse  inference.  Mr
        Gajjar expanded upon  the  other  grounds  of  appeal,  drawing  my
        attention to the appellant's explanation, at questions 234 and  235
        of her substantive asylum  interview,  for  her  failure  to  claim
        asylum in Poland or France, and submitting  that  the  judge  acted
        unlawfully by  requiring  corroboration  in  the  form  of  medical
        evidence. He confirmed that the appellant was not the recipient  of
        legal aid.


     9. Ms Isherwood drew my attention to those parts of the  determination
        where the judge accurately recorded the appellant's visits  to  the
        Polish embassy, and submitted that it  was  for  the  appellant  to
        prove that the man accompanying her was incapable of giving  cogent
        evidence in light of the assertion  by  Counsel  that  he  was  the
        appellant's brother.


    10. I indicated  at  the  hearing  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
        materially erred in law and I gave a summary of those errors, which
        I now consider in greater detail. Having satisfied myself that  the
        judge's adverse credibility findings  were  unsafe,  neither  party
        objected to the  matter  being  remitted  back  to  the  first-tier
        Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Discussion

  11. In her asylum interview, at questions 234 and 235, the appellant was
      asked why she failed to claim asylum in Poland and France. She claimed
      that the language barrier prevented her from claiming asylum in either
      country. In response to question 236 the appellant claimed that she
      heard that the UK is "the most powerful", and reiterated that she
      could speak neither Polish nor French and did not know anyone in those
      countries, whereas she had a friend in the UK. In her statement, at
      paragraph 9, the appellant reiterated once again that she did not
      claim asylum in Poland or France due to the language barrier and she
      felt it would be in her best interests to seek protection in the
      country where language would not be an obstacle in getting her story
      across. At 14(a) the judge fails to engage with this explanation.
      Although the judge sets out paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the appellant's
      statement, there is no reference to the explanation given by the
      appellant in her asylum interview, or to the explanation given in her
      statement. While the judge may have been entitled to reject this
      explanation, in the absence of any engagement with the reasons
      proffered by the appellant, it cannot be said that he would have been
      bound to reject this explanation.


  12. At 14(b) the judge draws an adverse inference based on the absence of
      any medical evidence in support of the appellant's claim to have been
      burnt with a knife and to have self-harmed. While a judge is entitled
      to draw an adverse inference from the absence of evidence that one
      would reasonably expect to be provided, I am satisfied, on the
      particular facts of this case, that there was no reasonable basis for
      the judge to expect the provision of medical evidence, such as a
      scarring report. There is no requirement within the immigration rules
      that, in assessing a claim of ill-treatment, medical evidence must be
      provided. There may be valid reasons for the absence of such evidence.
      For example, an appellant who is not legally aided may not be able to
      afford a medical report, or the acquisition of such a report was never
      suggested by the legal representatives. There is no indication that
      this judge ever enquired as to the reasons why there was no medical
      evidence. Nor has the judge given any consideration to the appellant's
      interview where she twice refers the interviewing officer to scarring
      on her body she claims was caused by her brother (at questions 90 and
      129). In the absence of any attempt by the judge to ascertain why
      there was no medical evidence he was not lawfully entitled to hold
      this against the appellant.


  13. At 14(d) the judge draws an adverse inference based on the appellant's
      answers to questions 186 and 187 of her asylum interview. At question
      186 the appellant was asked what happened after she resigned from work
      and returned home. She said that when she got home everyone was busy.
      It was then put to her (question 187) that she went home after
      resigning from work, to which she answered, "I was in office, I got
      the ticket and straight away I went to the airport. No one knows
      that." The judge found that the appellant's answers to questions 186
      and 187 were inconsistent because she initially said that she went
      home after resigning from work on 29 July 2016, but then said she went
      straight to the airport. The questions must be considered in their
      full and proper context. This inconsistency was put to the appellant
      by the interviewing officer at questions 189 and 190. Following
      further clarification, at questions 191 and 192, the appellant
      explained that she returned home on the day that she collected her
      visa (26 July 2016), but did not return home on the day that she
      resigned from work (29 July 2016). The interviewing officer appeared
      satisfied with the appellant's explanation as no further clarification
      was sought. In her Reasons For Refusal Letter the respondent did not
      rely on this alleged inconsistency in finding the appellant
      incredible. Nothing on the face of the judge's decision indicates that
      the Presenting Officer ever relied on this alleged inconsistency.
      Having carefully considered the full context of the interview
      questions, from questions 181 to 192, I am satisfied that the
      appellant did offer an explanation for what initially appeared to be
      an inconsistency, and that the respondent appeared to accept this
      explanation. In the circumstances, there was no reason for the
      appellant to believe that her answers to questions 186 and 187 would
      be held against her. The judge failed to raise this alleged
      inconsistency at the hearing. I am satisfied that the failure to give
      the appellant an opportunity to deal with this perceived inconsistency
      amounts to a procedural impropriety.


  14. Finally, at 14(e), the judge drew an adverse inference from the
      failure of the individual accompanying the appellant to the hearing to
      submit any evidence in support. It remains unclear how this individual
      is related to the appellant. Mr Gajjar could not recall informing the
      judge that the man was the appellant's brother, although I have no
      reason to doubt the accuracy of the judge's recording. Mr Gajjar
      indicated that his own record of proceedings reflected that recorded
      by the judge of the appellant's explanation that the man was somebody
      she met via Facebook and with whom she had been staying for 7 or 8
      months. The judge stated, "whether the individual is a brother or a
      friend, he can reasonably be expected to know a great deal about the
      appellant's situation but he has not submitted any evidence in support
      of the appeal." I accept that, if the man was the appellant's brother,
      he could reasonably be expected to have knowledge of the appellant's
      situation. But the judge did not resolve the conflicting accounts of
      the man's relationship with the appellant. It does not appear that the
      judge invited the man to declare his relationship, or that the parties
      were invited to make submissions on this point. With respect, the
      question whether the individual was a brother or a friend does make a
      considerable difference in determining whether it is appropriate to
      draw an adverse inference from his failure to give evidence. If, as
      the appellant maintained in her evidence, the individual was a only a
      friend, there was an insufficient factual basis entitling the judge to
      assume that he would "know a great deal about the appellant's
      situation." No information at all was provided as to the scope of this
      man's knowledge of the appellant's account. The judge was not
      consequently entitled to draw an adverse inference without clearly
      resolving the issue of the man's relationship with the appellant.


  15. I am satisfied that the above errors of law, individually as well as
      cumulatively, render unsafe the First-tier Tribunal's decision. As
      there have been no sustainable factual findings it is appropriate for
      the matter to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be
      considered afresh, all issues open, before a judge other than judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal Carroll.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a  material  error  of  law.
The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)
hearing, before  a  judge  other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Carroll.


[pic]                               20 December 2017

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
