
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04880/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2020                  |On 26 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SAA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K Smith of Garden Court North.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. On 4  July  2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on the 10 September 2019.
    3. In a decision promulgated on 29 October 2019  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Chapman found the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  erred  in  law
       and set that decision aside. At [5 - 6] of the error of  law  finding
       the Deputy Judge wrote:

           "5.    At the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Bates
                acknowledged that there had been a rule 24 response dated  1
                October  2019  defending  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
                Tribunal Judge, however, he did not  intend  to  follow  the
                line taken by the Respondent  in  that  document.  Mr  Bates
                accepted that the judge had failed to make a  clear  finding
                on whether the Appellant's brother is  employed  in  Baghdad
                and whether there was  a  societal  risk  of  FGM  from  the
                Kurdish community in Baghdad. He accepted the judge had  not
                dealt with either of those issues and therefore the decision
                was unsafe. The  parties  agreed  that  the  only  issue  is
                internal relocation to Baghdad and the risk of FGM there."

    4. As a result of the Covert 19 pandemic and it not being practical  for
       the Deputy Judge to complete the resumed hearing without undue delay,
       a transfer order has been made by the Upper Tribunal dated 20 October
       2020.
    5. The matter comes before me as a face-to-face hearing for the purposes
       of enabling the Upper Tribunal to either allow or dismiss the appeal.

The law

    6. The current county guidance case is SMO, KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
       identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) which is known to
       the parties which I do not need to set out in this decision.  Nor  in
       relation cases such as AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq.

Discussion

    7. The First-tier Tribunal judge noted the appellant  is  a  citizen  of
       Iraq who was born on 1 July 1977. Her husband and two daughters, aged
       11 and 7 at the date of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       are dependent upon her claim.
    8. In an earlier  decision  promulgated  on  28  March  2018  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Tully wrote at [36]:

           "36.   Looking at the evidence in the  round  I  find  that  the
                appellant has not given a credible and consistent account of
                the business she says she started with her husband.  I  find
                that they  are  so  inconsistent  by  far  the  most  likely
                explanation is that they  have  fabricated  the  account  to
                mount a false asylum claim in the UK. I do not accept,  even
                to the lower standard required, that she ran  this  business
                as she claims or that she is therefore at risk  from  either
                her family  or  the  Iraqi  authorities  as  a  result.  The
                protection claim must therefore fail."

    9. The current claim is predicated on a different  basis  which  can  be
       summarised in the following terms:

           '[Mrs A], [R] and [B] are Iraqi nationals born in Iraq. They and
           their  families  are  Kurdish  and  Sunni  Muslims.  The  family
           originates from Pahadar in the IKR, which is in  a  remote  area
           near the Iranian border in the governorate of Suleymaniyah. [Mrs
           A's] tribe  is  Mirawdali  and  her  husband's  (her  daughter's
           father), is tribe Sheikh.


           [Mrs A], was subject to FGM as a minor at approximately 10 years
           of age. The families of girls' mother and father  practice  FGM,
           with female family members on both  sides  having  been  cut  as
           children. FGM is usually performed at  the  instigation  of  the
           family at around 10 years of age. As [R] reached the age of  10,
           the family have received threats from Iraq  to  have  the  girls
           cut. [R] and [B] are at risk of FGM been performed  on  them  if
           returned to Iraq.'

   10. Judge Davies noted at [43]  the  issue  in  the  appeal  is  that  of
       internal relocation as the respondent accepted  that  the  appellants
       daughters are at risk of FGM in the IKR, area,  making  the  question
       whether there is any other part of Iraq to which the appellant can be
       reasonably expected to internally relocate. It was  accepted  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the appellant herself had been cut.
   11. In relation to identity documents the First-tier  Judge  recorded  at
       [23]:

           "23.   The  Respondent  took  into  account  the  Appellant  had
                purported to have possessed a CSID document. He believed the
                Appellant could not utilise this document her sister who she
                was still in contact could assist her in  obtaining  a  CSID
                and  subsequently  a  passport.  The  Respondent  took  into
                account the Appellant had not made  any  attempt  to  obtain
                documentation from the Iraqi embassy in London."

   12. The appellant has filed a skeleton argument dated  19  November  2020
       which sets out the core issues and which needs to be read as  if  set
       out in full in this decision.
   13. The appellant attended the hearing  with  her  husband  remaining  in
       Manchester to look after the older children. The  Upper  Tribunal  is
       grateful to the advocates for their assistance in  relation  to  this
       appeal.
   14. Dealing with the individual issues, the first of which is whether the
       appellant will be re-documented, I accept that in light of  the  fact
       there is evidence of the appellant's CSID it is likely  she  will  be
       able to prove to the Iraqi authorities in the UK  both  her  personal
       identity and nationality. I  accept  the  situation  in  relation  to
       identity documents in Iraq has changed in  that  the  appellant  will
       need to be in her home area to obtain a new Iraqi identity  document,
       as a result of the need for her to provide biometric information such
       as iris scans.
   15. I find on the evidence that it has been made out the  appellant  will
       be able to return to Baghdad. I find, however, that it has  not  been
       made out that the appellant will  be  able  to  secure  a  new  Iraqi
       identity document  in  Baghdad  placing  her  and  the  family  in  a
       difficult position where such is required to  enable  the  family  to
       access resources,  secure  employment,  and  enrol  the  children  in
       school, as noted at [34] of the skeleton argument.
   16. I do not find it has  been  established  that  the  appellant  has  a
       support network in Baghdad who will be able to  assist  in  obtaining
       accommodation or providing support until the family are able  to  re-
       establish  themselves.  I  find  there  is  arguable  merit  in   the
       contention that the appellant's husband whose previous occupation was
       as a taxi driver, will experience considerable difficulty as a result
       of  not  speaking  Arabic  and  not  being  familiar  with   Baghdad,
       irrespective of the problems experienced at the roadblocks, in  being
       able to find such work and support his family.
   17. I find there is arguable merit in the contention that as  the  family
       are unable to speak Arabic they would have to  live  in  the  Kurdish
       settled areas in Baghdad where there is a real risk,  if  traditional
       beliefs prevail, of FGM being performed upon the girls. The issue  of
       the presence of the appellant's brother in the Iraqi military  forces
       and his connection with the Kurdish areas of Baghdad is  raised  and,
       if it had been made out, will clearly be an additional risk factor in
       light of his opposition to the appellant generally as recorded in the
       evidence.
   18. There is also the issue of sectarian violence in Baghdad in  relation
       to which there is a real risk if encountered by  the  militia  of  an
       opposing sect, being unable to  speak  Arabic  and  without  adequate
       protection from family or otherwise in Baghdad, that the family  will
       suffer ill treatment as set out in SMO.
   19. The skeleton argument sets out the  factors  to  be  considered  when
       assessing the reasonableness  of  internal  relocation.  I  find  the
       appellant has discharged the  burden  of  proof  upon  her  to  lower
       standard applicable in an appeal of this  nature  to  show  that  the
       protective factors required to enable this family to be able to  live
       in Baghdad safely do not exist on the facts.
   20. I find it has not been made out that it  is  reasonable  in  all  the
       circumstances for the appellant and her family to internally relocate
       to Baghdad, the place identified by the Secretary of State  to  which
       they will be returned, or elsewhere outside the IKR.
   21. As it is accepted there is a real risk of harm in  their  home  area,
       from which there is no sufficiency of protection, and in light of  it
       being   established   that   the   proposed   relocation   will    be
       unreasonable/unduly harsh on the facts, I allow the appeal.

Decision

   22. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.

  Anonymity.

   23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 November 2020
