
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04783/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24th August 2017                   |On 6th September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                            Arkan Ibrahim kareem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer, Solicitor with Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity who  claims  to
    have been born on 27th October 1995.

2.    On  2nd  May  2016,  the  respondent  refused  to  grant  asylum   and
    humanitarian protection to the appellant and as a result, the appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Malik sitting in Manchester on 20th December  last.



3.   The appellant's claim to asylum was based on his  fear  of  persecution
    from his uncle.  The appellant's father died when he was young  and  he
    lived with his mother and older sister in Rahimawa.  He finished school
    at the age of 15 and worked as a labourer in and around Kirkuk.   Since
    he was not able to earn very much,  his  paternal  uncle  assisted  the
    family financially.  He lived in the same building with  his  wife  and
    three children.  He worked in the construction  business  and,  claimed
    the appellant was very strict and would hit him  if  he  disobeyed  his
    uncle.

4.   The appellant claimed that in August 2004, his uncle asked him to  join
    Daesh.  The appellant refused and the appellant claims that  his  uncle
    hit him with a butt of a gun on his head.  To teach him a  lesson,  his
    uncle also  reported  the  appellant  to  the  police.   They  put  the
    appellant in handcuffs, took him to  the  hospital  where  he  received
    stitches and then transferred him to the police station  where  he  was
    held for five or six days.  They never told him why  he  was  released,
    but he knew that his uncle just wanted to show how powerful he was.

5.   The appellant went home and about a month later he was asked to go  out
    with his uncle at night.  He was not told where he was  going  and  was
    taken to a cemetery where his uncle met two people in a car.  They gave
    his uncle a bag and he talked for a short time.   His  uncle  told  him
    that they needed to deliver the bag to someone.  He said that his uncle
    did not tell him what was inside the bag and when the appellant refused
    his uncle became furious.  His uncle took a gun and shot the  appellant
    in his right leg causing him to pass  out.   When  he  awoke  he  found
    himself in his uncle's friend's house where he was treated by a  doctor
    who removed a bullet.  The appellant was then driven home by his uncle.



6.   When  the  appellant's  mother  asked  what  was  wrong  the  appellant
    explained it was an accident and felt that he could not  tell  her  the
    truth in front of his uncle.  It was two or three days  later  when  he
    did tell her the truth, because she  was  suspicious.   Eventually  his
    mother sold her jewellery and arrangements were made for the  appellant
    to leave Iraq.

7.   The judge gives clear, logical and cogent reasons why  she  found  that
    the appellant had fabricated the core of his claim.  She found it to be
    a false asylum claim and went on to find that the appellant was not  at
    risk from his uncle and, or in the alternative from the authorities for
    any of the reasons he claimed.  His account was totally false.

8.   As a result, the judge went on to  consider  what  risk,  if  any,  the
    appellant would face on  return.   The  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant was from Kirkuk, a contested region of Iraq.   The  appellant
    does not originate from IKR, but the judge assessed the risk on  return
    on the basis that he would  be  returned  to  Baghdad  and  then  would
    relocate to IKR.  She  considered  the  country  guidance  case  of  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC)  and  noted  that  the
    appellant had left Iraq on his own passport which  he  claims  to  have
    given to an agent in Turkey and had  now  lost.   He  exited  from  the
    border within the IKR region and had previously been to IKR.  The judge
    found that there was no reasonable evidence to suggest  that  he  could
    not request his family to act on his behalf for him  to  obtain  a  new
    CSID or nationality documentation to  enable  him  to  seek  a  laissez
    passer to return to Iraq.  The appellant was found  to  be  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity who speaks Sorani.

9.   Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, suggesting that it was properly arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal may averred in its finding that the appellant's relatives
    in Kirkuk would be able to assist the appellant in obtaining a CSID; it
    was arguable that the appellant would need to go to Kirkuk as  part  of
    the process and may expose himself to risk by doing so.   It  was  also
    found to be properly arguable the appellant may not be able to relocate
    safely to the IKR from Baghdad.

10.  The appellant's representative relied  on  his  grounds.   Mr  Harrison
    submitted that the judge had found that the  appellant's  claim  lacked
    all credibility.  He claimed  that  his  family  were  in  Kirkuk  but,
    submitted Mr Harrison, nothing else the appellant had said was found to
    be true.  Mr Harrison  submitted  that  his  family  members  could  be
    elsewhere in Iraq.  He agreed with me that this was speculation on  his
    part.

11.  After reflecting, Mr Harrison told me that he accepted that there  must
    be an error of law in the judge's determination and,  as  a  result  he
    said that if AA were applied then the first question to ask was whether
    or not it was feasible on return to  Baghdad  to  avoid  any  potential
    undue harshness in that city by travelling to the IKR?

12.  I asked the representatives if they were  both  agreed  that  I  should
    remake the decision myself.  They  both  indicated  that  they  saw  no
    reason why I should not.  Mr Greer submitted that  notwithstanding  the
    fabricated claim made by the appellant, the country guidance  was  such
    that the appellant could not be returned and his appeal would  have  to
    be allowed.  Mr Harrison indicated that  there  was  no  reason  why  I
    should not remake the decision.  He told me that he was  not  conceding
    the appeal, but indicated that he would be surprised if I  were  to  do
    anything other than to allow the appeal.

13.  I reserved my decision.

14.  In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
    gave extensive guidance.  The appellant is a  former  resident  of  the
    Iraqi Kurdish region.  AA makes it abundantly clear that he will not be
    returnable to Baghdad if he is not in possession of either a current or
    expired Iraqi passport, or a laissez passer.  Holding  a  civil  status
    identity document (CSI) is one way in which it is possible for an Iraqi
    national to obtain a passport or  laissez  passer,  but  the  appellant
    cannot obtain one while he is in the United Kingdom.  He claims that he
    has lost contact with his relatives.  He  has  been  found  not  to  be
    credible and to have fabricated the core of his asylum claim and, as Mr
    Harrison points out, there is no reason to believe the  appellant  when
    he says that his relatives are in Kirkuk and he has lost  contact  with
    them.  They might very well be elsewhere in Iraq and they may very well
    be in a position to assist him obtain a CSID.  However,  as  I  pointed
    out to Mr Harrison is speculation.

15.  As anticipated by Mr Harrison and as distasteful as it is to  allow  an
    appeal by someone who has made a completely fabricated his asylum claim
    and demonstrated that his word cannot be relied upon, I have  concluded
    that his asylum appeal must be allowed, because he cannot  be  returned
    to Baghdad.

11.  I have concluded that the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did involve the making of an error on a point of law.   I  remake
    the decision myself.  For the reasons I have given,  I  have  concluded
    that the appellant's asylum appeal must be allowed.

Summary

The appellant's asylum appeal is allowed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

