










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04360/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2017                      |On 8 June 2017                         |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                             Mr Hawkar Mahmoudi
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant  is  a  national  of  Iran,  whose  date  of  birth  was
      originally in dispute; following a Merton compliant assessment  on  13
      February 2016 he was assessed to be 20 years old.


   2. His appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 18 April  2016
      to refuse his protection claim was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge B A Morris in a decision promulgated on 19 January 2017.


   3. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  from  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Rimington,  who  found  it  to  be  arguable  that  the   Judge   gave
      disproportionate  weight  to  issues  which  are  peripheral  to   the
      appellant's main claim and that she thereafter failed to make relevant
      findings when dismissing the core of his account.


   4. Mr Khan, who did not represent the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, (where  the  appellant  appeared  in  person),  adopted  the
      grounds of appeal prepared by other counsel.


   5. In the grounds it is accepted that the Judge was entitled to take into
      account   when   assessing   the    appellant's    credibility,    any
      inconsistencies including those relating to his age and his journey to
      the UK.


   6. Mr Khan submitted however that the Judge gave disproportionate  weight
      to issues which were peripheral  to  the  appellant's  main  claim  of
      subjective fear, namely that he was at risk of persecution or harm  on
      return by reason of his support for the Peshmerga. The  appellant  had
      contended that his father was killed  11  years  ago  by  the  Iranian
      intelligence agency. He claimed to have helped the PDKI.  There was  a
      raid on his home and the authorities said that they wanted  to  arrest
      him. The appellant maintained that he delivered letters for  the  PDKI
      and whilst not officially a member he supported them. This  was  noted
      by the Judge at [19].


   7. The Judge found that the appellant gave no reasonable explanation  for
      the discrepancies  as  to  his  date  of  birth  [30].  The  screening
      interview gave his date of birth as 11 August  1997.  During  the  age
      assessment he gave his date of birth as 11 August 1998 and  in  answer
      to various questions gave answers which would have made him either 23,
      24, 18 or 17. When the discrepancies were put to him by the assessors,
      he disputed the dates or blamed  the  interpreter,  stating  that  the
      professionals had recorded the information incorrectly.


   8. In his witness statement he said he was  born  in  1998  and  in  oral
      evidence stated that he was born in 1997.


   9. The Judge also noted at [31] that  the  details  he  gave  as  to  his
      journey to the UK were  not  consistent.  In  3.3.  of  the  screening
      interview he claimed  to  have  gone  from  Iran  to  Turkey,  Greece,
      Macedonia, Serbia, Croatia, Austria, Hungary, Germany and  France.  In
      his asylum interview he said he travelled from Iran to Turkey, Greece,
      Serbia, Austria, Germany and France. Further, the period  of  time  he
      claimed to have stayed in each location was not  consistent.  He  said
      that he stayed for 15 days in Turkey, three days in Germany  and  over
      three months in Calais. At the date of his interview  on  25  November
      2015 he claimed to have left Iran about four months previously. During
      his age assessment in February 2016 he said that  he  left  Iran  five
      months previously and that it took him two  months  and  ten  days  to
      travel to the UK. Those answers would have meant that he left Iran  in
      September 2015.


  10. In his asylum interview he said he was in France for about two  months
      and ten days which he told the age assessors was the  period  of  time
      that the entire journey  to  the  UK  had  taken  him.  He  also  gave
      inconsistent and conflicting evidence relating to his time in  France.
      He claimed to have been in the Jungle for  about  45  days.  That  was
      inconsistent with the information he gave at the  screening  interview
      and at his asylum  interview.  These  inconsistencies  undermined  the
      credibility of his evidence and of his claim [31].


  11.  The  Judge  noted  that  he  attempted  to   explain   away   various
      discrepancies by arguing that poor interpretation had been provided by
      various professionals but at the screening interview, a second Kurdish
      Iranian was being interviewed at  the  same  time  and  confusion  had
      arisen as a result of that. In support of that assertion he stated  in
      his asylum interview that he was interviewed with someone else and the
      question was asked of that "guy who was sitting beside me and he  said
      Kalashin." The interpreter was "via telephone" so he thinks they  were
      mixed up and wrongly recorded this on the interview record. He claimed
      that the same person has been interviewed by  his  solicitor  and  has
      confirmed his place of birth as Kalashin.


  12. During his asylum interview he twice said that he was born  in  Ganabo
      Village. The respondent did not accept his explanation,  pointing  out
      that his solicitors had not provided  any  evidence  of  this  alleged
      interview with the other man, or even confirmed that it had  happened.
      There was no explanation as to how  the  appellant's  solicitor  would
      have been aware  of  this  mistake  during  the  screening  interview,
      identified the other person, contacted him and interviewed him.  These
      matters had been clearly  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  and  the
      appellant's solicitors continued to represent him for a  further  four
      months. However, there was no evidence from his solicitors  confirming
      this alleged confusion during the screening interview. She found  that
      this matter undermined his credibility  and  the  credibility  of  his
      claim [33].


  13. She found that the appellant used the excuse  of  such  confusion  for
      different inconsistencies during his oral evidence. He used it  as  an
      answer to the question why he had not said in the screening  interview
      that he was a supporter of the Peshmerga, why he had said in answer to
      question 95 that a friend of Saman was arrested whereas in his witness
      statement he said it was Saman who was arrested. Moreover, he used the
      excuse when stating in his screening  interview  that  he  left  "four
      months ago", but later said he left in September 2015, and why he said
      in his screening interview that his passport had been lost at sea  and
      subsequently  stated  that  he  never  had  a  passport.   All   those
      discrepancies undermined his credibility as well as the credibility of
      his claim. The fact  that  he  attempted  to  rely  upon  the  alleged
      confusion as an explanation of the clear discrepancies undermined that
      credibility [34].


  14. She found at [35] that the evidence of his witness did not assist him,
      and on the contrary, disclosed a further discrepancy  undermining  his
      case. The appellant had been clear that he and his  witness  were  not
      very close and did  not  know  each  other  very  well.  The  witness,
      however, stated that they were friends and became friends in Iran.


  15. Mr Khan sought to rely on  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal in YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145.


  16. In that decision, the Tribunal stated  at  [19]  that  it  has  to  be
      remembered that a screening interview is  not  done  to  establish  in
      detail the reasons a person gives to support  her  claim  for  asylum.
      Further, the screening interview may well be conducted when the asylum
      seeker is tired  after  a  long  journey.  These  things  have  to  be
      considered when any inconsistencies between  the  screening  interview
      and the later case are evaluated.


  17. Mr Khan submitted that the appellant arrived in the UK on 25  November
      2015 and his screening interview was held the same day. The  interview
      noted that he stated that he felt fit  and  well.  He  had  a  Kurdish
      Sorani interpreter. He was told that if he  does  not  understand  the
      interpreter he should tell the interviewing officer.


  18. Mr Khan submitted that  in  the  circumstances,  limited  weight  only
      should have been given to the inconsistencies.  In  the  circumstances
      the Judge gave disproportionate weight to peripheral issues.


  19. The Judge  only  identified  two  discrepancies  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's subjective fear. At [34] the Judge simply  identified  his
      failure to mention the fact that he was a supporter of  the  Peshmerga
      during his screening  interview  and  the  inconsistency  relating  to
      whether it was his friend who was arrested or that person's friend who
      was arrested.


  20. He  contended  that  the  Judge  'failed  to  otherwise  address'  the
      appellant's account of subjective fear or make specific findings  upon
      it including the alleged death of his father and his participation  in
      assisting the PDKI by delivering letters.


  21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Norton submitted that it was not  only
      the screening interview that the Judge  referred  to.  The  Judge  had
      regard to the submissions at [23] where issues relating to  his  claim
      had been mentioned. Between the date of his  screening  interview  and
      his substantive interview there was no evidence confirming the alleged
      basis for the confusion. The appellant's solicitors sent a  letter  to
      the UKBA prior to the substantive asylum  interview  scheduled  for  7
      February 2016. His witness statement was attached. There  was  however
      no comment or any objection that  was  raised  regarding  the  alleged
      source of confusion which occurred during the screening interview.


  22. The Judge had regard to the decision in  SSH  and  HR  (Illegal  Exit:
      Failed Asylum Seeker) Iran CG [2106] UKUT 00308 (IAC). Even if he left
      Iran illegally she found that he had not shown to the  lower  standard
      that he would be at risk on return [37].


      Assessment


  23. Judge Morris has  given  a  thorough  and  detailed  decision.  It  is
      contended however that she  gave  disproportionate  weight  to  issues
      peripheral to his main claim; and that she  failed  to  make  relevant
      findings when dismissing the core of his account.


  24. I have had regard to the appellant's explanation that he  gave  during
      the screening interview as to why  he  did  not  say  that  he  was  a
      supporter of the PDKI, namely, that he might not have said  it  as  he
      was tired. The Judge was aware that he had been in the back of a lorry
      for a lengthy time.


  25. The Judge also noted at paragraph [32] that during his  oral  evidence
      the appellant claimed that the journey was organised by smugglers  and
      that they beat him up and tortured him on the  journey.  However,  she
      noted that such a serious allegation did not appear anywhere  else  in
      his claim. She found this to  be  a  "last  minute  appearance"  which
      undermined his credibility including the credibility of his claim.


  26. Nor did the appellant state in his screening  interview  that  he  had
      been a supporter of the Peshmerga. The Judge noted that he  sought  to
      use the excuse of confusion at the  screening  interview  for  further
      inconsistencies he gave during  his  oral  evidence.  I  have  already
      referred to them at paragraph [13] above and do not repeat them.


  27. Moreover, during his screening interview the appellant did not mention
      the basis of his claim and stated that he had never been involved with
      politics. He stated at paragraph 3.1 that he came to the  UK  to  make
      his own life and to get away from political problems. He stated at 4.1
      that if the government knows he is here and he is sent back  he  could
      be in danger. He fears the government. He does not support them.


  28. Moreover, the Judge had regard to the submission at  [23]  that  there
      was no consistent account as to how many times  he  delivered  letters
      for the Peshmerga. At interview he said seven  or  eight  but  in  his
      witness statement he said 10-15.


  29. Regarding the asserted confusion, the Judge noted that  the  appellant
      was represented by solicitors after his screening interview and  prior
      to his asylum interview. Notwithstanding that, and notwithstanding his
      assertion  in  his  asylum  interview  that  other  persons  had  been
      interviewed by his solicitor confirming that his place  of  birth  was
      Kalashin,  there  was  no  evidence  from  the  appellant's  solicitor
      confirming this asserted  confusion.  Nor  was  it  mentioned  in  his
      witness statement which was sent by the solicitors prior to  the  date
      of his asylum interview.


  30. It is evident that the Judge found the appellant to be unreliable  not
      only in respect of what were asserted to be "peripheral  matters"  but
      also in relation to the core of his claim.


  31. I am satisfied that she considered his claim regarding his involvement
      in politics, including his assertion that he delivered letters for the
      Peshmerga. In relation to those assertions, there  was  no  consistent
      account as to how many times he did this. This varied  from  seven  to
      eight at interview and from ten to fifteen in his  witness  statement.
      There are other matters relevant to his claims which were referred  to
      by the Judge which she set out in the presenting officer's submissions
      at [23].


  32. The findings she made are sustainable on the evidence as a whole.  Her
      conclusions on the core  of  his  claim  were  properly  reasoned  and
      explained.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law.  The decision shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date 5 June 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer








