
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04587/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2018                   |On 28 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                    [F H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 21 March 2018 refusing his application for asylum.

    Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 27 August 1983.   He
    claimed asylum on 3 November 2015.  It was not entirely clear from  his
    various  statements  when  he  first  arrived  in  the  UK.   He   gave
    contradictory answers to this question in his screening  interview  and
    asylum interview but in a letter dated 24 August  2016  his  solicitors
    said that he was satisfied that he came to the UK in 2011 and not  2015
    and in further representations made on his  behalf  dated  14  February
    2018, it was asserted that he had entered the UK in 2010.

3.    There is  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been  fingerprinted  in
    Hungary on arrival there on 11 December 2009, where he remained for two
    weeks before travelling to Austria.  He was fingerprinted on arrival in
    Italy on 28 December 2009 and then  travelled  to  Belgium  and  France
    before entering the  UK  concealed  in  the  back  of  a  lorry.   This
    chronology is consistent with the appellant arriving in the UK in 2010.

4.     The  appellant  based  his  claim  on  a  fear  both  of  the  Afghan
    authorities who suspected him of being a member of the Taliban and  for
    that reason had arrested and detained him in 2006-7 and of the  Taliban
    who suspected him of being a spy for the Afghan government.  He claimed
    that his father had received a letter from the police  in  2011  asking
    about his whereabouts and he also relied on a threat  letter  from  the
    Taliban.  The respondent, whilst accepting that  the  appellant  was  a
    citizen of Afghanistan, did not accept that he had  been  arrested  and
    detained by the Afghan government or would be of  adverse  interest  of
    them on return or at any risk from the Taliban.

    The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant not  only
    relied on his own evidence as set out  in  his  witness  statement  and
    further representations made on his  behalf  but  also  on  documentary
    evidence including the letters he claimed were sent by  the  police  in
    Afghanistan  to  his  father  and  the  Taliban  letter.   He  produced
    authentication reports from an expert witness relating  to  both  these
    documents and other documents, including a health  status  report  from
    Kabul Medical University and  a  confirmation  letter  from  the  Ulema
    Council and Elders of Kabul Province, Paghman District that he had been
    detained by the authorities in 2006 and released  after  payment  of  a
    bribe in 2007.  The appellant  claimed  that  after  his  release,  the
    Taliban started to look for  him,  accusing  him  of  working  for  the
    government and he then fled Afghanistan.

6.    In her assessment of the evidence the judge noted that  the  appellant
    had made no mention of being in fear of the Taliban  in  his  screening
    interview and she  said  that,  had  this  been  true,  he  would  have
    mentioned it at his first opportunity of providing  details  about  his
    claim.  In his witness  statement  he  claimed  that  the  Taliban  had
    delivered a warning letter to his house some five years after  he  left
    Afghanistan but then changed his evidence and claimed that the delivery
    of the letter was some 5 to 6 months after his release from  detention,
    some 11 years ago.

7.    The judge found that the appellant had  changed  his  evidence  in  an
    attempt to improve the quality of his account, embellishing  it  in  an
    attempt to bolster his evidence but she accepted  that  it  was  likely
    that he  had  been  detained  in  2006  as  he  claimed  and  that  the
    authorities  had  taken  interest  in  him  because  of  his   cousins'
    involvement with the Taliban [19].  She found that  the  health  status
    report provided support for his claim that he had been detained [27].

8.    However, this detention had occurred some 12 years ago and  there  was
    evidence that the cousins in question had been  imprisoned.   She  also
    noted his evidence that he had  managed  to  return  to  his  shop  and
    continued to trade after his release, remaining in Afghanistan  without
    difficulty for some time before he left the country.   She  found  that
    all these  factors  suggested  that  the  authorities  had  no  further
    interest in him and she found that his detention in 2006 would not give
    rise to a risk on return [20].  She considered the documentary evidence
    and said at [25]-[27]:

         "25.     I consider the documents relied on from  Afghanistan  with
         Tanveer Ahmed in mind.  I attach no weight  to  the  police  letter
         dated in 2011.  I do not accept the authorities had any interest in
         the appellant after his release in 2007.  The  appellant  does  not
         explain why the police would be writing a letter about him after he
         had left Afghanistan.

         26.      I attach no weight to the letter the appellant  claims  is
         from the Taliban, given I do not  accept  the  appellant's  account
         regarding the Taliban.  Although the document expert finds that the
         letter bears the hallmarks of a genuine Taliban  threat  letter,  I
         attach no weight to the document for the reasons given.

         27.       I attach some weight to the letter from the Ulema Council
         members as it supports the appellant's claim that he  was  detained
         in 2006.   I  also  attach  weight  to  the  health  status  report
         provided, the date and contents support the appellant's claim  that
         he was arrested in 2006."

9.    Accordingly, the judge found the appellant  had  failed  to  establish
    even to the lower standard of proof that he faced a real risk on return
    from the Taliban or from anyone else and she found that he could return
    safely to his home area in Kabul [29].

    The Grounds of Appeal

10.   It is argued in ground 1 that the judge erred in law in her  treatment
    of the screening interview when assessing the weight to be attached  to
    the answers in that she  failed  to  direct  herself  properly  to  the
    warnings in various cases against placing excessive weight  on  answers
    given during a screening interview.  She also failed to have regard  to
    the fact that the appellant had been scared at that interview  and  had
    said at his asylum interview that he was unhappy  with  it.   Ground  2
    argues that the judge erred by failing to give sufficient  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence about the police letter.  She had found that the
    appellant had not explained why the police would be  writing  a  letter
    about him after he left Afghanistan, but that  issue  was  inadequately
    reasoned. He had left in Afghanistan arriving in the UK in 2010 but had
    gone to great efforts to leave without  his  departure  coming  to  the
    attention of the authorities.  Ground 3 argues that the judge was wrong
    to attach no weight to the threat letter from the Taliban  despite  the
    expert finding that it bore the  hallmarks  of  being  genuine  and  no
    sufficient reasons were given for rejecting this opinion.

11.   In her submissions Ms Iengar relied  primarily  on  ground  3  arguing
    that there had been a failure  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the
    expert evidence and that the judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  it  were
    insufficient and indicated a failure to have regard to the evidence  as
    a whole.  She also submitted that the  judge  had  erred  by  attaching
    undue weight to the appellant's failure to  mention  his  fear  of  the
    Taliban at the screening interview. As the judge had accepted parts  of
    the evidence, it was unclear why she did not accept  that  the  Taliban
    would have an adverse interest in him.

12.   Mr Kandola submitted that the expert evidence simply showed  that  the
    letter from the Taliban had the hallmarks of being genuine but  whether
    it was genuine was an issue of fact for the  judge  to  assess  in  the
    light of the evidence as  a  whole.   She  had  been  entitled,  so  he
    submitted, to take into account the length of time after the  appellant
    had left Afghanistan that the letters were written.  The judge  had  to
    consider the issues in the round and he submitted that she had  reached
    a decision properly open to her.

    The Error of Law

13.   I will deal first with grounds 2 and 3  which  challenge  the  judge's
    finding that both the police letter and  the  threat  letter  from  the
    Taliban were documents on which no weight could be placed.  The  expert
    evidence relating to the police letter  is  found  in  the  appellant's
    bundle (A) at A69-78 and in relation to the Taliban matter at a A81-92.
     The evidence is provided by Mr Jawad Zadeh  whose  qualifications  are
    set out at A69-72 and he explained his methodology and analysis in A73-
    74 of his report.  He has set out his various tests and observations at
    A74-76. It is his conclusion that the  police  arrest  letter  has  the
    correct hallmarks and characteristics  of  a  genuine  Afghan  national
    police arrest letter and it is his view that it is a genuine  document.



14.   There is a similar report in relation to the threat letter  issued  by
    the Taliban and Mr Zadeh's tests and observations are set out  at  A87-
    90.  His view is that  the  threat  letter  displays  all  the  correct
    hallmarks of a genuine Taliban threat letter and  at  A77  he  comments
    that he does not just authenticate a document because it looks  a  good
    document and that sometimes best quality documents fail  the  tests  of
    genuineness.

15.   It is also worth  noting  that  Mr  Zadeh  was  asked  to  assess  the
    authenticity of two photocopy documents  relied  on  by  the  appellant
    including the photocopy of the confirmation  document  from  the  Ulema
    Council but he declined to do so as there were numerous  rubber  stamps
    which required in-depth analysis and  he  regarded  it  as  unsound  to
    express an opinion without sight of the originals: A95.   He  was  also
    asked to assess the health status report from Kabul Medical  University
    relied on by the appellant and at A111 he gave his opinion this  was  a
    genuine report issued by the hospital.

16.   At [25] the judge said that she  attached  no  weight  to  the  police
    letter dated 2011. She did not accept that the authorities  would  have
    any interest in the appellant after his release in 2007 and he had  not
    explained why the police would be writing a letter about him  after  he
    had left Afghanistan.  In [26] she said that she attached no weight  to
    the letter from the Taliban "given I  do  not  accept  the  appellant's
    account regarding the Taliban".  She noted that the expert  found  that
    the letter bore the hallmarks of a genuine Taliban  threat  letter  but
    said, "I attach no weight to the document for the reason given".   That
    reason was her rejection of  the  appellant's  evidence  regarding  the
    Taliban.

17.    I am satisfied that the judge fell into the error identified by the
    Court of Appeal in Mibanga v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ 367 of
    failing to consider all the evidence in the round when assessing
    credibility.  The Court held that a decision-maker would err in law if
    they approached the evidence in a compartmentalised way and reached a
    conclusion before considering all the relevant evidence in the round,
    for example, by making an adverse finding on the credibility of an
    appellant's account and only then considering whether the findings made
    in an expert report are to be relied on: per Wilson LJ at para 24.

18.   The expert evidence about the police  letter  and  the  threat  letter
    from the Taleban are clearly capable of affecting the  outcome  of  the
    appeal if they are accepted as genuine. For this  reason,  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility is flawed by an error of law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.  I need not deal any further with  ground
    1 on the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  answers  in  the  screening
    interview save to comment that had that ground stood alone, I would not
    have been satisfied that the judge had erred in law.

19.   As credibility will have to be reassessed the  appropriate  course  is
    for the appeal to be reconsidered by the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Iengar
    sought to preserve the positive finding that  the  appellant  had  been
    detained in 2006.  Mr Kandola did  not  seek  to  resist  this  as  the
    respondent had not sought to challenge that  finding  in  this  appeal.
    Preserving findings of fact can cause difficulties when a case is being
    reconsidered by way of a full re-hearing, but this finding of  fact  is
    no longer in issue between the parties and to that extent is preserved.

    Decision

20.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  such  that
    the decision should be set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a reconsideration by way of a full rehearing before a
    different judge.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
             Dated: 9 November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
