
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/04561/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On April 30, 2018                         |On May 3, 2018                   |
|                                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                   MRS S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wood (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend the anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and direct that unless and until a Tribunal
    or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  her
    or any member of  her  family.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national. She arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on  January  14,  2016  and  claimed  asylum  the  following  day.  The
    respondent refused her claim on April 25, 2017.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April  25,  2017.   Her
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Chambers
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on October 13, 2017 and in a  decision
    promulgated on October 24, 2017 the Judge refused  her  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on November 7, 2017. Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Scott-Baker  on
    November 15, 2017 because she found it arguable the Judge had erred  by
    failing to make credibility findings on (a) whether the  appellant  had
    been beaten by her brother or falsely imprisoned and (b) on  the  issue
    of whether her own sister had been killed  as  she  had  claimed.  Such
    findings went directly towards any assessment of risk on return.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. Mr McVeety did not adopt the content of a
    Rule 24 letter dated January 11, 2018 but conceded that having read the
    Judge's decision he agreed with Mr Wood that the Judge had to make  the
    findings identified in the grant of permission before  considering  the
    issue of relocation at paragraph 20 of his decision.

 6. Whilst the Judge made a number of important findings I accept  that  he
    did not address the two issues which clearly went to the issue of  risk
    on return. Whether the appellant would be able to relocate  within  the
    IKR would clearly be affected by what it was said had happened  to  her
    and her sister. As those findings were not made the Judge's  assessment
    of internal relocation to either her husband's home area  or  elsewhere
    in the IKR could not properly be considered.

 7. Mr Wood adopted the grounds of appeal and the grant of  permission  and
    invited me to find an error in law and remit the case back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. Mr McVeety agreed with this course
    of action.

 8. In light of the above I accept there is an error in law and there is no
    alternative to effectively restarting the appeal process  by  remitting
    the decision back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

    DECISION

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

10. I set aside the decision.



11. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a  Judge
    other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers.


Signed                              Date     11/04/2018
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
