
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04177/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunal Liverpool  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2018                               |On 22 August 2018            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     FH
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik instructed by Amelius Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the resumed hearing of the  appellant's  appeal  following  an
      error of law hearing on 26 March 2018.

2     The appellant is a national Iraq, from Kirkuk. An account that he  had
      come to the adverse attention of ISIS was rejected  by  Judge  of  the
      First tier Tribunal Mayler in her decision of 5 July 2017.  The  Judge
      held however the appellant would be at  risk  of  indiscriminate  harm
      contrary to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive in Kirkuk (as
      indeed had been accepted by the respondent in the refusal letter of  9
      April  2016),  and  held  that  the  appellant  could  not  reasonably
      internally relocate to Baghdad. The respondent appealed  against  that
      decision, on grounds,  inter  alia,  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
      consider the potential for the appellant to internally relocate to the
      Iraqi Kurdish Region, IKR.

3     At a hearing before me on 26  March  2018  (decision  dated  11  April
      2018), I held that the Judge had erred the manner alleged, and I  then
      adjourned the hearing to permit the appellant to give oral evidence as
      to the reasons why he could not internally relocate to  the  IKR,  and
      for findings of fact to be made on the appellant's assertion, given in
      his original asylum claim, that he could not live in the IKR due to  a
      land dispute between his family and the 'Jaff' clan, residing  in  the
      IKR.  The matter therefore came before me to again today, there  being
      inadequate time on 26 March 2018 for the appeal to continue.

4     It is also to be noted that since the  matter  last  came  before  the
      Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal has issued further  Country  Guidance  in
      relation to internal relocation to the IKR in the form of the decision
      of in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - Internal Relocation)  (CG)  [2018]  UKUT  212
      (IAC) (26 June 2018).

5     The appellant  gave  evidence  before  me  through  a  Kurdish  Sorani
      interpreter, Mr. Zada. I ensured that they were able to understand one
      another. The appellant adopted his witness statements  of  27  January
      2016, (respondent's bundle, pages C4  to  C7),  and  7  November  2016
      (appellant's bundle at B1-B5).

6     In his statement of 27 January 2016 the  appellant  asserted  that  he
      could not reside in Iraqi Kurdistan because his maternal uncle  had  a
      tribal problem with  the  Jaff  tribe  which  would  affect  him.  The
      appellant's maternal uncle had killed a member of this  tribe  over  a
      land dispute. Further, the appellant could  not  go  to  a  Shia  area
      because he was Sunni.

7     I also set out the appellant's evidence in  his  SEF  interview  of  8
      February 2016 on this issue. At the question 36, the appellant said he
      feared the Jaff clan because there was a feud  between  them  and  his
      maternal uncle and as he was related to his uncle he feared  them.  At
      questions 86 - 98 the appellant confirmed that the land dispute  arose
      about 3 to 4 years ago (i.e. therefore sometime in 2012 to  2013)  and
      his uncle killed a member of the Jaff clan at that time, 3 to 4  years
      ago. The uncle left the region and  had  since  then  been  living  in
      Kirkuk. The appellant did not know where the land was but  it  was  in
      Kurdistan. The appellant said initially the uncle  did  not  have  any
      problems but then the dispute started. The uncle had legally bought  a
      piece of land from someone but it turned out that the people who  were
      supposed to inherit the land stood  against  the  selling  of  it  and
      claimed it. The appellant did not know who his uncle  had  killed  but
      the uncle had advised the appellant not to go to Kurdistan,  to  avoid
      any retaliation. The appellant did not know  where  in  Kurdistan  the
      uncle had resided. The Jaff clan could be found anywhere in Kurdistan.
      They could find the appellant  because  the  clan  had  some  sort  of
      authority and power in Kurdistan. The appellant did not  know  if  the
      members of the Jaff clan knew where his uncle was. The  appellant  did
      not know what had happened to the piece of land but probably the  Jaff
      clan had taken it back or  were  occupying  it.  The  Jeff  clan  were
      everywhere in Kurdistan.  They  would   be  able  to  know  where  the
      appellant was eventually. If they asked around  they  would  find  out
      that he was related to his maternal uncle.

8     In evidence in chief the appellant confirmed that he had  never  lived
      in Kurdistan and did not have any family there.

9     In cross examination by Mr. McVeety  the  appellant  stated  that  the
      dispute had been in Sulemaniya. The uncle had not lived long  term  in
      Sulemaniya, he had gone there to purchase  land  and  come  back.  The
      problem had arisen because it was said the land belonged to the  whole
      family, to a number of siblings. The  uncle  had  legally  bought  the
      land. The appellant and his family had not been attacked as  a  result
      of this land dispute, although there had been  threats,  although  not
      directed at the appellant personally. The appellant had  not  been  in
      touch with his maternal  uncle  until  about  two  months  before  the
      previous hearing before the First tier Tribunal (which would therefore
      have been about May 2017).  The uncle had bought the land because  the
      buying and selling of land was good  business  because  of  high  land
      prices.

10    I asked  the  appellant  some  questions.  The  last  information  the
      appellant had about his uncle's whereabouts was from about a year  and
      three or four months ago, that he was then in Kirkuk. A  friend  Arkan
      had informed the appellant of this. When asked if the appellant was of
      any particular clan the appellant said he did not know too much  about
      this. He was just Kurdish. When asked how would any member of the Jaff
      clan know that the appellant was related to his  maternal  uncle,  the
      appellant says - because they have authorities and power in  the  PUK.
      His uncle had remained in Kurdistan for about 3 to 4 months after  the
      time he bought the land.

11    There were with no further questions for the appellant.

12    I heard submissions from the parties.

13    Mr. McVeety pointed out  that  this  was  a  rare  case  in  that  the
      appellant  was  already  known  to  possess  all   of   the   relevant
      documentation which would be required for daily life  in  Iraq.  There
      was a CSID card on file in the Home Office  file,  and  a  nationality
      certificate. These were set out at B5-B6 of the  respondent's  bundle,
      and I saw copies of the originals plus translations  in  the  Tribunal
      appeal file.

14    In relation to the appellant's claimed risk of harm in  the  IKR  from
      the Jaff clan, Mr.  McVeety  argued  that  this  was  not  a  credible
      account. The Country Policy and Information Note on Iraq: Blood Feuds,
      dated August 2017, sets out the different clans within  the  Kurdistan
      area. Information on the Jaff was to be found at 5.3 onwards. The Jaff
      is a large tribe, and Sulemaniya is considered to be their  provincial
      centre. Mr McVeety argued that it was implausible that a  person  such
      as the appellant's maternal uncle would choose to purchase  land  from
      the Jaff clan knowing their relatively powerful  position,  and  would
      have anticipated problems. Further, the  appellant's  account  of  the
      land dispute was vague. The appellant could not explain how the  large
      Jaff clan, with its  various  subdivisions,  would  know  collectively
      anything about  this  particular  land  dispute  which  related  to  a
      particular Jaff family.  Furthermore, even if this  land  dispute  was
      known amongst a wider group of Jaff clan members,  the  appellant  had
      not established how they would come to know  that  the  appellant  was
      related in any way to his maternal uncle.

15    In any event, it was the appellant's case that his maternal uncle  had
      left the IKR and was residing in Kirkuk, and  there  was  no  evidence
      that any blood feud over a land dispute was  being  pursued  with  any
      vigour. The appellant had not  said  that  he  himself  had  been  the
      subject of any threat. Further, if the Jaff power base  exists  around
      the Sulemaniya area, the appellant could live in  Erbil.  It  was  odd
      that the appellant himself suggested that he was not aware of his  own
      tribal origin, suggesting that the appellant was not telling the truth
      that this element of his appeal.

16    As regards the  application  of  AAH,  Mr.  McVeety  argued  that  the
      appellant would be returned to Baghdad, and, in possession of  a  CSID
      card, will be able safely to  fly  or  travel  overland  to  the  IKR.
      Nothing prevented this, in accordance  with  paragraph  three  of  the
      replaced section E of the headnote of AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
      944, such journey being affordable  and  practical  and  can  be  made
      without a real risk of the person suffering serious harm.

17    Mr. McVeety referred to paragraph 6  of  the  amended  headnote  which
      provided that a person in the appellant's position would  normally  be
      granted entry to the territory of IKR. Subject to  security  screening
      and registering his presence with the local mukhtar the appellant will
      be permitted to enter and reside in the  IKR  with  no  further  legal
      impediments or requirements, and there was no sponsorship requirements
      for Kurds. The potential risk factors during  any  security  screening
      were unlikely to arise in the appellant's case. He did not come from a
      family with any association with ISIL.  Although he came from an  area
      associated with  ISIL,  the  appellant  was  of  Kurdish  origin,  and
      although he is a single male of fighting age, he would  have  evidence
      of his recent arrival from the UK to dispel any suggestion  of  having
      arrived directly from ISIL territory.

18    Considering whether the appellant  might  have  family  assistance  to
      support  him  in  the  IKR,  Mr.  McVeety  suggested  that  given  the
      appellant's poor credibility, it was not necessarily that to be  taken
      to be the case that he did not have family members living in the  IKR.
      It was accepted that the appellant would not be able to gain access to
      a refugee camp for IDP's  in  the  IKR,  being  extremely  overcrowded
      already (headnote,  para  9(i)).  It  was  suggested  that  under  the
      Voluntary Returns Scheme, the appellant would have access to a returns
      package of up to �1500 which the appellant could use to pay for  rent,
      as per headnote para 9(ii), even at the cost of $300-$400  per  month.
      The appellant  would  not  need  to  resort  to  a  'critical  shelter
      arrangement'  living  in  an  unfinished   or   abandoned   structure.
      Considering headnote para 10, whilst accepting the  high  unemployment
      rate in the IKR, Mr. McVeety argued  that  the  appellant  could  find
      work, as he had some skills and experience. Although unskilled workers
      were  at  the  greatest  disadvantage  due  to  the  decline  in   the
      construction industry, the appellant had worked previously in Iraq  as
      a barber, and he was reasonably likely to be able to obtain  the  same
      employment.

19    For his part, Mr. Karnik sought to  draw  a  distinction  between  the
      guidance now given in AAH, which refers  to  the  requirement  for  'a
      valid CSID' card, as opposed to the possession 'a CSID' card, referred
      to in AA Iraq, without any qualification  that  it  be  deemed  to  be
      valid.

20    Although Mr Karnik accepted that the CSID card issued  by  the  Kirkuk
      authorities to the appellant in 2014 did not have any expiry  date  on
      it, he referred to the fact that Iraqi documentation has  changed  its
      format from time to time and that there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood that a CSID card issued in 2014 may no longer be valid,  on
      the basis that it may have  been  replaced  by  a  different  form  of
      document.

21    Further and in any event, given that the respondent was  proposing  to
      return the appellant to Baghdad, and had specifically  identified  the
      route of travel to a place of internal relocation to the IKR, then the
      principles of HH Somalia applied in the present appeal,  resulting  in
      the burden of establishing  that  such  route  was  safe  lay  on  the
      respondent.  Thus, the burden lay on  the  respondent  to  demonstrate
      that the CSID card in the appellant's name remained valid.

22    If the appellant arrived in Iraq without a valid CSID card,  then  the
      fact that he came from Kirkuk was relevant.  It  was  highly  unlikely
      that Kirkuk, given the conflict which had prevailed there  during  the
      period in which ISIS had a significant presence in the  region,  would
      still have a functioning Civil Status office from which the  appellant
      could obtain a replacement CSID card. The  headnote  of  AAH  provided
      that it would not be safe for a person to attempt to  travel  overland
      from Baghdad to the IKR without being in possession of  a  valid  CSID
      card.

23    Further, Mr. Karnik argued that the appellant had  no  family  members
      in the IKR, and, as noted by paragraph  8  of  the  headnote  in  AAH,
      cultural norms would require that any family in IKR would be  expected
      to accommodate him. This was an example of the  importance  of  family
      support. Further, any voluntary returns package would  soon  run  out,
      and the appellant would be unable to afford  the  high  rental  prices
      mentioned in the IKR.

24    Mr. Karnik referred  to  headnote  para  10(iv),  that  patronage  and
      nepotism continued to be important factors in securing  employment.  A
      returnee with family connections to the region will have a significant
      advantage in that he would ordinarily  be  able  to  call  upon  those
      contacts to make introductions to prospective employers to  vouch  for
      him. Mr. Karnik argued that the appellant had  no  such  patronage  or
      support group available to him. Even if the appellant  had  experience
      as a barber, Mr Karnik argued that a small business such  as  that  is
      likely to be run by a family group (and I note, for instance, that the
      appellant was a barber together with his own father  in  Kirkuk).   Mr
      Karnik argued that this will be a close-knit group, reluctant to admit
      members into employment within such workplaces, who were unrelated  to
      the owners, and unknown to them. The appellant as a newcomer would  be
      treated with suspicion and would not be given material  assistance  by
      those around him.

25    Mr. Karnik referred me to a number of paragraphs in the main  body  of
      the decision in AAH which he argued supported the propositions set out
      in the headnote.


26    Mr. Karnik also addressed me on the Jaff clan issue.  He  argued  that
      the appellant's young age at the time, and his physical distance  from
      the problems should be taken into account when considering  the  level
      of detail he was able to give in  relation  to  his  maternal  uncle's
      problems. There was nothing implausible about the level of  detail  he
      was able to provide.

27    Mr. Karnik argued that the Jaff clan, being influential and  powerful,
      was likely to have heard on a wide basis the news of  the  killing  of
      one of their member in the Sulemaniya area.  It  would  have  been  of
      note, and notorious, that the killing took  place  by  a  person  from
      outside the Sulemaniya area who had attempted to purchase  land.  This
      novel feature of the matter would be known by a wide group of the Jaff
      clan. Mr. Karnik argued that the suspicion of  newcomers  to  the  IKR
      would result in questions being asked about the  appellant's  origins,
      and there was a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  his  family
      origins, even if the uncle was related to the  appellant  through  the
      maternal line rather than the paternal line, would become known.  This
      would result in the appellant being be at risk of serious harm in  the
      IKR.  In  the  alternative,  Mr.  Karnik  referred  to  the  risk   of
      destitution as a set out above.

      Discussion

28    I determine the appeal on the basis that the appellant  cannot  return
      to Kirkuk, or remain for a prolonged period in  Baghdad.  He  will  be
      returned to Baghdad. I reject Mr. Karnik's proposition, made  for  the
      first time in closing submissions, that the appellant does not have  a
      valid CSID card. No evidence has been shown to me to suggest that  the
      formats of the CSID cards issued since 2014 have changed in any way so
      as to make  the  appellant's  CSID  card  now  invalid.  Mr.  Karnik's
      assertion is just that; a bare assertion, and his  argument  that  the
      document, which he accepts was valid at the time that it  was  issued,
      is no longer valid, is nothing more than pure speculation on his part.
      I am of the view that the appellant's CSID card, which is valid,  will
      enable the appellant to either fly or travel overland from Baghdad  to
      the IKR.

29     Mr  Karnik  also  made  reference  for  the  first  time  in  closing
      submissions to HH Somalia.  I assume this to  be  a  reference  to  HH
      (Somalia), AM (Somalia), J (Somalia),  MA  (Somalia)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 426. However  the  point
      was wholly undeveloped by Mr Karnik. No  copy  of  the  authority  was
      placed before me, and no particular passage was referred to. I make no
      further reference to the  case.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever  to
      support the appellant's current assertion that his CSID  card  may  no
      longer be valid.

30    The appellant will be  admitted  to  the  IKR,  as  per  the  relevant
      guidance in AAH.  I  find  that  there  is  no  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood that the appellant will  come  to  serious  harm  upon  any
      security screening on arrival in  the  IKR  around  the  time  of  his
      registration with the mukhtar. Although the appellant  comes  from  an
      area previously held by ISIS, he will be able to demonstrate  that  he
      has recently come from United Kingdom, and will have had nothing to do
      with the recent conflicts in between Kurds and Iraqi  national  forces
      against ISIS insurgents. Further, I see little reason why the  Kurdish
      authorities in IKR would suspect a Kurd  of  being  involved  in  ISIS
      atrocities, given that ISIS treated the Kurds with hostility.

31    I find that the appellant will be able to secure accommodation  for  a
      short period of time using funds that he will be provided with as part
      of a returns package.

32    I do not find that the appellant will be at risk of  serious  harm  in
      IKR from the Jaff clan. Even allowing  for  the  appellant's  relative
      youth and that he received information about the land dispute from his
      maternal uncle second hand, and did not receive threats directly  from
      the Jaff clan, I find that his account of this issue is very vague. He
      is unable to provide the name of any particular family from  the  Jaff
      clan that is involved in the dispute, where in particular the land is,
      what type of influence or power this particular family has in the IKR,
      and  whether  they  have  any  particular  influence  in   the   local
      authorities or wider authorities in the IKR.

33    Further, and in any event, I find that it is simply not made out  that
      the wider Jaff clan will know anything about a land dispute in which a
      particular Jaff family  have  become  embroiled.  Further  still,  the
      appellant has failed to establish, even if a fairly wide group  within
      the Jaff clan are aware of the land  dispute  between  the  particular
      Jaff family and the appellant's maternal uncle, how there would  be  a
      reasonable degree of likelihood that any person in the IKR would  come
      to know that he was related to his maternal uncle.  It  has  not  been
      asserted, for instance, that he shares a name or part of a  name  with
      his maternal uncle. Even if newcomers into an area in the IKR may face
      some scrutiny, I find that the appellant would be  able  to  give  his
      father's name and family background without there being  any  risk  of
      needing to identify his mother's brother.  The  proposition  that  the
      appellant is at risk of harm in the IKR as a  result  of  any  dispute
      that the maternal uncle had with the Jaff plan is fanciful,  and  does
      not establish a reasonable degree of likelihood of serious harm.

34    I find the determination of  this  appeal  therefore  depends  on  the
      probability of the appellant  securing  employment  to  avoid  himself
      becoming destitute in the IKR. In this regard I find it of  assistance
      to consider the outcome in the appeal in AAH itself. I quote the Upper
      Tribunal's consideration of the  likely  fate  of  that  appellant  at
      paragraph 146 - 149:

           "146. In respect of accommodation, the Appellant  would  not  be
                 able to gain access to a refugee camp. The camps are closed
                 to newcomers. Nor would he be able to rent a room in one of
                 the  traditional  neighbourhoods,  since  on   Dr   Fatah's
                 evidence this would be regarded as  socially  unacceptable.
                 He has no family members to take him in. It would  be  open
                 to  the  Appellant  to  rent  an   apartment   in   a   new
                 neighbourhood at the cost for $300-$400 per  month,  or  to
                 pay for a hotel room. Whilst these are options  that  would
                 certainly be available to him in the immediate period after
                 his arrival - assuming he has applied for the VRS  grant  -
                 we think it very unlikely that the Appellant would be  able
                 to earn enough money to keep paying that level of rent.  In
                 those circumstances the most likely outcome is that  within
                 a couple of months of his arrival in the IKR the  Appellant
                 will  find  himself   living   in   a   'critical   housing
                 arrangement'.  Whether  his  quality  of   life   in   this
                 accommodation can be said to be 'unduly harsh'  depends  on
                 whether or not he is able to secure  sufficient  income  to
                 obtain basic necessities such  as  food,  clean  water  and
                 clothing.


           147.  Although the Appellant is  literate  in  both  Sorani  and
                 Arabic he has  limited  education  and  no  qualifications.
                 Those are factors that weigh against him in the job market.
                 His experience as a labourer is of negligible  value  given
                 the very high unemployment rate in the IKR, and the decline
                 in  the  construction  industry.  We  recognise  that   the
                 Appellant has no connections to call upon to help him get a
                 job. In this regard we also note that the Appellant has  in
                 the  past  demonstrated  an  ability   to   overcome   that
                 particular obstacle: he had no connections to Mosul when he
                 and his wife moved  there,  and  yet  he  managed  to  find
                 employment and provide for his family  for  some  11  years
                 before he left that city. The last job he had in Mosul  was
                 as a generator operator. We consider  that  to  be  a  real
                 advantage. It is a semi-skilled role that is unlikely to be
                 affected by the economic downturn: most businesses and many
                 homes will be dependent upon such generators. Finally, what
                 the Appellant has that many IDPs do not, is a  valid  CSID.
                 The Appellant is physically able, literate, experienced and
                 crucially, he is  documented.  Taking  those  factors  into
                 account we are  satisfied  that  he  will  be  one  of  the
                 minority of IDPs in the IKR who are  able  to  secure  some
                 form of employment.


           148.   We  do  not  underestimate  the  difficulties  that   the
                 Appellant will face. Taking all  of  the  relevant  factors
                 into account we are however satisfied that he will be  able
                 to lead what is in general  for  Iraq  today  a  relatively
                 'normal' life. His accommodation will be  far  from  ideal,
                 but we find that  he  will  be  able  to  feed  and  clothe
                 himself. He will be able, as he has done here, to establish
                 a private life in the form of friendships with  others,  be
                 it locals or other IDPs in his area. It is  not  reasonably
                 likely that he will become  destitute  or  that  his  human
                 dignity will be otherwise compromised  to  an  unacceptable
                 extent.


           149.  We do not therefore accept that it would  be  unreasonable
                 to expect the Appellant to relocate  to  the  IKR  and  his
                 appeal must be dismissed."

35    I note in the present appellant's  witness  statement  of  27  January
      2016 that the appellant attended primary and then secondary school, up
      to the age of 18, and until the age of 23 the appellant studied  at  a
      technology school in Kirkuk (paragraph 5).  During  the  time  he  was
      studying he also worked in a barbershop with his father.  At  question
      25 of the SEF interview, the appellant also states that he studied  at
      technology (vocational) school until year three but did  not  complete
      it.  Although that background would appear to  represent  a  level  of
      education which is probably higher than that many men living  in  IKR,
      the only evidence of the appellant's actual employment  was  with  his
      father in the family barbershop.

36    The only language which the appellant  appears  to  speak  is  Kurdish
      (screen, question 1.10 a 1.11). In AAH itself, appellant AAH's limited
      education and lack of qualifications were deemed to  be  factors  that
      weighed against him in the job market. It  was  found  that  appellant
      AAH's experience as a labourer was of negligible value given the  very
      high unemployment rate in the IKR upon the decline in the construction
      industry.  That  appellant,  like  the  present  appellant,   had   no
      connections to call upon in order to help get the job.

37    However, in AAH, the Upper Tribunal noted that that appellant  had  in
      the past demonstrated an ability to overcome the obstacle of having no
      connections to call upon when he and his wife had moved to Mozel,  and
      he had managed to find employment and to provide for  his  family  for
      some 11 years before having to leave that city. His last job in  Mozul
      had been as a generator operator. The Upper Tribunal  considered  that
      to be a real advantage, being a semiskilled role that was unlikely  to
      be affected by the economic  downturn.  Appellant  AAH,  as  does  the
      present appellant, had a valid CSID card.  In AAH, the  Tribunal  took
      the factors of AAH being physically able,  literate,  experienced  and
      crucially documented, into account in being satisfied that he would be
      one of the minority of IDP's in the IKR who would be  able  to  secure
      some form of employment.

38    I am ultimately persuaded by Mr. Karnik's  submission  that  obtaining
      employment in the IKR will be extremely difficult for  the  appellant,
      and the appellant's lack of family connections, patronage and nepotism
      are all important factors to consider in assessing the probability  of
      his  securing  employment.  Unlike  the  appellant  AAH,  the  present
      appellant has no experience of venturing out by himself as the head of
      a household to find work. The appellant was only 22 years old  at  the
      time that he left, and his  only  employment  experience  was  working
      together with his father. Although there will always be a  requirement
      for barbers in any community, I do not consider that  skills  in  that
      area are likely to be seen  the  being  of  real  advantage,  such  as
      appellant AAH's skills as a generator  operator.  I  also  accept  Mr.
      Karnik's submission that barbers businesses are likely to  be  run  by
      family groups with which the appellant would have no connection.

39    I am persuaded, taking  all  these  factors  into  account,  that  the
      appellant faces a  real  risk  of  being  unable  to  find  sufficient
      employment on entering IKR to enable him to financially survive and to
      provide himself with adequate  accommodation.  I  find  that  internal
      relocation  from  Kirkuk  to  IKR  is  not  only  unduly   harsh   and
      unreasonable, but it is in fact likely to result in  a  real  risk  of
      destitution  crossing  the  threshold  into  inhuman   and   degrading
      treatment or punishment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

40    The appellant's original appeal before Judge Meyler  was  allowed  not
      on refugee grounds, but rather on the grounds that the refusal of  his
      protection claim was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
      1998, as a result of a risk of breaches of Articles 2 and 3 ECHR, also
      with reference to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

41    I am of  the  view  that  the  proposed  internal  relocation  of  the
      appellant to IKR raises a real risk to him under Article 3 ECHR.

      Decision

42    On 26 March 2018, I ruled that the decision involved the making  of  a
      material error of law, and set aside the decision.

43    I remake the decision by allowing the appeal under Article 3 ECHR.


    Signed:                                             Date: 13.8.18
    [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan







    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless and until a Tribunal or
    court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any
    member of their family. This direction applies both to  the  appellants
    and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
    to contempt of court proceedings.




    Signed:                                             Date: 13.8.18
    [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


