
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04956/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                     | Decision Promulgated              |
|On 15th  October 2018                   | On 18th October 2018              |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     AF
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Khan, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chambers promulgated 17.5.18, dismissing on all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    30.3.18, to refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    11.6.18.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below, I found no material error of law in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such  as  to  require
    the decision to be set aside.

 4. The basis of the claim was that the appellant had engaged in  a  sexual
    relationship with a young  woman  who  became  pregnant.  Her  parents,
    members of the influential Barzani tribe, killed her and threatened  to
    kill the appellant.

 5. In essence, the complaint in the grounds is that  the  judge  erred  by
    failing to make  any  or  any  adequate  and  reasoned  findings  about
    essential aspects of the appellant's claim and also made  contradictory
    findings. It is also submitted that the judge  failed  to  provide  any
    reasoning in respect of the risk from the Barzani Tribe.

 6. Reading individual sentences from the decision, cited in  the  grounds,
    it might at  first  appear  that  Judge  Chambers  merely  recited  the
    evidence but failed to go on to make findings of fact. However,  it  is
    clear from a reading of the decision as a whole that Judge Chambers did
    not believe any part of the appellant's account. It appears to me  that
    the grounds of appeal arise from a misunderstanding  or  misreading  of
    Judge Chambers' decision. For example, in the submissions before me  Mr
    Khan emphasised the last sentence of [21] of the decision: "It is  fair
    to conclude on what the appellant says that (S's) father was seeking to
    murder the appellant as well on the 28 January." It was submitted  that
    either the judge was accepting the appellant's case or his meaning  was
    unclear when the appellant is entitled to know the basis on  which  his
    appeal  has  been  rejected.  In  fact,  [21]  has  to  be  read  as  a
    continuation of the point being made by the  Judge  from  [17]  through
    [22] of the decision. The judge first pointed out that although  it  is
    claimed that the young  woman  had  been  killed,  the  appellant  knew
    nothing about the details of her alleged death  and  despite  being  in
    contact with his family had made no enquiries as to how her  death  had
    been presented. I do not accept that the judge was  unfairly  demanding
    corroboration  for  the  claim,  accepting  as  he  did  at  [19]  that
    appellants are not generally under a duty to corroborate their account.
    However, as the judge explained there are circumstances where it  could
    have been provided and might reasonably be expected. There was no death
    certificate but it not just the absence of documentation  but  a  total
    lack of information about her demise when one might have  expected  him
    to have sought such information. For someone said  to  have  fallen  in
    love with this young woman, he was remarkably ignorant  and  incurious.
    It is this aspect, amongst others, that led the judge to conclude  that
    the account was not credible.

 7. The judge went on to further point out other incredible aspects of  the
    claim, including that despite, on his own  account,  knowing  that  her
    pregnancy had been disclosed to her family and thus that they wanted to
    kill him as well as her, he did not take any action but  coincidentally
    went away from the area with his brother to have a nose  operation.  At
    [22] the judge pointed out that the appellant had not claimed  that  he
    fled the area that day in fear of being murdered but put  forward  this
    "story" to explain his absence from the scene and to fit  in  with  the
    claim of having received a telephone tip off that the girl's father was
    after him. The judge makes clear that this account  was  not  believed,
    having set out what aspects of the account he found  not  credible  and
    why. Properly read as a narrative decision,  the  judge  did  not  make
    inconsistent findings at all, contrary to the claim of the grounds  and
    submissions to me.

 8. It may be that the textual style adopted by the judge could  have  been
    clearer and spelt out more clearly by way of summary what was  accepted
    and what was not. However,  I  am  satisfied  that  a  reading  of  the
    decision as a whole provides adequate  and  cogent  reasoning  for  not
    accepting any part of the appellant's claim. Those reasons were open to
    the judge on the evidence.

 9. Whilst there were no findings about the claimed risk from  the  Barzani
    Tribe, a member of whom had been  a  past  president  of  the  IKR,  it
    follows from the above that the judge rejected the appellant's  factual
    claim and thus there was no need for the judge to address a  risk  that
    did not exist. If the appellant's  account  of  his  life  having  been
    threatened by a young woman's family is rejected, it follows that there
    is no risk from the family, whether or not  they  are  members  of  the
    Barzani Tribe or not. There is no error of law in the judge's treatment
    of this issue.

10. It follows that I find the grounds and submissions on error of law  not
    made out.

Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and

                       the appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup





Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, given the circumstances, I make an  anonymity
order.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



