
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04232/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    P. T.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Rogers, Solicitor, IAS
For the Respondent:    Mr Stainthorpe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of the DRC, entered the UK illegally in October
2015 and made a protection claim which was refused on 19 March 2018. The
Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard on 12 November 2018, and
dismissed, by First-tier Tribunal Judge T Jones, in a decision promulgated
on 3 January 2018. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was
granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 13 March 2019 on all the grounds
advanced. The Respondent did not reply to that grant with a Rule 24
response.

The Appellant's case was that he had left the DRC for South Africa in 2009,
fearing persecution if he remained. That is initially correctly recorded by
the Judge [11], but his decision then goes on to record in three subsequent
passages his apparent understanding that the Appellant had not left the DRC
prior to October 2015 [26, 36, 43]. It is common ground before me that
these cannot be characterised as mere typographical errors, of no
consequence. I agree, it is not possible to read the decision as a whole,
without concluding that this must have reflected the Judge's mis
understanding of the evidence when he came to make his decision. Although
Mr Stainthorpe was not prepared to concede that this error of fact amounted
to a material error of law, he was unable to point to any authority that
assisted his position. The relevant authority is ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA
Civ 844. A factual error, if significant to the outcome, can constitute an
error of law, but the key question is whether the Appellant has had the
fair hearing to which he is entitled, before any adverse findings of
credibility are made against him. A necessary part of that fair hearing is
that the Tribunal has listened carefully to his case, and has understood
it, before proceeding to make any adverse findings upon it. That is the
prism through which the error of fact is to be viewed; to see whether it
discloses that the judicial process was sufficiently flawed to amount to an
error of law.

In my judgement the Appellant has clearly established the error of law
complained of, and identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in granting
permission. The central adverse finding of fact is set out in paragraph 43.
It is extremely difficult to understand what the Judge was trying to
articulate in this passage, although whatever it may have been, the
incorrect date of departure from the DRC appears to have been central to
it.

In the circumstances both parties agree that a fresh hearing is the only
pragmatic course open. I agree. None of the findings of fact made by the
Judge are safe, or can be preserved. In circumstances such as this, where
it would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered
by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to
deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly
considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact
finding exercise required is such that having regard to the over-riding
objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to the
First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First tier Tribunal Judge T Jones, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre.

    A Lingala interpreter is required.

    The remitted appeal may not be suitable for the short warned list given
    the recent developments in the DRC, about which the Appellant may wish
    to file evidence to explain why he says he would now be at risk of harm
    upon return to the DRC. The Appellant must write to the Tribunal by 5pm
    21 June 2019 explaining what further evidence he proposes to file, and
    setting out a proposed timetable. The Tribunal will issue Directions
    for listing on 24 June 2019.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 7 June 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
[pic]
