
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04135/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th March 2018                         |                                |
|                                           |On 10th April 2018              |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     INS
                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Levine, ILC Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was  born  on  the  1st  January
    1998. She appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Spencer, promulgated on the 12th  June  2017,  to  dismiss  her  appeal
    against refusal of her Protection Claim.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claim can conveniently  be  summarised  as
    follows.

 3. The appellant is a Kurdish Sunni Muslim who hails from Kirkuk in  Iraq.
    On the 15th September 2016, she began a sexual relationship with a  man
    who was providing her with private tuition in mathematics and  physics.
    She fell pregnant as a result. The appellant and her tutor  immediately
    left Iraq. However, they subsequently became separated on route to  the
    United Kingdom. The appellant now fears that upon return to Kirkuk  her
    family members will kill her for bringing shame and dishonour upon  the
    family as a result of giving birth to  a  child  outside  wedlock.  She
    additionally fears that she will suffer  serious  harm  due  the  areas
    surrounding Kirkuk continuing to be contested by  Daesh.  Finally,  she
    fears that she will become destitute  because  she  is  a  lone  female
    without documentation.

 4. Judge Spencer rejected the appellant's account of the circumstances  in
    which she came to leave Iraq, not least because  there  was  conclusive
    (and uncontested) fingerprint evidence to show that she was  in  Greece
    at the time when she claimed to have been in a sexual relationship with
    her tutor in Iraq. The judge was unimpressed by the appellant's  change
    at the hearing of her timeline and  her  explanation  for  why  it  was
    different from that which she had given in her  Asylum  Interview.  The
    judge also held that the fact that the appellant  had  entered  the  UK
    using a false Spanish passport was damaging to her overall credibility.
    His conclusion in relation to the reasons for her flight from Iraq  are
    stated at paragraph 32 of his decision:

         "I therefore conclude that the Appellant has failed to substantiate
         her claim as to how she became pregnant or that  she  has  a  well-
         founded fear of her family."

 5. Paragraph 4 of the Grounds of Appeal argue that (a) the judge failed to
    apply "any commonsense to the matter" (above), (b) the question of  how
    the appellant came to be pregnant was "totally irrelevant", and (c) the
    judge's sole purpose in making this finding was "to  undermine  and  to
    lower the self-esteem of the Appellant". Mr Levine  sought  to  advance
    this somewhat Delphic argument by suggesting that, upon a  natural  and
    ordinary construction of the words  employed,  the  judge  had  made  a
    finding that the appellant had failed to substantiate  her  claim  that
    she become pregnant through sexual intercourse. Such  a  finding  would
    indeed be lacking in "any common sense". It is however, if  I  may  say
    so, a most improbable interpretation of the judge's meaning. When  read
    within the context of the preceding paragraphs it is  clear  that  what
    the judge in fact found was the appellant had  failed  to  substantiate
    the claimed circumstances in  which  she  had  entered  into  a  sexual
    relationship with the father of her child. On this reading of paragraph
    32, the judge's finding was very far from "irrelevant" to the issues in
    the appeal.  On  the  contrary,  it  went  to  the  very  core  of  the
    appellant's claim that she was now at risk  of  harm  from  her  family
    members in Iraq.

 6. The only other ground of appeal that was pursued by Mr Levine was  that
    contained within paragraph 5 of the written grounds:

         "Paragraph 34 of the Determination of Judge Spencer  is  internally
         inconsistent and weak at best. If the  judge  is  able  to  make  a
         finding to the effect that "I find that she would face a real  risk
         of suffering harm if she attempted  to  travel  through  the  areas
         controlled by Daesch via land then it is logically indefensible for
         the Judge not to follow the Upper Tribunal case of AA in  which  it
         was said that there was a real risk of indiscriminate  violence  in
         Kirkuk (the  Home  town  of  the  Appellant).  The  judge  has  not
         understood the true nature and legal effect of the  Upper  Tribunal
         case of AA and how it is directly relevant and applicable  to  this
         case."

 7. Before considering this ground further, it is first necessary to set in
    context what the judge had to  say  about  the  reasonableness  of  the
    appellant's return to Kirkuk and relocation elsewhere within Iraq.

         "33. It was agreed between the parties that  it  was  held  in  the
         country guidance case of AA 15(c) Iraq CG  2015  UKUT  00544  (IAC)
         that Kirkuk is a contested area. The parties also agreed  that  the
         Court of Appeal held in SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 stated that:

              "decision makers and tribunal judges  are  required  to  take
             Country Guidance determinations into account,  and  to  follow
             them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,
             are adduced to justifying their not doing so."

         34.  The Respondent  seeks  to  rely  upon  a  Country  Policy  and
         Information Note dated March 2017 (paragraph 70 RFRL). This  states
         that, "the security situation has changed  since  April  2015,  the
         point up to which AA considered evidence... Daesh now only  control
         parts  of  Mosul....  and   the   surrounding   areas   in   Kirkuk
         governorate." I have to consider how  the  Appellant  would  travel
         from Baghdad to her hometown of Kirkuk. I find that she  will  most
         likely have to travel through an area controlled by Daesh in  order
         to do this as they still  control  the  surrounding  areas  in  the
         Kirkuk governorate. There is no airport in  Kirkuk  and  she  would
         therefore have to complete this journey by land. I  find  that  she
         would face a real risk of suffering serious harm if  she  attempted
         to travel through  the  areas  controlled  by  Daesh  via  land.  I
         therefore find that this evidence does not amount  to  very  strong
         grounds to not follow the Country Guidance of AA on this issue.

         35.  I therefore turn to the issue of internal relocation. I  agree
         with the submission that the Appellant's return is feasible as  she
         will be able  to  obtain  her  Iraqi  nationality  certificate  and
         passport from her family. I also agree that even if return were not
         feasible this in itself would not be a reason to grant protection.

         36.  The Respondent submits that the Appellant  could  travel  from
         Baghdad to the IKR to live with her aunt. The Country  Guidance  in
         AA states:

             E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

             17.  The Respondent will  only  return  P  to  the  IKR  if  P
             originates from the  IKR  and  P's  identity  has  been  'pre-
             cleared' with the IKR authorities. The authorities in the  IKR
             do not require P to have an expired or  current  passport,  or
             laissez passer.

             18.  The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article
             15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

             19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain
             entry for 10 days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can
             remain for longer, although K will need to register  with  the
             authorities and provide details of the employer. There  is  no
             evidence that the IKR authorities  pro-actively  remove  Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.

             20.  Whether K, if returned  to  Baghdad,  can  reasonably  be
             expected to avoid any potential undue harshness in  that  city
             by travelling to the IKR,  will  be  fact  sensitive;  and  is
             likely to involve an  assessment  of  (a)the  practicality  of
             travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such  as  to  Irbil  by  air);
             (b)the likelihood of K's securing employment in the  IKR;  and
             (c) the availability of assistance from family and friends  in
             the IKR.

             21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a
             home area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to  relocate  to  the
             IKR."

         37.  I follow the guidance  in  AA  and  find  that  she  would  be
         returned to Baghdad. I find that she would be able to  travel  from
         Baghdad to the IKR. It has not been substantiated  that  she  would
         have to travel through any area controlled by  Daesh  in  order  to
         complete this journey. She is an ordinary citizen and will have her
         documents. She is not at risk at any roadblocks, as I do not accept
         that her family will have reported her missing, as I  do  not  find
         her credible on this issue as to why she left Iraq. I do find  that
         she is heavily pregnant. I have considered this however I find that
         this will not restrict her from travelling via land or  air.  There
         is no evidence that substantiates that she  will  not  be  able  to
         conduct this journey as a result of being pregnant. I find that she
         would be to take an internal flight to the IKR and this would  also
         mean that she would avoid any area controlled by Daesh. I find that
         she has shown great resourcefulness and fortitude in travelling  to
         the UK. I find that she could use this again and  could  travel  to
         the IKR and live with her aunt.

         38.  She is in contact with her aunt and has  visited  her  once  a
         year (Q.24) and I find that she will be able to  reside  with  her.
         These findings mean that she will be  able  to  find  accommodation
         very quickly. The Country Guidance states, "There  is  no  evidence
         that the IKR authorities pro-actively remove  Kurds  from  the  IKR
         whose permits have come to an  end."  I  therefore  find  that  the
         Appellant would be allowed entry initially for 10 days and would be
         allowed to remain there. Once her child has reached  an  age  where
         other people can care for him/her I find that the Appellant will be
         able to use her resourcefulness and find employment.  I  find  that
         she is an intelligent young lady who will be able to find some sort
         of employment. I agree with the Respondent's submission in the RFRL
         and find that it would be reasonable for the Appellant to  relocate
         to the IKR.

         39.  The Appellant  submits  in  her  witness  statement  that  she
         requires medical care and assistance in the UK and  that  she  will
         require a reasonable level of nursing/medical care  after  she  has
         given birth. The Appellant herself in interview stated that she now
         has no complications in her pregnancy and she was told  that  these
         issues had resolved the day before the interview (Q.4). I find that
         she has not substantiated that the appropriate level of care for  a
         pregnant lady is not available in the IKR. I also find that she has
         not  substantiated  that  her  pregnancy  will  restrict  her  from
         relocating and travelling to the IKR.

 8. Contrary to the impression that is given  in  the  written  grounds  of
    appeal, it is apparent from the above that the judge was well aware  of
    the need to follow the guidance in AA absent cogent evidence justifying
    departure. It is moreover clear that he had declined  the  respondent's
    invitation to depart from that guidance on the strength of the  further
    information that had been placed before him. Doing his  best  with  the
    grounds as pleaded, Mr Levine suggested  that  there  was  an  inherent
    contradiction between the judge's finding at paragraph 34 that it would
    not be safe for the appellant to travel from Baghdad to Kirkuk and  his
    finding at paragraph 37 that she could safely travel  from  Baghdad  to
    the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR). However,  it  is  patently  clear
    from the judge's reasoning that the difficulty  for  the  appellant  in
    travelling to Kirkuk was that due to the absence of an airport in  that
    city so that she would be  forced  to  travel  overland  through  ISIS-
    controlled territory, whereas she would be able to avoid this by taking
    an internal flight to Erbil airport in the IKR [paragraph 37]. That was
    a finding that was  reasonably  open  to  the  judge  given  his  other
    findings (which are not challenged) that the appellant would be able to
    secure the necessary travel documentation [paragraph 35],  the  absence
    of evidence to suggest that the Kurdish authorities proactively  remove
    those who stay beyond their initial period  of  leave  to  remain,  the
    appellant's continued contact with her aunt who lives  in  that  region
    [paragraph 38], and the lack of evidence  suggesting  that  appropriate
    medical care would be unavailable in the IKR [paragraph 39].

Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date: 7th April 2018

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

