
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04774/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th August 2017                           |On 6th September 2017         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                           Zubair Rhaman Alukozai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohzam, a solicitor from Birmingham Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on 1st  January
    1988, and who  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  29th  November  2015,
    concealed in the rear of a lorry.  He claimed asylum on  the  same  day
    claiming a fear of the Taliban and personal enemies of his family.

2.   The respondent refused the appellant's  claim  in  an  asylum  decision
    letter dated 27th  April  2016.   The  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution and did  not,
    therefore, qualify for asylum within the  terms  of  the  1951  Refugee
    Convention.  The respondent was also  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    return to Afghanistan would not place the United Kingdom in  breach  of
    the European Convention for the protection of the  European  Convention
    for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms  and  that
    the appellant was not eligible for humanitarian protection.

3.   The appellant's  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N
    Sharkett in Manchester on 24th October 2016.

4.   Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the appellant was not  represented
    but was assisted by the judge in giving his account.

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, but did  not  believe
    the whole of it.  The judge found that the appellant had  not  given  a
    truthful account of why he had left Afghanistan and he did not  believe
    the appellant to be at risk for  the  reasons  he  had  given.   Having
    considered the security position in Afghanistan since the  promulgation
    of the country guidance case  of  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) the judge concluded that even if the  appellant
    did not wish to return to his home area he would be able to  return  to
    Kabul.  He found that the appellant was  a  young  man  who  had  shown
    considerable resource in travelling to the United Kingdom and  who  had
    told the judge that he had been used to travelling around for months at
    a time because he belongs to a nomad  tribe.   He  was  able  to  speak
    Pushtu and Dari and if he wished to  would  have  the  support  of  his
    family and extended family living in Afghanistan.

6.   While the judge noted that there was recently an increase in the  level
    of violence in Kabul, he also noted  that  the  Government  was  taking
    steps to limit risk to civilians and found that the  overall  level  of
    danger did not reach a 15(c)  level.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant would be at no greater risk on return to Kabul than any other
    citizen living there and that there was not sufficient evidence to give
    reason to depart from AK.  He concluded that he must also  dismiss  the
    appellant's  claim  for  humanitarian  protection  and  his  claim  for
    protection under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR based, as they  were,  on
    the same factual matrix as the asylum claim.

7.   The appellant sought permission to appeal  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chapman granted permission on 26th April 2017.  In doing  so  she
    said this:-

         "2.  The grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal, which were made in time,  assert
             that the Judge erred materially in law:


             (i)  in attaching too much emphasis  to  credibility  findings
                  and using these to dismiss the appeal;


             (ii) in failing to make a finding as to  whether  or  not  the
                  Appellant's father worked with/alongside the Taliban;


             (iii)    in failing to take into  consideration  the  security
                  situation and/or  Taliban  presence  in  the  province  or
                  region that the Appellant comes from;


             (iv) in failing at [55] to provide any adequate and/or  proper
                  reasoning and failed to reach an ultimate finding  on  the
                  reliability and authenticity of the documentary evidence;


             (v)  erred  as  a  matter  of  fairness  in  failing  to  seek
                  clarification on matters of credibility;


             (vi) in holding it against the appellant that neither  he  nor
                  his father took any steps to  seek  revenge,  which  would
                  have amounted to a serious criminal offence;


             (vii)    in making speculative findings at [56]-[67];


             (viii)   at [61]-[63] in finding the Appellant's  account  not
                  credible in relation to an alleged bomb attack due to  the
                  absence of a police report;


             (ix)  at [69]-[71] in failing to provide  the  Appellant  with
                  the  opportunity  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  internal
                  relocation and in  failing  to  apply  the  correct  legal
                  principles, in light of the Appellant's circumstances  and
                  the fact that he has no  ties  in  Kabul  and  no  support
                  there.


         3.   The Appellant was unrepresented at his  asylum  appeal  before
             the First tier Tribunal.  He did not  request  an  adjournment
             [9].  The Judge clearly bore the fact that the  Appellant  was
             unrepresented in mind: see [51].  It is not arguable that  the
             Judge erred in attaching  too  much  emphasis  to  credibility
             findings and using these to dismiss the appeal, given that the
             Appellant's credibility  was  in  issue  in  the  Respondent's
             refusal decision and it was incumbent upon the Judge  to  make
             findings on his credibility.  It is clearly implicit from [57]
             that the Judge accepted that  the  Appellant's  father  worked
             with or alongside the Taliban.


         4.   However, it is arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  at  [55]  in
             failing to indicate whether or not he accepted the reliability
             and authenticity of the documents confirming that  his  father
             had been shot,  albeit  the  date  provided  for  the  Counter
             Terrorism  department   was   1383   (2004/05)   whereas   the
             Appellant's evidence was that the shooting had taken  place  8
             years prior to the hearing viz  2008.   It  is  also  arguable
             that, although the Judge bore in mind that the  Appellant  was
             unrepresented, he failed to give the Appellant the opportunity
             to clarify matters pertaining to his credibility and  internal
             relocation and it is arguable that he erred in his  assessment
             of  the  translated  documentary  evidence  submitted  by  the
             Appellant.


         5.   Permission to appeal is granted.  All grounds may  be  argued,
             but those identified at [4] above appear  to  have  a  greater
             prospect of success than others."

8.   In addressing me, Mr  Mohzam  submitted  that  the  judge  appeared  to
    accept that the appellant's father worked both for the Taliban and  for
    the Government and this was something accepted by Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Chapman in granting permission.  However, the First Tier Tribunal
    Judge erred in law by failing to make a decision on whether or not  the
    appellant's father did work for the Taliban and for the Government, one
    way or the other.   He  submitted  also  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered whether it would be safe for  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Afghanistan, or whether he would be  at  risk  of  Article  15(c)  harm
    there.  The judge further erred in failing to give  the  appellant  any
    opportunity to explain why he was not able to travel to Kabul and would
    not be safe there.

9.   Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24 response submitted on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  In relation to paragraph 55 of the  determination,
    it is clear that some form of documentary evidence was submitted to the
    judge by the appellant relating to the attack.  In granting permission,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman refers to this document  as  having
    been provided by the Counter Terrorism department.  However,  submitted
    Mr  Harrison,  at  paragraph  55  the  judge  merely  points   out   an
    inconsistency between the date recorded in the document  and  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant.  The judge did not believe  the  appellant's
    account as to the authenticity of the document, but this was irrelevant
    because the issue was that the appellant's own evidence was contrary to
    it.  The appellant claimed that he would be at risk on return, but  the
    judge quite clearly indicates at paragraphs 69 to 71 that there was  no
    reason at all why, if he did not wish to return to his  home  area,  he
    would not be able to live in Kabul.  As a matter of fact,  Mr  Harrison
    told me, he would be returned by the Secretary of State to Kabul.

10.  Mr Harrison indicated that there was no error of law identified by  the
    grounds which amounted to nothing more than a series  of  disagreements
    with the judge's decision.

11.  Mr Mohzam had nothing further to add.  I reserved my decision.

12.  At paragraph 51 of his  determination,  the  Tribunal  Judge  indicates
    that in reaching his decision he has had regard to the country guidance
    case of AK (Afghanistan v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ. 535).  He said:-

     "Although the Appellant has not raised it,  as  the  Appellant  is  not
         legally represented I have also considered any  changes  that  have
         occurred since AK was decided  and  whether  there  is  any  cogent
         evidence before me that would require me to consider departing from
         the findings in AK."

     That was the proper approach to take in the circumstances.

13.  Then, at paragraph 55 of the determination,  the  judge  merely  points
    out an inconsistency between the document relied upon by the  appellant
    and his oral evidence.  The judge noted that the appellant was  adamant
    that the shooting attack on the  appellant's  father  had  taken  place
    eight years before the hearing at the time when his father was  50  and
    he was now aged 58 or 59.  However,  the  document  relied  on  by  the
    appellant indicated that the shooting took place in 2004 or 2005,  when
    his father would have been 46 or 47.

14.   At  paragraph  58  of  hid  determination,  the  judge  rejected   the
    appellant's claim that the Taliban had been threatening the appellant's
    father since 2001, because he did not believe it credible that in  that
    fifteen year period they would not  have  taken  any  steps  to  attack
    either the appellant's father, or other members  of  the  family.   The
    judge records at paragraph 57 of the determination that  the  appellant
    claimed that the Taliban had told the appellant's father that either he
    had to go back and join them himself or that he had to send one of  his
    sons.  The judge did not find that to be credible, because if it  were,
    then the Taliban would have taken action against the  appellant  and/or
    his brother, especially since the appellant was some 27  years  of  age
    when he left Afghanistan.

15.   The  judge  gives  further  reasons  for  finding  the  appellant  not
    credible.  In paragraph 58 of  his  determination  he  noted  that  the
    appellant claimed that he was angry when his father was shot  and  that
    he wanted to revenge the shooting.  At the time, the appellant  was  20
    years of age, but had taken  no  steps  in  the  intervening  years  to
    attempt to kill his father's assailant and it was some six years  later
    when he claimed there was a bomb placed in his car that was intended to
    kill him.

16.  At paragraph 59, the judge noted that the appellant's uncle was  killed
    some eight years previously  and,  if  as  claimed  by  the  appellant,
    revenge is the culture in the area in which the  appellant  lives,  and
    because of this the appellant will never be safe because the  assailant
    is anticipating an attack on his life, then it is simply  not  credible
    that the appellant's father, in the knowledge  of  what  was  to  come,
    would not have taken steps to make sure that his  sons  were  safe  and
    avenged  his  brother's  killer.    Alternatively,   given   that   the
    appellant's father is said to have  significant  influence  within  his
    tribe, if he was not strong enough to carry out the killing himself, he
    could have arranged for somebody else to do it on his behalf.

17.  The judge concluded that  it  was  simply  not  credible  that  if  the
    appellant's father's assailant had always known that a  revenge  attack
    was likely that he would not have made  a  pre-emptive  attack  on  the
    appellant and/or his family,  but  had  not  done  so.   The  appellant
    claimed that there was a bomb planted in his  car,  but  because  of  a
    warning, the police were  able  to  defuse  the  bomb  and  no-one  was
    injured.

18.  The judge noted that no evidence was provided of  any  report  made  to
    the police to indicate that the appellant  knew  the  identity  of  the
    person or persons responsible for planting the bomb.

19.  The judge concluded  that  the  appellant  had  not  given  a  truthful
    account of his reasons for having left Afghanistan and, were there  any
    truth in his account that the Taliban  were  threatening  to  kill  the
    appellant, his father and brother, they would have done so by now.   It
    was simply not credible they would have allowed fifteen years  to  pass
    if that had been their true intention.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was only 13 years of age when his father  was  said  to  have
    left the Taliban, but had the Taliban intended that  the  appellant  be
    forced to join, then they would have taken steps long before he reached
    his mid 20s.  The judge concluded that the appellant was  not  at  risk
    from a man who shot the appellant's uncle and  father.   The  appellant
    was 20 years of age when that attack was said to have happened, and  if
    the culture of revenge such as that explained by the appellant  was  to
    result in the death of the appellant, then it would have done so before
    he reached the age of 26.  The fact that there were no attacks  on  him
    led the judge to conclude that if he were in dispute  with  someone  in
    Afghanistan it was for reasons other than a  fall-out  because  of  the
    shooting of his uncle and father.

20.  It is clear therefore that the judge did not believe any  part  of  the
    appellant's claim.  I believe  that  the  judge's  decision  is  clear,
    cogently reasoned and thorough.  The judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    security position in Afghanistan and concluded that the appellant would
    not be at any risk of return to Kabul.  The judge  was  satisfied  that
    the risk to civilians and the overall level of  danger  did  not  reach
    15(c) level.

21.  It was suggested on behalf of the appellant  that  he  was  denied  the
    opportunity of explaining why he is not able to go to Kabul  but,  with
    respect, there is simply no evidence to suggest that he was denied  the
    opportunity of giving full details  of  his  claim  to  the  judge  and
    explaining why he could not return to Afghanistan.  It  is  clear  from
    the determination that the judge assisted the appellant in  giving  his
    account.

22.  The grounds suggested that the judge  attached  too  much  emphasis  to
    credibility findings and used these to dismiss the appeal.   With  very
    great respect there was no  error  on  the  part  of  the  judge.   The
    appellant's credibility was in issue and the respondent's  reasons  for
    decision letter make this abundantly clear.  It was incumbent upon  the
    judge to make clear findings on credibility and this he did.

23.  The second challenge  suggests  that  the  judge  should  have  made  a
    finding whether or not the appellant's father worked with or  alongside
    the Taliban.  With very great respect, given the judge's  findings  the
    judge did not err.  It is quite clear that the judge  did  not  believe
    the appellant's account.

24.  The third challenge suggests that the judge erred in  failing  to  take
    into account the security situation  and/or  Taliban  presence  in  the
    province or even where the appellant comes  from,  but  the  judge  was
    quite satisfied that if the appellant did not wish  to  return  to  his
    home area he could be safely relocated to Kabul where he would not face
    an Article 15(c) risk.

25.  There was no error in failing to reach findings on the reliability  and
    authenticity of documentary evidence submitted by the appellant.  It is
    not  clear  entirely  what  that  evidence  was,  but  nonetheless   it
    contradicted the appellant's own evidence and  that  contradiction  was
    never explained.  It is said that by failing to seek  clarification  on
    matters of credibility, the judge erred, but with  respect  the  issues
    taken by the judge are clear and obvious ones.  The judge did not  hold
    it against the appellant that neither he nor his father had  taken  any
    steps to seek revenge, merely that  despite  claiming  that  he  wanted
    revenge he had done  nothing  about  seeking  revenge  and,  given  the
    culture prevailing as  indicated  by  the  appellant,  the  appellant's
    father's assailant had not taken any steps  to  prevent  the  appellant
    seeking  revenge.   The  findings  at  paragraph  57  to  67  were  not
    speculative; they were the judge's reasons for finding the  appellant's
    claim simply not credible.  As I have indicated, they are cogent,  they
    are clear and they are logical.   The  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    letter makes it clear that the  appellant  would  be  returned  to  the
    international airport in Kabul.  It was for the  appellant  to  explain
    why he could not relocate to Kabul if he thought that he  would  be  at
    risk there.  He chose not to do so.

26.  I have concluded that in making the decision  Judge  Sharkett  has  not
    materially erred in law for all the reasons I have set out and I uphold
    the judge's determination.

Notice of Decision

22.   The  appellant's  asylum  appeal   is   dismissed;   the   appellant's
    humanitarian protection appeal is dismissed; and the appellant's  human
    rights claim is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Chalkley                                Date:   6th
September 2017
