
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/04274/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |   Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 28 June 2017                       |   On 7 July 2017               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                KARWAN AMINI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Sachdev of Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 23 September 1995 and is a national of Iran.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Gladstone promulgated on 27 October 2016  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  16
   April 2016 to refuse the Appellants protection claim made on 20  November
   2015.
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were  in  essence  that
   it was not accepted that the  Appellant  had  engaged  in  activities  on
   behalf of the KDP or that he was of interest to Etalaat.

The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Gladstone ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal on all grounds.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that  the  Judge  failed  to  have
   regard to the material evidence  before  her;  failed  to  give  adequate
   reasons for her findings and there was procedural unfairness  in  failing
   to identify an issue that required clarification.
8.  On 23 November 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker  refused  permission
   to appeal. The application was renewed  and  on  27  January  2017  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Pitt gave permission.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Ms  Sachdev  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) She relied on the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission.

   b) In relation to the first ground she argued that the Judge should  have
      taken into  account  the  totality  of  the  background  material  and
      recognised that the names KDP and KDPI were 'easily mistakable.'

   c) The Appellants answers showed that he was aware of the history of  the
      KDP and that there had been a split in the party and the Judge  failed
      to recognise this.

   d)  Contrary  to  the  Judges  finding  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated
      considerable knowledge of the KDP.

   e) In finding that the suggestion that RA's family may have reported  him
      was incredible the Judge ignores the fact that the  Appellant  himself
      considered this unlikely.

   f) In finding that it was incredible the security forces did not find him
      when he hid at his sister's  house  this  fails  to  engage  with  the
      background material that the Iranian security  forces  are  not  fully
      effective or perfect.

   g)  In assessing the Appellants sur place activities the Judge failed  to
      consider whether showed that he was  anti  regime  given  the  Iranian
      Governments lack of tolerance for any Kurdish activities.

   h) Ground 2 argued that the Judge failed to  make  adequate  findings  at
      paragraph 100-101 to justify  her  conclusion  that  if  RA  had  been
      arrested he would have named HK rather than the Appellant as there was
      no evidence that RA and HK knew each other and the Appellant would not
      know if HK had been named.

   i) In relation to Ground 3  having  identified  6  issues  that  required
      clarification at the start of  the  proceedings  it  was  procedurally
      unfair to make an adverse finding in relation  to  how  the  Appellant
      knew that RA had been executed after he left Iran.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that :

   a) He relied on the Rule 24 notice.

   b) The conclusions reached by the Judge were open to her on the evidence.

   c) She  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  there  was  confusion  in  the
      Appellants claim in respect of who he supported.

   d) This was  simply  a  disagreement  with  an  outcome  adverse  to  the
      Appellant.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.
13. In relation to  adequacy  of  reasons  in  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
   Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it was held that (i) It  was  axiomatic
   that a determination disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for  a  tribunal's
   decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,
   incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,
   it was necessary to say so in the determination and for such findings  to
   be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not believed
   or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to  satisfy  the
   requirement to give reasons.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail  every
   single argument advanced before her,  nor  consider  in  isolation  every
   single piece of evidence. She must weigh all of the evidence before  her,
   and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the parties, and  in
   particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for her decision.

16. In what is an extremely detailed decision the Judge set out the case  as
   advanced by the Appellant at every stage of the  proceedings  though  his
   screening interview (paragraphs 14-17, Statement of  27.1.16  (paragraphs
   18-21) asylum  interview  (paragraphs  22-37)  and  statement  of  4.2.16
   (paragraphs 38-41), his rebuttal statement of 5.10.16( paragraphs  49-57)
   together with the oral evidence given in the proceedings (paragraphs  65-
   84)

17. The Judge made a number of findings in respect of the  Appellants  claim
   supported by detailed, well-reasoned explanations for her conclusions and
   it is clear that none of those reasons were determinative of her decision
   and that she took all of them into account in the round  before  reaching
   her conclusion. The challenged fidings are therefore among  a  number  of
   findings that she made.

18. The Judge  specifically  addresses  at  92-99  the  challenge  that  the
   Appellants claim was undermined by the fact that it is recorded  that  he
   supported the KDP1 in the screening interview and initially in the WS  of
   27.1.16 but the KDP in the AI and his lack of knowledge of the  KDP.  Any
   suggestion that  the  Judge  did  not  appreciate  that  there  were  two
   different parties with an intertwined history is unsustainable  from  any
   fair reading of the whole decision. The Judge was therefore  entitled  to
   note and give weight to the fact that at two places in the SI he referred
   to his support for the KDPI and to take into  account  that  his  witness
   statement of 27.1.2016 referred to him being 'a  supporter  of  the  KDPI
   (and the I was crossed out and initialled to read KDP) but this  was  not
   recorded in the record.' She was entitled to conclude that  this  was  an
   odd way of clarifying the issue.

19. The Judge was also entitled to take into account that the  knowledge  he
   displayed related more to the KDPI and  its  historic  leadership  rather
   than the current KDP leadership and in general terms why  he  would  give
   when asked information that was more relevant to the  party  he  did  not
   support rather than the one he did. She was also entitled to question why
   the Appellant  and  other  members  of  the  KDP  spray  painted  slogans
   attributed to the leadership of the KDPI. She found at paragraph 98  that
   there was a lack of clarity in the  evidence  as  to  who  the  Appellant
   supported and I am satisfied that she reached this conclusion based on  a
   clear understanding of the background material.

20. The Judge was also entitled to find at paragraph 96 on the basis of  the
   Appellants evidence that he was paid to help the party rather than  being
   a supporter.

21. In relation to the findings made at paragraphs 100-101  given  that  the
   Appellant lived in a village rather than a town or a city I am  satisfied
   that it was open to the Judge at paragraph 100 to conclude that given the
   Appellant  knew  RA  and  HK  and  all  were  members  of   and   working
   clandestinely for the KDP it was reasonably likely that they  would  know
   each other. The findings made at 101 were explained based on the oral and
   written evidence and well reasoned.

22. In relation to the argument that there was procedural  unfairness  I  am
   satisfied that the Judge in an effort to narrow the issues  identified  6
   matters which on a preliminary view required additional clarification  as
   part of her assessment of the case but this did  not  preclude  her  from
   making an adverse finding in relation to other issues particularly  given
   that it was one of a number of findings she made.

23. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
5.7.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
