
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04835/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 5 May 2017                        |On 18 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                    [S H]
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi  (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills       (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal whereupon it dismissed his  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 28 April  2016  to  refuse  to  grant  him
international protection.

2.    Although not invited to, I have made an anonymity order in respect  of
the claimant.  That is, essentially, as a precaution and on the  basis  that
there might conceivably be information  contained  in  this  decision  which
could lead to his experiencing difficulty if  returned  to  Iran.   I  have,
therefore,  simply  referred  to  him  as  "the  claimant"  throughout  this
decision.  I have also anonymised others where a  failure  to  do  so  might
lead to his being identified.

The claimant's immigration and adjudication history

3.    The claimant, as was accepted before me, is  an  Iranian  national  of
Kurdish ethnicity.  He was born on [ ] 1997.   He  was  encountered  by  the
United Kingdom authorities on 30 October 2015 when he claimed asylum.  His
claim was refused on 28 April 2016 and an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
was dismissed on 29 July 2016.  However, on 10 February 2015 a Judge of the
Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error
of law.  Specifically, it was decided that  the  First-tier Tribunal  judge
had erred in refusing an adjournment for a witness to attend.  It  was  also
decided that there would be a complete rehearing of the  appeal  before  the
Upper Tribunal.  That is how I came to hear the appeal on 5 May 2017.

The law

4.    In order to demonstrate entitlement to asylum, the claimant must  show
that if he were to be returned  to  Iran  he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
persecution for one of the five reasons set out in the  Refugee Convention.
If he is to fail on that basis he can, nevertheless,  establish  entitlement
to a grant of humanitarian protection if able to demonstrate a real risk  of
serious harm upon return.  He can also succeed on human  rights  grounds  if
he can demonstrate that he would face a real risk,  upon  return,  of  being
treated in a way which would bring about a breach of Article 2 or Article 3
of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

5.    With respect  to  all  of  the  above,  it  is  for  the  claimant  to
demonstrate that there is a real risk of such persecution, serious  harm  or
Article 2/Article 3 ill-treatment.  In other words, while the standard  of
proof is a low one the burden lies upon him.  I have assessed matters as  at
the date of the hearing before me.

The claim in summary

6.    The claimant says that he is from Sardasht in  Iraq  and  that  he  is
illiterate.  He claims to have been a supporter of  the  Kurdish  Democratic
Party in Iran (KDPI) having become  involved  in  2013  or  2014  through  a
friend of his called "S" who was, in fact,  a  member  of  that  party.   He
claims to have distributed leaflets for the Party at  night-time.   He  says
that he was invited to a Party meeting but did not attend because there  was
a visitor to his family home and custom demanded he was present  whilst  the
visitor was there.  He states that, in fact,  the  meeting  was  raided  and
that he subsequently received a telephone call from a person  I  shall  call
"M" who was resident in Iraq and who was a party official.  M  informed  him
that the Ettelaat had discovered a list of the  proposed  attendees  at  the
meeting and that his name had been on that list.  Soon after receiving  that
information he noticed a white motorcar approaching his village  and  claims
that, since he had not seen that sort of motorcar in  the  area  before,  he
realised it was being driven by members of the Ettelaat.  He  says  he  also
heard their footsteps approaching his family home and that, in  consequence,
he fled.  He says he then  left  Iran  illegally  (illegal  exit  not  being
seriously disputed before me) before eventually making his way to the UK.

7.    Since coming to the UK the claimant says that he has  undertaken  some
political activity with the KDPI in the UK.  In his oral evidence to me,  he
said that he had got to know a person I shall refer to as "RD"  who  is  now
the deputy leader of  the  UK  branch  of  the  KDPI.   He  had  attended  a
demonstration outside the Austrian Embassy.  He  had  attended  a  memorial
service for a fallen member of the KDPI.  He had  attended  a  gathering  he
referred to as a "reunion of Kurdistan".  In total  he  had  attended  three
events.  He had not,  he  said,  attended  any  other  sorts  of  events  or
meetings in the UK.  However, he does  have  a  presence  on  Facebook  and,
whilst being illiterate,  he  has  a  friend  who  assists  him  in  placing
information on his Facebook pages and managing  his  Facebook  account.   He
asserts that there is material on there which demonstrates  his  pro-Kurdish
and anti-Government beliefs.  He claims to have in excess of  500 "Facebook
friends" and that some of  them  are,  in  fact,  supports  of  the  Iranian
regime.

8.    Essentially, the way the case is put on the claimant's behalf is  that
having come to the adverse attention of the Ettelaat, he  will  be  at  risk
upon return in consequence of his activities in Iran.   Alternatively,  even
if he has not undertaken any activities in  Iran  he  will  be  at  risk  in
consequence of his having had a presence on the  Internet  (essentially  his
Facebook pages) and that as a Kurdish failed asylum seeker  who  had  exited
illegally and who would be returning on  a  temporary  travel  document,  he
would be questioned by the authorities upon return and (since he  cannot  be
expected to lie) such questioning  would  reveal  that  he  has  a  Facebook
presence and, once that is looked at, it  will  reveal  his  anti-Government
beliefs.  That, in turn, will lead to his being persecuted.

The Secretary of State's position

9.    The Secretary of State does not accept that the claimant has  provided
a credible account of events in Iran.  What is accepted, as noted above,  is
that he is Iranian and Kurdish and his claim to have left illegally was  not
disputed either.  Mr Mills accepted that if I were to find the  account  of
events in Iran truthful, the appeal must succeed.  If, however, I  were  not
to so conclude, then he argued it should fail notwithstanding  the  evidence
about his Facebook account.  He says that whilst the claimant might well  be
questioned upon return, the Iranian authorities would perceive him as  being
a mere "hanger on" or a person who was simply  seeking  to  create  a  false
internet profile in order to artificially enhance  his  prospects  of  being
able to settle permanently in the UK.  As such, they would see  no  need  to
persecute him or to subject him to serious harm.  He pointed out that  there
had been a number of  Country  Guidance  decisions  of  the  Upper Tribunal
suggesting that illegal exit, an unsuccessful claim  for  asylum  and  being
returned on a temporary travel document would not  create  a  real  risk  of
persecution or serious harm.  He made reference to the reported decision  of
the Upper Tribunal in AB and Others (Internet Activity - State of Evidence)
Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) but pointed out that that  was  not  a  Country
Guidance decision and had only  been  reported,  as  was  explained  in  the
headnote, for the purpose of placing within the public domain  the  evidence
that been considered by the Upper Tribunal in that case.

The documentary evidence

10.   I had before me all of the documentation which had been  prepared  for
the initial first-tier hearing.  That included a bundle and a  supplementary
bundle filed on behalf of the claimant, a bundle provided by  the  Secretary
of State, a copy of the decision in AB (cited  above)  and  a  copy  of  the
Country Guidance decision in SSH and RH (Legal Exit:  Failed Asylum Seeker)
Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).   At  the  hearing  I  received  further
documentation provided on behalf of the claimant consisting of  two  letters
of 21 April 2017 written by the chairman of the UK branch of the  KDPI,  a
statement written by the witness RD and copies  of  some  photographs  which
had been placed on the claimant's Facebook pages.  Mr Mills did  not  raise
any objections to the late production of the documentation.





The oral evidence

11.   I have already touched upon certain of the evidence given.  I  do  not
need to set out, in full, what was said at  the  hearing  but  what  appears
here is a summary.

12.    The  claimant,  my  having  checked  that  he  and  the   interpreter
understood each other, adopted his witness statement of 21 July 2016.   He
made references to some of the photographs appearing on his  Facebook  pages
and said one of them, described as a  "small  photograph"  was  of  him  and
another person holding a Kurdish flag.  In cross-examination he referred  to
attending  the  various  events  referred  to  above.   He  had  met  RD  in
January 2016 and then "many times after  that  at  meetings".   Although  a
friend assists him, he decides what is to be  written  and  what  is  to  be
posted on his Facebook pages.   He  has  accepted  some  supporters  of  the
Iranian regime as Facebook friends (which I am told means they can view  his
Facebook pages without restriction) so that they  can  see  that  the  Kurds
"are still alive and have meetings and gatherings".   He  had  had  to  flee
Iraq because of his name appearing on the list.  He does not know  how  news
of the discovery of the list had reached Iraq.  He  had  only  been  to  one
such meeting before.  A list of attendees would be kept so  that  the  party
in Iraq would know who  was  "joining  and  supporting  in  Iran".   He  had
leafleted on a few occasions but was not  able  to  say  how  often  or  how
regularly he had done so.  Leafleting would take place only  when  an  event
was coming up.

13.   I then heard from RD who confirmed he is  the  Deputy  Leader  of  the
KDPI.  He had written the statement himself and his English was good  enough
to enable him to do that notwithstanding that he was  using  an  interpreter
at the hearing.  The claimant had got in touch with the  UK branch  of  the
KDPI when he had arrived in the UK and he has since been  very  active.   If
he is granted refugee status he will automatically be accepted as  a  member
of the party.

14.   In cross-examination the witness said that, due to  a  policy  change,
persons without proper immigration status cannot be accepted as  members  of
the Party in the UK.  He had not meant to indicate, in his  statement,  that
the claimant had only attended one meeting and one demonstration in the  UK.
 He thought he had possibly attended three  or  four  meetings.   After  the
first meeting he had contacted the KDPI office  in  Paris  (effectively  the
Head Office for Europe) and  had  asked  them  to  confirm  the  claimant's
background.  When members are approached by new arrivals it is necessary  to
carry out such a check.   Paris  had  been  asked  to  conduct  a  check  in
January 2016 but had only recently reverted to the witness to say that  the
party could support him.  Their approval of him had not been included by  RD
in his statement but that omission was simply a mistake.   The  witness  had
been recognised as a refugee in the UK some 10 years ago.

My assessment of credibility

15.   The truthfulness or otherwise of the account of events in Iran  is  in
issue between the parties and is an important consideration in  the  context
of this appeal.  So, I have had to consider whether or not I can accept  the
claimant, to the lower standard set out above, as a  credible  witness.   In
undertaking that exercise I have taken full  account  of  all  of  the  oral
evidence I have heard, all  of  the  documentation  which  has  been  placed
before me, and the competing submissions I have received.  I have  concluded
that, in this regard, I am not able to accept the  claimant  as  a  credible
witness.  That is for the reasons I now set out below.

16.   The claimant is illiterate.  Such is not disputed.  He  says  that  he
distributed leaflets in Iran but has also  stated  he  knew  little  of  the
content of those leaflets.  In his witness statement  of  21 July 2016  he
said "I have confirmed that I did not know the exact contents because  I  am
illiterate" but went on to say that they had pictures of Dr. Ghassemlou who
was a leader of the KDPI until  he  was  killed  and  that  they  also  have
pictures of a Mr Sharafkandi who was a fighter for Kurdish rights.

17.   It is readily understandable that the claimant, as  a  person  who  is
illiterate, would not be able to read,  for  himself,  the  content  of  the
leaflets he was distributing.  However, he does accept that conducting  such
leafleting is a dangerous exercise.  Indeed,  it  is  a  core  part  of  his
account that what he was doing would attract significant disapproval on  the
part of the authorities and those associated with the authorities  in  Iran.
Against that background  I  believe  that  he  would  have  wanted  to  have
verified to him what was said in the leaflets before deciding to  distribute
them so that, at least, he would fully understand the nature and  extent  of
the risk he was taking.  He had a friend who distributed the  leaflets  with
him and I find it implausible that he would not have  asked  his  friend  to
give him more precise information regarding the content of those leaflets.

18.    To  some  extent  the  claimant's  oral   evidence,   regarding   his
leafleting, was inconsistent with what he had previously indicated.  He  was
not able, before me, to give any indication at all regarding the  regularity
with which he would undertake his leafleting.   Further,  his  evidence  was
that all of the leaflets were, essentially, concerned with  forthcoming  (as
I understand it) social and political events.

19.   In his asylum interview, however, he said  that  he  would  distribute
leaflets twice a month (question 46).  He said that he did  not  know  what
was contained in the leaflet, making no mention of forthcoming events. I  do
feel, therefore, there are inconsistencies regarding the regularity  of  his
leafleting and the content of the leaflets.  These inconsistencies,  on  one
view, might not seem all that significant but they  are  matters  of  detail
about something of a very straightforward and simple nature and,  therefore,
something in respect of which consistency could reasonably be expected.

20.   The centrepiece of the claim is that the claimant had been invited  to
a meeting, was intending to go to it, could then do so because of a  visitor
but, nevertheless, had come to the attention of the authorities because  his
name had appeared on a list of proposed attendees.

21.   Clearly, if the claimant  is  asserting  that  attendance  at  such  a
meeting would  of  itself  lead  to  significant  adverse  interest  by  the
authorities then one would  expect,  logically,  that  attendance  would  be
limited to only demonstrably trusted persons and that care  would  be  taken
not to create a record of who was in attendance  or  was  likely  to  be  in
attendance.  Against that background, it seems to me implausible  that  this
claimant, as a mere supporter and leafletter would  be  invited  to  such  a
meeting in the first place.  Even if I am wrong about that,  however,  I  do
find  myself  wholly  in  agreement  with  Mr Mills  that  it  is   really
inconceivable, in the face of such risk, that a record  of  attendees  would
be voluntarily created by the very persons who  would  be  at  risk  if  the
meeting were to be discovered or raided.  I simply cannot accept  that  part
of the claimant's account.

22.   In light of the above, therefore, I have concluded that  the  claimant
did not leaflet for the KDPI, that he did  not  attend  any  KDPI  meetings,
that his name did not appear  upon  any  list  of  attendees  and  that  the
Ettelaat did not come looking for him as he claims.  I find that, whilst  it
is possible that he harbours some general support for the Kurdish cause,  he
has done nothing in Iran which would bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the
authorities.

23.   I now turn to consider the credibility of what he and RD have  had  to
say regarding his UK based claimed activity.

24.   I have to treat what the claimant himself has  to  say  about  all  of
this with a degree of caution given my conclusion  that  he  has  sought  to
mislead with respect to events in Iran.  As to RD, I do have concerns  about
his evidence.  In that context, it was to the effect that the  claimant  had
been checked out by the Paris office and that, only  shortly  prior  to  the
time RD had prepared his statement (21 April 2017) it had  been  confirmed
that he was a genuine KDPI supporter.   I  think  that,  in  fact,  if  such
confirmation had been received RD, as the second ranking official in the  UK
branch of the Party, would have regarded that as  being  a  matter  of  very
considerable significance.  Against that background  I  feel  sure  that  he
would have ensured  that  it  was  referred  to,  and  prominently,  in  his
statement.  I did wonder whether the  omission  might  be  explicable  as  a
result of any limitations in the witness's  oral  and  written  English  but
when I asked him about that he assured me that his command  of  English  was
sufficient.  Additionally and in any event, his  representatives  have  been
content to submit his statement, in  the  form  it  is,  on  the  claimant's
behalf.  This is something, therefore, which causes a degree  of  damage  to
RD's own credibility.

25.   RD stated, in his oral evidence, that  when  there  are  new  arrivals
(presumably he meant persons who had just arrived in  the  UK  and  who  had
approached the KDPI and claimed to be  members,  supports  or  sympathisers)
"we must check background with Paris".  He also made mention of  a  "written
statement" being sent to Paris.  He said that that is done with  respect  to
all such persons, presumably, for security reasons.   It  seems  to  me,  in
these circumstances, to make no sense for members of the KDPI in the  UK  to
reach their own conclusions about such a  person  without  waiting  for  the
result of the Paris checks to  be  communicated  to  them.   Otherwise,  one
might wonder why such checks would be  carried  out  at  all.   However  two
letters said to have been written by the chairman of the UK  branch  of  the
KDPI had been  produced  for  the  first  appeal  hearing.   Both  of  those
letters, one dated 18 February 2016 and one dated 19 July 2016, had stated
that the claimant had  attended  "most  of  our  meetings/events  since  his
arrival into the United Kingdom".  It is  hard  to  see  why  he  would  be
permitted to do that, and why he would be trusted, without  the  results  of
the background checks which RD  had  referred  to.   Further,  there  is  no
evidence emanating directly from the  Paris  office  stating  that  they  do
conduct such checks or that they were  ever  asked  to  conduct  a  specific
check about the claimant.

26.   I also note that, with respect to those two  letters  written  by  the
chairman, one of them described him as being a  "supporter"  and  the  other
describe him as being a "member".  The difference between the two has  never
been explained.

27.   There are,  before  me,  some  photographs,  said  to  appear  on  the
claimant's Facebook pages, demonstrating his attendance at some meetings  or
events.  I was not urged to find that the photographs were staged and  I  am
satisfied, to the lower standard, that the claimant  has  attended  a  small
number of  KDPI  gatherings  or  conceivably  other  gatherings  of  Kurdish
groups, within the UK.  However, I do  not  accept  that  he  is  a  genuine
member or supporter of the KDPI, I do not accept that he has been vetted  by
an office in Paris and I do not accept that RD believes him to be a  genuine
member or supporter.  Rather, I find that his  limited  attendance  at  such
events (and on his own account he has not attended very many) has been  with
a view to his being  able  to  present  what  he  thinks  might  be  helpful
supportive evidence (such as the photographs).

28.   There is then the Facebook activity.  I am  prepared  to  accept  that
the claimant does have a Facebook presence.  He was  not  challenged  as  to
his claim that he does and he has produced what appeared  to  be  copies  of
certain of his Facebook pages.  However, when asked why  given  that  he  is
illiterate he likes to have a Facebook presence he was not able  to  give  a
proper reply.  He simply gave  a  general  indication  to  the  effect  that
Facebook is a means of expressing an opinion.  I do not accept that some  of
his Facebook friends are supporters of  the  regime.   Both  representatives
agreed, before me, that to become a Facebook friend the person who they  are
seeking to befriend has to approve them.  It is part of the claimant's  case
that internet activity is monitored by the Iranian authorities and that  his
internet activity will put him at risk.  I think if he realised there  might
be such risk at all he would be careful and  cautious.   The  last  thing  I
believe he would do, in those circumstances, is  to  allow  persons  who  he
knew or thought might be supports of the regime to become a Facebook  friend
and to then gain access to the whole of his Facebook account.  I  appreciate
he offered an explanation a to why he would do this but I do not  find  that
explanation to be at all  plausible  given  that  it  would  amount  to  his
putting himself at unnecessary risk.

29.   Whilst I accept that he does have a Facebook presence,  and  whilst  I
accept that at face value what appears on his Facebook pages  would  support
the proposition  is  that  he  is  a  Kurdish  activist  or  sympathiser  or
supporter, I find that the material has been put there with a  view  to  him
artificially enhancing his claim.

My reasoning in light of my findings

30.   It follows from the above that I would conclude the  claimant  is  not
and never has been a wanted person in Iran.  As such,  I  would  reject  his
claim that he has already come to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  and
that, on that account, he would be at risk on return.

31.   The more difficult question is whether, given his  activities  in  the
UK and in particular his Facebook activities, he  will  be  questioned  upon
return in circumstances where  his  response  to  that  questioning  or  any
internet research carried out by the authorities as  a  consequence  of  his
responses, will lead to a real risk of persecution or serious harm.

32.   The claimant, through his representatives, has  placed  much  reliance
upon the decision of the Upper Tribunal in AB.  It was said therein:

      "467. The mere fact of being in the United Kingdom  for  a  prolonged
      period does not lead to persecution.  However it may lead to  scrutiny
      and there is clear evidence that some people  are  asked  about  their
      internet activity and particularly for their Facebook  password.   The
      act of returning someone creates a 'pinch-point' so that a  person  is
      brought into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have both
      the time and inclination to interrogate them.  We think it likely that
      they will be asked about their internet activity and  likely  if  they
      have any Internet activity for that to be exposed and if  it  is  less
      than flattering of the Government to lead to at the very list  a  real
      risk of persecution."

33.   I agree with Mr Mills that what is said in the headnote is important.
 It was made clear there that the material placed before  the  tribunal  did
not disclose a  sufficient  evidential  basis  for  the  giving  of  Country
Guidance with respect to the risk which might be faced by persons  who  have
been active on the internet.  So, I do not regard what was  said  in  AB  as
being binding upon me in the way that what is said  in  a  Country  Guidance
decision will be.

34.   I also have SSH and HR, cited  above,  which  is  a  Country  Guidance
decision and which decides that an  Iranian  male  in  respect  of  whom  no
adverse interest has previously been manifested by the State, will not  face
a real risk of persecution or serious harm simply on account of having  left
Iran illegally and/or being a failed asylum seeker.   It  is  worth  noting,
though, that the Upper Tribunal did seem to accept that there would be some
questioning  upon  arrival  at  the  airport  regarding  such  persons  (see
paragraph 23 of the decision) and, indeed, Mr Mills accepted that too.

35.   This claimant, of course, according to the evidence will be  returning
as a failed asylum seeker, as a person who exited  illegally,  as  a  person
being returned on a temporary travel document and as a person who  is  of  a
minority ethnic group (a Kurd).  I would conclude, in light of all of  that,
that there is as a minimum a  real  risk  that  he  will  be  of  sufficient
interest to be questioned by the authorities upon return.   The  issue  then
is what will happen when he is so questioned.

36.   It seems to me that it is extremely  difficult  to  predict  with  any
degree of certainty what such questioning might or might not involve.  I  do
not consider there to be a real risk that the claimant's  internet  activity
(that is to say his Facebook pages) will have already come to the  attention
of the authorities.  That is because, since I have  rejected  his  claim  to
already be a wanted person in Iran, there is no reason why  the  authorities
would have him on their radar.  But it was pointed out in AB that there  was
material suggesting that the regime was "twitchy" about  internet  activity.
I think, as a matter of common sense, that is, to  the  necessary  standard,
likely to be so. I would accept then that, to the same  lower  standard,  he
will be asked about this.  Since he cannot be  expected  to  lie  (something
not disputed before me) the  questioning  is  likely  to  reveal  he  has  a
Facebook account and is then likely to reveal his password. That,  in  turn,
will reveal the content.  I note Mr Mills "hanger on" argument but take  the
view that the Iranian regime when faced with a Kurdish failed asylum  seeker
who has exited illegally and who  has  sought  asylum  abroad  and  who  has
placed what will effectively  be  seen  as  oppositionist  material  on  his
Facebook pages, will not make that distinction.  It may be  an  unattractive
conclusion  given  the  claimant's  quite  extensive  dishonesty  but  I  do
conclude he is  a  refugee.  On  the  same  basis  I  conclude  he  has  the
protection of article 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

The appellants appeal is allowed.

Further, the appellant is granted anonymity under rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless and until a Tribunal or  Court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This  direction  applies  to  both  the  Appellant  and  Respondent.
Failure to comply could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                               Signed
                                  MR Hemingway
                                  Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Dated    16 May 2017



To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award.




                               Signed
                                  MR Hemingway
                                  Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Dated    16 May 2017

