
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04815/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th November 2017                         |On 11th December 2017         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                             Didar Hassan Khdhr
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk of Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Colyer of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 9th May 2017.

 2. The Appellant is an Iraqi citizen of Kurdish ethnicity.  He entered the
    UK illegally on 24th November 2015 and claimed asylum.

 3. His claim was based upon a fear of ISIS.  The Appellant had owned a gym
    in Bartella near the city of Mosul.  In July 2014 he was threatened  by
    ISIS because he allowed both men and women to use his gym.  He  claimed
    that he was threatened by telephone and his cousin abducted.  In August
    2014  ISIS  occupied  Bartella  and  the  Appellant  fled.   He  became
    separated from his family.

 4. His claim for international protection was refused on 28th April  2016.
    On 20th December 2016 the Respondent issued a supplementary reasons for
    refusal letter.

 5. The appeal was heard on 26th April 2017 and  dismissed  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9th May 2017.

 6. The FTT found that the Appellant could not safely return  to  his  home
    area and it would be unduly harsh  for  him  to  relocate  to  Baghdad.
    However it was found that  the  Appellant  had  a  reasonable  internal
    relocation option to the Iraqi Kurdish region  (IKR).   The  FTT  found
    that the Appellant previously held an Iraqi passport and identity  card
    and (at paragraph 69) considered that  "the  Appellant  has  not  fully
    pursued the options for obtaining a replacement  passport  for  reasons
    outlined later in this decision."  The FTT found (at paragraph 96) that
    the Appellant would, as an ethnic Kurd, be permitted to reside  in  the
    IKR and once there he could go to the Civil Status  Affairs  Office  so
    that his Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) could be reissued.

 7. Following dismissal of his appeal, the Appellant applied for permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  His application was initially refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio who found no arguable error of law in
    the FTT decision.

 8. The application was renewed.  Three grounds were advanced on behalf  of
    the Appellant.  Firstly it was contended that the  FTT  had  materially
    erred in assessing credibility, having accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    account was credible, yet concluding that he was not  credible  on  the
    issue of documentation and relocation to the IKR.  The FTT  had  relied
    upon section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004, finding his credibility was damaged by his  failure  to
    claim asylum before reaching the UK, and only making a claim for asylum
    in the UK after he had been arrested by the police.  It  was  submitted
    that it was unclear how this was relevant to the Appellant's claim.  It
    was contended that the FTT had erred  by  finding  that  the  Appellant
    could have done more  to  secure  identity  documents  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy in the UK  as  this  was  inconsistent  with  the  Respondent's
    refusal decision, as the Respondent accepted that  in  the  absence  of
    identification documents the  embassy  would  not  issue  the  required
    travel documentation.  It was unclear what more  the  Appellant  should
    have done or should have been expected to do.

 9. The second ground contended  that  the  FTT  had  materially  erred  in
    concluding that the Appellant could obtain a CSID.   It  was  submitted
    that the Appellant could not obtain a CSID in Baghdad as there  was  no
    alternative CSA office for the governorate of Ninewah in  Baghdad.   In
    any event the FTT had found that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

10. It was contended that the FTT had erred at paragraph 96  in  concluding
    that the Appellant could obtain a replacement CSID  in  the  IKR.   The
    Appellant could not obtain a CSID in his home  area,  as  the  FTT  had
    found that he could not safely return there.

11. The third ground of appeal submitted  that  the  FTT  materially  erred
    regarding internal relocation to the IKR by ignoring how the  Appellant
    was meant to reach the IKR.  In the absence of identity  documents  the
    Appellant would not be able to fly from Baghdad to the  IKR.   The  FTT
    had assumed that access to the IKR would  be  granted,  but  failed  to
    consider evidence that there were specific problems arising for  people
    from the governorate of Ninewah in accessing  the  IKR.   The  FTT  had
    failed to make adequate findings on how  the  Appellant  was  meant  to
    survive in the IKR.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor and I
    set out below, in part, the grant of permission;

         "The FTT concluded, however, that the  Appellant  could  internally
         relocate to the  KRG  [92],  a  finding  founded  in  part  on  the
         conclusion that the Appellant could obtain  a  CSID  [91].   It  is
         arguable that these findings are vitiated by legal  error  for  the
         reasons identified in the grounds.  Inter alia,  the  FTT  arguably
         failed to rationally identity (a)  where,  or  how,  the  Appellant
         could obtain a CSID and (b) how the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
         travel from Baghdad (which appears to be the point  of  return)  to
         the KRG.  In the alternative, the conclusions in relation  to  each
         are arguably irrational.

         All grounds may be argued."

13. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    dated 9th November 2017 pursuant to rule 24 of The  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  In summary it was contended that the  FTT
    directed itself appropriately and did not materially err  in  law.   It
    was noted that Bartella had in fact been liberated by the Iraqi Army on
    20th October 2016.  There was therefore no longer an ISIS  presence  in
    the Appellant's home area.   The  FTT  had  made  tenable  findings  at
    paragraphs 84 and 86 noting that  the  Appellant  had  previously  been
    issued with an Iraqi passport and there would be a record of this,  and
    the FTT had made a finding open to it, that the Appellant as a Kurd who
    had previously resided in the IKR could reasonably relocate there.

14. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.





Submissions

15. Mr Fraczyk relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal and his  skeleton  argument  dated  24th  November
    2017, which had been prepared to  answer  the  rule  24  response.   Mr
    Farczyk pointed in particular to paragraph 177 of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in AA (Iraq) CG which indicates that an Iraqi national  living
    in the UK could obtain a CSID through the Iraqi Embassy in  London  but
    only if he was able to produce a current or expired passport and/or the
    book and page number for  his  family  registration  details.   As  the
    Appellant could not provide those documents or information he would  be
    unable to obtain a CSID in the UK.

16. Mrs Aboni relied upon the rule 24 response and submitted that  the  FTT
    had not erred in law in finding that the Appellant  would  be  able  to
    obtain replacement identity documents, including a passport  and  CSID.
    The Appellant would then be returned to Baghdad, and from  there  could
    travel to the IKR.  I was asked to find no error  of  law  in  the  FTT
    decision.

17. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. The FTT did not have the benefit of the guidance given by the Court  of
    Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 which was decided after the FTT
    decision had been promulgated, and which amended the guidance given  by
    the Upper Tribunal in AA (Iraq) CG.[2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).

19. Considering first the issue of documentation, the  Appellant  confirmed
    when interviewed (questions 9 - 11) that he previously  held  an  Iraqi
    passport, birth certificate, and  identity  card  when  he  started  at
    college.  These documents had been left in Iraq when he fled.  The  FTT
    recorded (at paragraph 8)  the  Appellant's  evidence  at  the  hearing
    confirming what he had  said  in  interview  in  relation  to  identity
    documents.

20. The amended country guidance contained in AA (Iraq) at Annex B7 is that
    an international protection claim cannot succeed by  reference  to  any
    alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of a  current  or  expired
    Iraqi passport or a laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds  that  return
    is not currently feasible  on  account  of  a  lack  of  any  of  those
    documents.

21. The Respondent found in the refusal letter, that the Appellant's return
    was not currently feasible because of a lack of identity documentation,
    but the Court of Appeal found in  AA  (Iraq)  that  regardless  of  the
    feasibility of return, it was necessary to decide whether an  Appellant
    has a CSID or would be  able  to  obtain  one,  reasonably  soon  after
    arrival in Iraq.  If the Appellant was unable  to  obtain  a  CSID,  he
    would in general be likely to face a real risk of destitution amounting
    to serious harm.  The FTT was therefore correct to consider whether the
    Appellant would be able to obtain a CSID, and the issue that  now  must
    be decided is whether the FTT materially erred  in  law  in  concluding
    that the Appellant would be able to obtain a CSID.   The  FTT  makes  a
    finding in  paragraph  84  that  the  Appellant's  "failure  to  obtain
    replacement documentation does not advance his claim."  The  FTT  finds
    the Appellant was initially issued with identity documentation in Iraq,
    and that was accepted by the Appellant, and it is not an error  of  law
    to make such a finding.

22. The FTT finds that the Appellant could obtain a CSID, and at  paragraph
    96 makes a finding that this could be obtained in the  IKR.   There  is
    therefore a question as to how the Appellant would travel to  the  IKR.
    The country guidance indicates that because he does not originate  from
    the IKR, he would be returned to Baghdad, and would have to travel from
    Baghdad to the IKR.

23. There does not appear to be any objective evidence to confirm that  the
    Appellant could obtain a CSID in the IKR, as he does not originate from
    that region.  Therefore I find that the  FTT  erred  in  reaching  this
    conclusion.  I then have to consider whether this error is material.

24. My conclusion is that the error in concluding  that  a  CSID  could  be
    obtained in the IKR is not material for the following reasons.

25. At paragraph 177 of the Upper Tribunal decision  in  AA  (Iraq)  it  is
    found that if an individual is not able to produce a  passport  and  is
    unable to produce the relevant family registration details, a power  of
    attorney can be provided to an individual in Iraq  who  can  thereafter
    undertake the process of obtaining  the  CSID  from  the  Civil  Status
    Affairs Office in the  person's  home  governorate.    The  process  of
    obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely to be  severely  hampered  if  the
    person wishing to obtain the CSID is from an area where  Article  15(c)
    serious harm is occurring.  The FTT found that it would not be safe for
    the Appellant to return to his home in Bartella which is near Mosul.

26. Further guidance  on  appointing  a  power  of  attorney  is  given  at
    paragraph 174 of AA (Iraq), where reference is made  by  an  expert  Dr
    Fatah explaining that power of attorney could be given to  a  relative,
    friend or lawyer in Iraq to obtain a CSID.  The process of giving power
    of attorney to a lawyer in Iraq to act as a proxy is commonplace and Dr
    Fatah had done this himself.  The power of attorney could  be  obtained
    through the Iraq Embassy.

27. The point has been made on the Appellant's  behalf  that  there  is  no
    reference in the country guidance to an alternative CSA Office for  the
    governorate of Ninewah in Baghdad, the  inference  being  that  as  the
    Appellant comes from that governorate,  and  cannot  return  there,  it
    would be impossible to  obtain  a  CSID  from  an  alternative  office.
    However the country guidance issued by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq)
    at Annex C11 indicates that alternative CSA offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar
    and Salahuddin have been  established  in  Baghdad  and  Karbala.   The
    Appellant lived very close to Mosul and there was  no  evidence  before
    the FTT to indicate that his CSID was not issued from Mosul.  Therefore
    it would be possible for the  Appellant,  using  a  proxy,  such  as  a
    lawyer, to make  an  application  to  the  alternative  CSA  office  in
    Baghdad.  In addition, it is confirmed at paragraph 187  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in AA (Iraq), that there is a national  status  court
    in Baghdad to which a person could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of
    identity, although the precise operation of the court is unclear.

28. At paragraph 186 it is stated  that  a  person's  ability  to  persuade
    officials that they are the person named on the relevant  page  of  the
    book holding their information, is likely to  depend  on  whether  they
    have family members or other individuals who are prepared to vouch  for
    them.  The FTT found that the Appellant had obtained documentation from
    Iraq contained at pages  6  -  28  of  the  Appellant's  bundle.   This
    confirmed that  the  Appellant  had  travelled  to  the  World  Amateur
    Bodybuilding Championships in Padua, Italy in June 2012.  The Appellant
    is named in the documentation and there are  photographs  of  him.   He
    used his Iraqi passport to travel to Italy.  The Appellant had obtained
    this documentation from Ahmed Rambo, who he described as the leader  of
    the Iraqi  Olympic  Committee.   One  of  the  documents  sent  to  the
    Appellant is the licence to open a training gym, issued  by  the  Iraqi
    Federation of Bodybuilding, part of the National Olympic  Committee  of
    Iraq.  This is evidence that could be used by the  Appellant  to  prove
    that he previously held an Iraqi  passport.   No  adequate  reason  was
    given by the Appellant as to why he could not approach  Mr  Rambo,  who
    had previously been his coach, to vouch for his identity.

29. I therefore conclude that the FTT did not err in law  in  finding  that
    the Appellant would be able to obtain a CSID.  The error was in finding
    that this would be issued in the IKR, but the error is not material  as
    the evidence indicates that  the  Appellant  could  obtain  a  CSID  in
    Baghdad.  He could make arrangements for a proxy to obtain this on  his
    behalf, or, if he was returned  to  Baghdad  (which  is  not  currently
    feasible) the Appellant could obtain the CSID himself.  Therefore there
    is no material error disclosed in the FTT decision in relation  to  the
    issue of obtaining a CSID.

30. I do not find that the FTT materially  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant had a reasonable relocation option to the IKR.  The challenge
    to the FTT decision on this point was that  the  FTT  had  not  made  a
    finding as to how, in the absence of identity documents  the  Appellant
    would be able to fly from Baghdad to the IKR.  As the  Appellant  would
    be able to obtain a CSID in Baghdad, it follows that he would not  have
    difficulty in taking a flight from Baghdad to Erbil.   The  Appellant's
    evidence was that he had previously been granted access to the IKR, and
    had studied in Erbil.  He had not encountered  any  difficulty,  as  at
    that time he had the required identity  documents.   As  the  Appellant
    would be able to obtain a CSID, before travelling to the IKR,  the  FTT
    did not err in finding that  he  had  a  reasonable  relocation  option
    within the IKR.

31. There was reference in the grounds of  appeal  to  the  FTT  erring  in
    relation to section 8 of the 2004 Act.  I do  not  find  that  has  any
    relevance.  The important points in the FTT decision were  the  finding
    that the Appellant could not safely return to his home area,  it  would
    be unduly harsh for him to settle in Baghdad, that he would be able  to
    obtain a CSID, and had an internal relocation option within the IKR.

32. Though the FTT erred in considering the CSID issue, the error  was  not
    material, and my conclusion is that the decision of the FTT stands  and
    the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             4th December 2017




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FTT stands, so does the decision not to  make  a  fee
award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             4th December 2017

