
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04137/2018
                                                               PA/07882/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 24 September 2020                       |On 6 October 2020               |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     XPH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms J Loughran, Counsel, instructed by Brighton
Housing trust
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has  not
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Hanes (the judge) who, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  3
         March 2020, dismissed the appeal of  XPH  (appellant)  against  the
         decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         (respondent) dated 13 March 2018 and  25  June  2019  refusing  her
         asylum and human  rights  claim  and  her  claim  for  Humanitarian
         Protection (HP).

Background

      2. The appellant is a female national of China. She was 19  years  old
         at the date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. She entered  the
         UK on 3 March 2016 aged 15 years old  and  claimed  asylum  on  the
         basis that she was a victim of  trafficking.  Her  claim  to  be  a
         victim of trafficking  was  initially  rejected  by  the  Competent
         Authority and the respondent refused her  protection  claim  on  13
         March 2018. The Competent authority reconsidered its  position  and
         accepted that the appellant was a victim of trafficking on  23  May
         2019. The respondent reconsidered her  position  as  a  result  but
         refused the appellant's protection and human rights  claims  on  25
         June 2019. The appellant appealed both the March 2018 decision  and
         the June 2019 decisions, hence the two reference numbers.

      3. Much of the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  in
         dispute. The respondent accepted that the appellant was a victim of
         trafficking and that she had been forced to travel to  the  UK.  In
         her Reasons for Refusal Letter the respondent did not  dispute  the
         appellant's account of events that occurred  in  China  or  on  her
         journey to the UK. In summary, the  appellant,  who  was  born  and
         raised in Hefei  City,  Anhui  Province,  went  to  live  with  her
         maternal grandmother when she was around 7 years  old  because  she
         was told her parents had gone to the UK. Her  maternal  grandmother
         died in  July  2014  and  the  appellant  was  ill-treated  by  the
         grandmother's sister with whom she went to live. The appellant  ran
         away after about a month, took a bus to a city she claimed  not  to
         know, slept in a park for a few days and then worked washing dishes
         in a restaurant that provided her with accommodation for 2 years.

      4. She met a man one day in the same park who gave the impression that
         he knew her parents in the UK. He offered to  arrange  for  her  to
         travel to the UK, took some money from her and gave her 875  Euros.
         The man, who told the appellant  to  call  him  'uncle',  took  her
         photograph and arranged plane tickets and  accompanied  her  to  an
         unknown country. On arrival the appellant was blindfolded, taken to
         a room and locked inside for around a week.  Another man  took  her
         on another flight. She was threatened that she would be  beaten  if
         she said anything. On arriving in the next country,  the  appellant
         was blindfolded and placed in a car and then locked in a room.  Men
         wearing masks brought her food. The  appellant  was  later  put  on
         another flight. She was met by another man who had her  photograph.
         She was sick in a car when blindfolded and the man struck her  with
         his fist. She was  taken  to  another  room  and  blindfolded.  The
         appellant was taken on a final flight to the UK and claimed  asylum
         when she arrived at Gatwick.

      5. Although the respondent accepted that the appellant was a victim of
         trafficking, and that she had a genuine  subjective  fear  of  ill-
         treatment  in  China,  the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
         appellant would be at real risk of persecution. The respondent  did
         not accept that a female victim of trafficking would be  considered
         a member of a Particular Social Group (PSG) for the purposes of the
         Refugee Convention. I note that this was in contrast to the earlier
         decision dated 13 March 2018 in which the respondent accepted  that
         the appellant was a member of a PSG.  The  respondent  additionally
         concluded that the Chinese authorities were  able  to  provide  the
         appellant with a sufficiency of protection, and that she could,  in
         any event, internally relocate to another part of  China.  Nor  was
         the  respondent  satisfied  that  there  were   'very   significant
         obstacles' to the appellant's return to China,  with  reference  to
         the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  immigration
         rules, or that her removal would breach Article 8 ECHR.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. The judge had before her a large bundle of documents served by  the
         appellant that included, inter  alia,  the  Competent  Authorities'
         Conclusive Grounds decision, witness statements from the  appellant
         dated 21 June 2016 (amended on 5 January 2018), 11 April  2018  and
         24 January 2020,  an  expert  country  report  prepared  by  Joshua
         Kurlantzick  (the  country  expert)  dated  5  December   2019,   a
         psychological report on  the  appellant  dated  16  September  2019
         prepared by Dr Lissa  Morrish,  Child  Psychologist  (the  Clinical
         Psychologist),  an  addendum  report  prepared  by   the   Clinical
         Psychologist dated 24 January 2020, and a number  of  human  rights
         reports relating to China. The judge treated  the  appellant  as  a
         vulnerable  person  in  accordance  with  the  Joint   Presidential
         Guidance Note No 2010, although the appellant gave no oral evidence
         save on one limited matter. The judge heard oral evidence from  LL,
         the appellant's foster carer, which she summarised at [9] and [10].



      7. The judge acknowledged that the Clinical Psychologist  conducted  a
         3� hour assessment with the appellant on  12  September  2019,  and
         that a further 1-hour assessment was conducted on 22 January  2020.
         The Clinical Psychologist assessed to the  appellant  as  suffering
         from  PTSD,  severe  depression  and  mild  anxiety.  The  Clinical
         Psychologist considered that if the appellant was returned to China
         there was a very real possibility that she would commit suicide  as
         she would feel isolated and alone and was  likely  to  act  on  her
         belief that death would reunite her with her grandmother. The judge
         recorded the Consultant Psychologist as stating that "the appellant
         would also benefit from antidepressant  medication".  At  [16]  the
         judge stated,

             "With respect  to  the  report  of  Dr  Morrish,  I  make  the
             following observations. She saw the appellant on two occasions
             (four  months  apart)  at  the  request  of  the   appellant's
             solicitors. At 2.5 and 2.7 Dr Morrish refers to the  appellant
             being subjected to threats of  death  or  serious  injury  and
             sexual violence at the hands of the people who trafficked  her
             to the UK and that when she lived alone in a strange  city  in
             China, she may have been the victim of sexual violence. At 5.7
             there is reference to the appellant stating she  felt  'dirty'
             with no further clarification, leading  Dr  Morrish  to  opine
             that the appellant was avoiding traumatic memories  and  would
             benefit from appropriate psychological intervention. There  is
             however no evidence before me from the appellant  relating  to
             sexual violence perpetrated against  her  or  of  prostitution
             (which was confirmed at the hearing). I am not satisfied  that
             there is any factual basis for Dr Morrish's  remarks  on  this
             issue and I find that it is speculation. The appellant in  her
             Statements refers to being threatened with violence during her
             journey to the UK but actually hit on one  occasion  when  she
             was sick in a car. There  was  no  indication  of  Dr  Morrish
             having had access to the appellant's medical records. There is
             no evidence  before  me  of  the  appellant  being  prescribed
             antidepressants   (despite   Dr   Morrish's   diagnosis    and
             recommendations) or the  appellant  has  been  referred  to  a
             psychiatrist. The appellant has been referred for  counselling
             with a Practitioner on 27  January  2020.  LL  was  unable  to
             assist me with the qualifications of the Practitioner and  the
             nature of the counselling (nor do I have  a  letter  from  the
             Practitioner). The evidence before me is  that  the  appellant
             has progressed with her studies and is now in college. She  is
             now able to use the bus on her own to get to/from college  and
             go out with friends. In conclusion, whilst I have  taken  into
             account the report of Dr Morrish, I give it limited weight."


      8. The judge directed herself in  accordance  with  the  Qualification
         Regulations and SB (PSG - Protection Regulations - Reg  6)  Moldova
         CG [2008] UKAIT 00002 on the issue whether a victim of  trafficking
         for sexual exploitation was capable of being a member of a PSG, and
         noted that the group in question must have a distinct  identity  in
         the society in question  [18].  At  [22]  the  judge  set  out  the
         headnote of HC & RC (Trafficked women) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027,
         a Country Guidance case in which  it  was  conceded  that  a  woman
         trafficked for the purposes of prostitution did constitute a member
         of a PSG. At [23] the judge did not accept that the appellant was a
         member of a PSG. The judge noted that in HC & RC the applicants had
         been trafficked for sexual exploitation and that this appellant has
         never engaged in prostitution. The judge stated,

             "The expert report of Joshua Kurlantzick (JK report) at AB 527
             is not particularly helpful on the issue of females  who  have
             not been trafficked for  the  purposes  of  prostitution.  The
             Skeleton Argument refers to paragraph  22  of  the  JK  report
             which  appears  to  suggest  that  society  in  China  equates
             trafficking with prostitution and returnees are shunned. I  am
             not satisfied that the appellant who was, in  effect,  rescued
             on arrival in the UK is a member of a PSG,  namely  women  who
             were trafficked for  prostitution.  Even  if  it  were  to  be
             accepted that all women who have been trafficked (for whatever
             purpose, even if not sexually exploited) show a characteristic
             which cannot be changed, I'm not satisfied that all members of
             such a group  are  perceived  as  different  with  a  distinct
             identity in China (or specifically females who were trafficked
             but not sexually exploited) .... I therefore conclude that the
             appellant's asylum claim is not for a Convention reason."


      9. The judge then summarised the findings in HC &  RC  [25],  rejected
         the appellant's claim that she did not know the name of the city in
         which she lived for 2 years [26], and then, at [27], concluded that
         the appellant would not  face  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  if
         returned to China, either from her  grandmother's  sister  or  from
         those who trafficked her to the UK. The  judge  reasoned  that  the
         appellant was now an adult and would not  be  in  danger  of  being
         recruited for child labour, and that although she was trafficked to
         the UK, the judge was not satisfied that there were good reasons to
         consider that she would be trafficked again. The judge  said  there
         was "no persuasive evidence" that those who  were  responsible  for
         trafficking her previously would be in any  position  to  find  and
         abduct her. The persons who brought her to the UK were  aware  that
         she was in the  country,  no  evidence  had  been  adduced  of  any
         approach made to  her  in  the  UK,  there  was  no  evidence  that
         traffickers would be in a position to know that she had returned to
         China, and there was no suggestion that snakeheads were involved or
         that the appellant had a contractual debt to  pay  off.  The  judge
         concluded that there was no persuasive  evidence  that  individuals
         who trafficked the appellant to the UK operated throughout China.

     10. At [28] the judge noted that the appellant was now  a  young  adult
         and was more experienced in the risks of trafficking  and  had  the
         benefit of being able to mature to adulthood with  the  support  of
         her foster family. She was in a much better position than  she  was
         as a child on her own to work and to  support  herself.  The  judge
         referred to "background country information"  that  linguistic  and
         cultural barriers were not inhibiting factors preventing ethnic Han
         Chinese from moving away from the place of hukou registration,  and
         that even on the assumption that there was still  a  real  risk  of
         harm to the appellant on return, the judge was not satisfied  there
         was no sufficiency of protection available to her.  The  judge  was
         not satisfied "taking into account all the circumstances  including
         the background evidence in  the  country  guidance"  that  internal
         relocation would be unduly harsh.

     11. Having found that the appellant was not  entitled  to  Humanitarian
         Protection, and that her removal would not breach Article 3  EC  HR
         in respect to her suicide risk, and  that  her  removal  would  not
         breach Article 8 in terms of paragraph 276ADE and her free standing
         private life rights, the judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     12. The Grounds of  Appeal,  amplified  by  Ms  Loughran  in  her  oral
         submissions, essentially contend that  the  judge  failed  to  have
         regard to the evidence from the country expert when concluding that
         the appellant was not a member of a PSG and in assessing the issues
         of risk return,  sufficiency  of  protection  and  relocation.  The
         country expert provided evidence on all these issues  and  yet  the
         judge only once mentioned the expert's report.  the  basis  of  the
         appellant's claim was not inconsistent with the conclusions of  the
         extant CG case, which did not exclude the possibility that a victim
         of  trafficking  may  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  the
         particular facts of the case. The grounds further contend that  the
         judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the  medical
         evidence and that she made material mistakes  of  fact  as  to  the
         content of the medical evidence, and  that  the  judge  misdirected
         herself in respect of paragraph 339K immigration rules. The grounds
         contend that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
         information, particularly the  evidence  from  LL,  when  assessing
         whether the appellant would be at risk of re-trafficking or further
         exploitation, and in respect of internal relocation.

     13. Mr Melvin, who produced written submissions for the 'error of  law'
         hearing contended that the judge had  considered  the  most  recent
         Country Guidance on trafficking and had adequately referred to  the
         country expert report and gave  clear  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         appellant's claim that she was a member of a PSG. The  judge  fully
         considered the Clinical Psychologist's report and was entitled, for
         the reasons given, to attach only limited weight  to  that  report.
         The judge gave full and adequate reasons  at  [27]  for  concluding
         that the appellant was not at risk of being  read  trafficked.  The
         grounds were said to be no more than a disagreement with a  factual
         assessment properly open to the judge.

Discussion

     14. I am  persuaded,  for  the  following  reasons,  that  the  judge's
         decision involved the making  of  errors  on  points  of  law  that
         require the decision to be set aside.

     15. My first concern relates to the basis for  the  judge's  conclusion
         that the appellant was not a member of a PSG. I note  that  in  the
         March 2018 decision the respondent accepted, at paragraph 29,  that
         "victims of trafficking are perceived as different in  society  and
         form a particular social group". This was based  on  long  extracts
         from the US Trafficking in Persons report 2017 which considered  in
         detail the attitude  and  actions  of  the  Chinese  government  in
         respect of  trafficking.  The  June  2019  decision,  in  contrast,
         concluded at [26] that victims of trafficking were not perceived as
         being different by the surrounding society. The extracts relied  on
         however had little to do with the Chinese government's attitude and
         efforts to protect  victims  of  trafficking.  More  significantly,
         although the judge  directed  herself  according  to  the  relevant
         authorities relating to membership of a PSG, I  am  persuaded  that
         the judge has failed to give adequate reasons  for  concluding,  at
         [23], that, as the appellant was "in effect, rescued on arrival  in
         the  UK"  without  the  risk  of  being  forced  into  prostitution
         materialising, she would not be regarded as  a  member  of  a  PSG,
         particularly  in  light  of  the  country  expert's  evidence.   Mr
         Kurlantzick indicated that, "people who were trafficked  once  from
         China return and are often shunned by society - which often equates
         trafficking with prostitution" (paragraph 22). The  country  expert
         additionally stated, "people who were trafficked and/or engaged  in
         sex work - are often viewed with a social stigma in China, one that
         makes it hard for them to gain employment, networks of friends  and
         family, and find housing, particularly  if  they  have  no  natural
         support network to lean  on  upon  their  return  to  the  country"
         (paragraph  26).  The  country  expert  stated,   "...   There   is
         significant  social  stigma  in  China  against  people   who   are
         trafficked and returned  (especially  lone  females)  -  landlords,
         employers, hospitals and others do not want to treat these  people,
         for fear that the migrants' passed illegal activities will  somehow
         bring the police and other  security  services  to  the  landlords,
         employers and hospitals to investigate them" (paragraph 35). And at
         paragraph  36  the  expert  stated,  "this  social  stigma  against
         returning migrants - who are also assumed to have taken part in sex
         work, whether or not this is really true,  -  would  make  it  very
         difficult for a woman to  reintegrate  into  Chinese  society."  In
         reaching her conclusion the judge failed to take into account  this
         evidence. Whilst the judge was not obliged to accept the  views  of
         the expert, it was incumbent on her to engage  with  this  evidence
         and to give reasons for rejecting it.  I'm  additionally  concerned
         that the judge misdirected herself at [23] in requiring that  "all"
         members of the proposed PSG had to be perceived as different with a
         distinct identity in  China.  There  is  no  requirement  that  all
         members of proposed PSG have to be perceived as having  a  distinct
         identity in order for the PSG to exist  for  the  purposes  of  the
         Refugee Convention.

     16. I am additionally satisfied that the judge's  conclusion  that  the
         appellant would not be at risk from those who trafficked her to the
         UK, or at risk more generally of being trafficked or exploited, and
         that she could internally relocate, failed to adequately take  into
         account the country expert report, or the accepted  facts  relating
         to the appellant's trafficking. It is apparent from the appellant's
         account that she was trafficked into the UK by a criminal  gang.  I
         fully accept that there was no  mention  of  snakeheads,  that  the
         appellant does not claim to have a contractual debt to pay off, and
         that she has not been approached by any gang member in  the  UK.  I
         additionally accept that HC & RC found  that  women  and  girls  in
         China do not generally face a real  risk  of  serious  traffickers.
         There was however evidence in the country expert report  suggesting
         that someone in the appellant's position  may  nevertheless  be  at
         risk on return. At paragraph 50 of his report  the  country  expert
         indicated that the spread of the Internet and social media makes it
         easy for criminal networks including trafficking groups, to monitor
         people who come into China especially when they  are  removed  from
         Europe or North American countries. At  paragraph  16  the  country
         expert stated, "... The use of social  media  and  the  Internet  -
         combined with the extensive  on-the-ground  networking  connections
         with police local officials that many Chinese  criminal  syndicates
         possess in the country - makes it possible  in  my  experience  for
         syndicates trafficked people to track returnees not only when  they
         arrive in international airports but when  they  travel  throughout
         the country." At paragraph 30 the expert stated  that  people  were
         trafficked once are  indeed  at  much  higher  risk  of  being  re-
         trafficked if they are returned to  China."  At  paragraph  58  the
         expert stated, "If she were returned to China, it is plausible that
         she (the Appellant) would be endangered again and find it difficult
         to obtain long-term  shelter  upon  return.  She  would  be  easily
         traceable in her home area by her  original  traffickers  or  other
         trafficking groups. Moreover, even though she could relocate within
         China she would still be endangered  and  vulnerable  wherever  she
         relocated within the country."  And  at  paragraph  62  the  expert
         stated that, "... trafficking organisations are known to explicitly
         target people in China who have been returned  to  the  country  as
         they know these people often return unemployed  and  unskilled  and
         homeless  and  have  no  protection  from  the  threat   of   being
         trafficked." Whilst the  judge  was  not  obliged  to  accept  this
         evidence, it was incumbent on her to at least engage with it and to
         explain why this particular appellant, applying the extant  Country
         Guidance case, would  not  be  at  risk  of  serious  treatment  if
         returned to her home area and why it  was  reasonable  for  her  to
         internally relocate, particularly in light of her mental health.  I
         find that the judge's failure to  consider  these  aspects  of  the
         expert country report anywhere in her determination  constitutes  a
         material error of law.

     17. I have several concerns with the judge's approach to  the  Clinical
         Psychologist's  report.  The  judge   found   that   the   Clinical
         Psychologist  had  no  factual  basis  for  her  opinion  that  the
         appellant may have been the victim of sexual violence and that such
         a  conclusion  was  speculative.  It  is  clear  however  from  the
         psychological report that the author was aware  and  accepted  that
         her opinion was speculation as she said  the  appellant  "may  have
         been the victim of sexual violence" (at 2.7) [my emphasis]. This is
         not a legitimate reason for reducing weight  to  the  psychological
         report. Moreover, at 5.7 of her report  the  Clinical  Psychologist
         explained that she was  asked  in  her  letter  of  instruction  to
         'investigate the possibility that (the Appellant) was the victim of
         abuse during her period of work in China at the age of  13.'  I  do
         not accept the judge's assertion  that  the  Clinical  Psychologist
         gave "no further clarification" as to why she  concluded  that  the
         appellant was avoiding traumatic  memories.  It  was  her  clinical
         judgement that the appellant had "... spent many  years  attempting
         to protect herself from the distressing thoughts and memories  from
         her past" (at 5.7) and that the appellant's pattern of  thinking...
         led to the  suppression  or  elimination  of  painful  thoughts  or
         memories, which appears to have resulted in the avoidance of a wide
         domain of traumatic memories" (supra).

     18. The judge  appears  to  reduce  the  weight  she  attaches  to  the
         psychological  report  because  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
         appellant was  prescribed  antidepressants,  despite  the  Clinical
         Psychologist's recommendations. The Clinical  Psychologist  however
         stated that the appellant "... is likely to benefit from  long-term
         psychological therapy aimed at enabling her to process the  traumas
         she has experienced"  and  she  "may  benefit  from  antidepressant
         medication to help reduce the severe symptoms  of  depression  from
         which she is currently suffering" [my emphasis]. The judge has  not
         taken into account the oral evidence from  LL  that  the  appellant
         wasn't taking antidepressants because "we wanted  to  see  how  the
         counselling went" (with reference to an appointment letter dated 13
         January 2020 from the Crawley Assessment & Treatment Team). In  any
         event, the fact that recommendations from a  Clinical  Psychologist
         have not been put into effect, either in part or in whole, does not
         logically  reduce  the  probative  nature  of   the   psychological
         assessment or the weight  that  could  be  accorded  to  an  expert
         report. I'm further  concerned  that  the  judge  appears  to  have
         reduced the weight she has attached to the Clinical  Psychologist's
         expert view because the appellant was now studying a beauty  course
         in college, was able to travel 25 minutes on  a  bus  to  and  from
         college, and went out with her friends. There was no explanation as
         to why the appellant's ability to  undertake  these  tasks  somehow
         reduced the probative weight of the expert's opinion. Nor does  the
         judge appear to have fully considered the evidence from LL that the
         appellant did "not often" go out with her friends and that she  was
         still living with LL because she was too scared to live on her own.
         I'm finally concerned that the judge has failed to explain in  what
         manner she gave the  psychological  report  "limited  weight."  The
         judge does not explain, for example, whether she  attached  limited
         weight to the diagnoses that the appellant was suffering from  PTSD
         and severe depression.

     19. I find the errors  of  law  identified  above  render  the  judge's
         conclusions unsafe and that the decision must be set aside  in  its
         entirety.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     20. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or


         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.


     21. I have determined that the judge's decision is unsafe  for  reasons
         that include a failure to give adequate reasons and  a  failure  to
         consider relevant evidence. I find  that  the  appellant  had  been
         deprived of a fair hearing and of the opportunity to have her  case
         considered. The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
         so that a new fact-finding exercise can be undertaken.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hanes.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed D.Blum

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum     Date: 30/09/2020


        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email




