
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04150/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 October 2016                        |On 8 December 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Dph
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Wilkins, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, DPH, was born in 1998 and is a male  citizen
    of Iraq.  By a decision dated 31 March 2016, the respondent refused the
    appellant's application for asylum.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) which, in a decision promulgated  on
    11 July 2016 allowed the appeal on asylum and  human  rights  (Articles
    2/3) grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal are short and I shall set them in full:

         A judge of the First-tier Tribunal has made a material error of law
         in the determination.

         At paragraph 33 the judge finds that

         (a)  he is not returnable to Iraq for the absence of any  necessary
             documents (sic).  This and the language  of  the  CG  [country
             guidance] was a case in  which  a  return  was  not  therefore
             feasible - and as a consequence of HF (Iraq) [2013]  EWCA  Civ
             1276 the FTT had to consider  whether  the  risk  claimed  was
             distinct from the question of risk arising from the absence of
             a relevant document.  The judge  therefore  erred  in  his/her
             finding of risk on return.

 3. The application for permission to appeal was refused in the  First-tier
    Tribunal but granted in the Upper Tribunal where Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic observed that

         arguably in making these findings [for the appellant did not have a
         civil  status  identity  document  (CSID)  and  would  be  returned
         unreturnable to Baghdad...and  would  be  unable  to  access  basic
         facilities in Iraq] the judge failed to consider [that  is]  failed
         to consider whether the claimed risk of  persecution  was  distinct
         from the risk arising from the absence of a relevant  document  and
         therefore failed to apply country guidance.

 4. At [33], Judge Saffer wrote:

         The Iraqi authorities will allow [the appellant] to enter Iraq only
         if he is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport or  a
         laissez passer which he has not.  He is not therefore returnable to
         Baghdad.  He does not have a civil status identity document (CSID).
           The  respondent  has  not   demonstrated   what,   in   any,   an
         identification document would lead the Iraqi authorities  to  issue
         him with a passport or laissez passer or that they intend to do so.
          As he has no  CSID  he  will  not  be  able  to  access  financial
         assistance from the authorities, employment, education, housing  or
         medical treatment.

 5. The judge accepted the appellant is  from  Mahmour  a  region  of  Iraq
    currently disputed by ISIL (or ISIS) and that the appellant's father is
    a peshmerga fighter.  The appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity.

 6. The current country guidance is AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT
    00544 (IAC).  As  Ms  Wilkins  of  Counsel  explained  in  her  helpful
    skeleton argument, the Tribunal  in  AA  sought  to  resolve  attention
    arising in cases where return is not feasible  at  any  given  time  on
    account  of  an  absence  of  appropriate  travel  documentation.   The
    Tribunal discussed the Court of Appeal decision in HH (Somalia)  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 426 and HF (Iraq) [2013] EWCA Civ 1276.  At [169],  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AA wrote:

         On one reading of HF (Iraq) - particularly the highlighted  passage
         in paragraph 101 - the impossibility of return  could  be  said  to
         make it unnecessary to hypothesise any risk to an appellant in  the
         country of proposed return, whether or not stemming from a lack  of
         documentation or similar problem. We do not, however, consider that
         the Court can be taken to have intended such a reading.  There  may
         be cases where it will be evident that the person  concerned  would
         be at real risk of persecution or serious harm irrespective of lack
         of documentation. Were  Nazi  persecution  of  the  Jews  occurring
         today, it would clearly subvert the purpose of  the  Convention  to
         deny refugee status on the basis that,  regardless  of  what  might
         happen to appellants on return because they are Jewish, they cannot
         in practice be returned (whether because of documentation  or  mere
         refusal to admit  Jews  to  Nazi  Germany).  For  this  reason,  we
         consider that the judgment in HF (Iraq) does not preclude  a  claim
         to  international  protection  from  succeeding,  insofar  as   the
         asserted risk of harm is not (or not solely) based on factors (such
         as lack of documentation) that currently render a  person's  actual
         return unfeasible.

         The Tribunal went on  to  consider  the  particular  terms  of  the
         circumstances of the appellant in AA at [207]:

         Given that the appellant's return  is  not  currently  feasible  it
         could be said that it is unnecessary to hypothesise any risk to him
         upon his return to Iraq. However, as identified in  paragraphs  169
         and 170 above, there may be cases where it will be evident that the
         person concerned would be at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
         harm  irrespective  of  the  lack  of  documentation  and  that  an
         applicant  should  not  be  precluded  for  pursuing  a  claim   to
         international protection in circumstances where the  asserted  risk
         of harm is not (or not solely) based on factors (such  as  lack  of
         documentation) that  currently  render  a  person's  actual  return
         unfeasible.

 7. I accept Ms Wilkins submission at [11] that it should  be  possible  to
    establish whether an Iraqi asylum seeker would  be  returning  to  Iraq
    with a CSID or not; such an individual would, of  course,  be  able  to
    return to enter Iraq using a laissez passer or valid passport.  In  the
    case of the present appellant, I  agree  with  Ms  Wilkins  that  Judge
    Saffer found that he does not have a CSID,  cannot  obtain  one  whilst
    still in the United Kingdom and will  be  unable  to  obtain  one  upon
    entering Iraq.  It is true that at [33] (see above) the  judge  appears
    to find that the appellant will  not  be  leaving  the  United  Kingdom
    because he will not be able to obtain a  passport  or  laissez  passer.
    However, in concluding paragraph 33, the judge draws attention  to  the
    fact that the appellant's failure to obtain a  CSID  would  render  him
    incapable of receiving financial assistance,  employment  or  education
    housing.  In his analysis, Judge Saffer has conflated  the  feasibility
    of return dependent upon possession of the  correct  documentation  and
    the risk to which the appellant would be exposed if he were  to  be  in
    Iraq because he did not possess and would be unable to obtain  a  CSID.
    At [38] Judge Saffer finds that

         it would be unduly harsh and unreasonable to require a  traumatised
         18 year old young man who has lost...contact with his  family,  and
         his home to go [to Baghdad] especially as he is a Kurd and there is
         no evidence he speaks Arabic.

    These additional findings by Judge  Saffer  bring  me  to  Ms  Wilkins'
    alternative submission (skeleton argument) [17].   Ms  Wilkins  submits
    that Judge Saffer has given "sufficient other reasons" why it would  be
    unreasonable for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad  even  where  his
    possession or lack of a CSID was not  a  relevant  consideration.   The
    Tribunal in AA considered the "position on documentation  where  return
    is feasible" at [204] C:

         C. POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

         8. It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied that the  return
         of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of  alleged  risk  of  harm
         arising from an absence of Iraqi identification documentation  will
         require judicial determination.

         9. Having a CSID is one of the ways in which it is possible for  an
         Iraqi national in the United Kingdom to  obtain  a  passport  or  a
         laissez passer. Where the Secretary of State proposes to  remove  P
         by means of a passport or laissez passer, she will be  expected  to
         demonstrate  to  the  Tribunal   what,   if   any,   identification
         documentation led  the  Iraqi  authorities  to  issue  P  with  the
         passport or laissez passer (or to signal their intention to do so).



         10. Where P is returned to Iraq on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport or other  current
         form of Iraqi identification document.

         11. Where P's return to  Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there are  no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID.

         12. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID,  P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         13. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely  hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad. The  evidence  does  not  demonstrate  that  the  "Central
         Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to  provide
         CSIDs to those in need of  them.  There  is,  however,  a  National
         Status Court  in  Baghdad,  to  which  P  could  apply  for  formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

 8. As Ms Wilkins pointed out, the Tribunal in AA clearly believed that  it
    had absolved the tension of the Court of  Appeal  authorities  when  it
    applied its own guidance to the facts of the appellant in AA  at  [207]
    (see above).

 9. Whilst I am aware that country guidance  exists  in  order  to  provide
    general principles as regards risk to particular groups and individuals
    returning to, as in this case, Iraq  and  whilst  I  find  that  it  is
    generally unhelpful to compare the specific facts relating to different
    individual asylum seekers, the fact remains that,  notwithstanding  the
    fact that the appellant in AA was not returnable  to  Iraq,  the  Upper
    Tribunal remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to carry out  a
    further fact-finding exercise.  [209] the Tribunal  noted  that  "as  a
    consequence of the passage of  time  the  situation  in  Iraq  for  the
    appellant's family may have changed.  Findings  are  required  in  this
    regard."  In the present appeal, we  have  a  relatively  recent  fact-
    finding exercise conducted by Judge Saffer in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the principle established in AA (that the fact an individual  may
    not be returnable to Iraq does not  necessarily  exclude  a  claim  for
    international protection succeeding),  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    grounds  of  appeal  in  this  particular  case   have   succeeded   in
    establishing that Judge Saffer erred in law.  I agree with  Ms  Wilkins
    that Judge Saffer, even  if  he  did  err  in  law  by  conflating  and
    confusing the relevance of documentation to feasibility of  return  and
    risk following return, has given sufficient reasons for concluding that
    this particular appellant should be granted  international  protection.
    Finally, I am aware that AA is subject to an appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  However, applying the relevant law and jurisprudence as at the
    date of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal and for the reasons  which  I
    have given, I find that the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 7 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 7 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

