
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04083/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                 KAMRAN AZAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Nizami, Counsel, instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  who  made  an  application  for
    asylum or other protection  under  paragraph  336  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  That application was refused by the respondent  in  a  detailed
    refusal letter of 4 December 2015.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor on  28  June  2016.   The
    Judge found the asylum claim to be essentially a  fabrication  and  the
    appeal was dismissed in all aspects.

3.   Challenge is made to that decision on a number of  grounds,  permission
    to raise the challenge having been granted on  one  of  those  grounds,
    namely the standard and burden of proof.  Thus the matter comes  before
    me to determine these issues.

4.   By way  of  context  the  appellant  claims  that  he  has  acquired  a
    significant and adverse profile in Pakistan by reason of his  political
    activities there and in the United Kingdom.  The precise  event  giving
    rise to the claim for asylum is said to have  occurred  between  6  May
    2015, when he left the United Kingdom, to 1 July 2015 when he returned.
    It is his case that he was involved in a significant public meeting  in
    Pakistan on 20 June 2015 when Rights for Kashmir were demanded and also
    the release of a writer.  It is his case that the  police  subsequently
    raided his home looking for him and that a warrant for his  arrest  has
    been issued.  Reliance was placed upon a First Information  Report  and
    an arrest warrant in that context.

5.   The respondent  made  particular  enquiries  of  the  Pakistani  police
    authorities in connection with the authenticity of the FIR and came  to
    the conclusions, for the reasons set out  in  a  document  verification
    report, that it was not genuine.  The police indeed had confirmed  that
    that document was not genuine and that the details  were  not  held  in
    that police station.  It was the case for the appellant in  reply  that
    corruption is rife within the police service and that the police had  a
    motive to give wrong information to the respondent  because  they  were
    anxious not to alert the appellant but would arrest him on return.

6.   The decision letter of 4 December 2015 is detailed in its  response  to
    the claim made by appellant dealing in some detail with his  interview,
    the letters, the newspapers, the  photographs  and  in  particular  the
    warrant and FIR.  The suggestion of  a  conspiracy  by  the  police  to
    deceive the respondent was not accepted.

7.   At the hearing the respondent  was  not  represented  by  a  Presenting
    Officer.  Clearly that posed some difficulty for  the  Judge  but  that
    matter was specifically dealt with at paragraph 6 of the determination.
     The Judge had  been  asked  to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  such  a
    Presenting Officer in the light of what was set  out  in  the  decision
    letter of 4 December 2015.  The  Judge  was  satisfied  that  he  could
    fairly and justly determine the issues without the presence of  such  a
    Presenting Officer and  informed  the  appellant  and  the  appellant's
    representative accordingly.

8.   There are in effect three substantive challenges which are made to  the
    determination.

9.   The first challenge is that the wrong standard and burden of proof  was
    applied. That was set out in paragraph 9 as being "substantial  grounds
    for  believing  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Qualification Regulations".

10.  Miss Nizami, who represents the appellant before me, submitted that  it
    was an incomplete phrase from the Qualification  Regulations  the  full
    context being "substantial grounds for  believing  that  the  appellant
    would face a real risk of  serious  harm".   She  submitted  that  that
    related to humanitarian protection  and  that  the  lower  standard  of
    reasonable degree of likelihood should be applied to matters of asylum.
     It was her submission that the standard and burden of  proof  was  set
    too high.

11.  Mr Melvin in response, however, draws my  attention  to  paragraphs  60
    and 61 of the determination.  He asks me to find  that  the  Judge  has
    correctly set out both tests, namely whether the appellant faces a real
    risk of serious harm if returned  and  also  under  the  Directive  for
    Humanitarian Protection substantial grounds for believing that he  will
    face a real risk of serious harm in his country of origin. I am invited
    to find that in practical terms there has  been  no  serious  departure
    from the burden and standard of proof.

12.  I would agree.  In any event given the finding that the Judge has  made
    that the claim for asylum based  upon  that  particular  meeting  is  a
    fabrication it is difficult to imagine  that,  even  applying  a  lower
    standard of proof to the facts, there  would  have  been  any  material
    difference of outcome.

13.  The second challenge made is the approach which the Judge  is  said  to
    have taken to the evidence of  Mr  Gul  Zaman.   It  is  said  that  he
    attended the hearing but that his statement at page 16  of  the  bundle
    was presented and should have been accepted by the Judge in  the  light
    of what the Judge had to say.

14.  It is contended in ground  2  of  the  appellant's  grounds  that  when
    dealing with the absence of the Presenting Officer the Judge had stated
    to the appellant and to his representatives that there would be no need
    to call the statements in the circumstances and would be taken as being
    read.  Such a statement, it is said, stands in contrast to the comments
    made in paragraph 55 of the determination which were as follows:

         "I note the appellant did provide  a  witness  statement  from  Gul
         Zaman which is contained at page 16 of the appeal bundle and I  was
         informed that this person may give evidence. In the event,  he  was
         not called and his evidence had not been tested in  anyway.   As  a
         consequence I give no weight to the witness statement  of Mr  Zaman
         in which he contends that the appellant is at  risk  on  return  to
         Pakistan on account of his alleged involvement on behalf of  UKPLNP
         both in Pakistan and in the United Kingdom."

15.  It is said that it is  fundamentally  unfair  for  the  Judge  to  have
    indicated that he would have accepted the statement  on  its  face  and
    then criticise the maker of the statement for not giving evidence.

16.  It seems to me, however, it is a matter for concern that  no  statement
    to that effect  has  been  prepared  by  Counsel  who  represented  the
    appellant  before  the  Judge.   A  reading  of  the  determination  at
    paragraphs 6 and 55 does not give that interpretation of what was  said
    by the Judge.  On the basis of those two documents it would  seem  that
    the Judge has simply indicated that in  the  absence  of  a  Presenting
    Officer he could  fairly deal with matters and that there had been some
    indication given that Mr Zaman would give evidence but in the event was
    not called so that his evidence was not tested.

17.  Clearly it would be a matter of concern if  a  Judge  was  to  indicate
    that the statement would be accepted on its face and then  subsequently
    criticise the maker of the statement for not giving  evidence.   It  is
    surprising, however, that on this important matter, that the detail  of
    what precisely was said to the parties has not been  properly  set  out
    in the statement, which could  then be presented  if  need  be  to  the
    Judge for further comment.

18.  The statement of Mr Zaman is in any event extremely  brief  and  speaks
    only in the most general terms of his political  involvement  with  the
    appellant.  So far as the key issue was  to  the  FIR  and  the  arrest
    warrant what is said is as follows:

         "I am aware that there are cases  filed  against  him  in  Pakistan
         occupied Jamu Kashmir which makes his return  there  impossible.  I
         understand that the life of such comrades is  made  difficult  upon
         return and that they are harassed  and  intimidated  by  the  state
         police and Pakistani secret agencies."

19.  At no stage does he give any indication as to how he  became  aware  of
    these matters, which clearly must go to the weight to his  evidence  in
    any event.  Clearly if the Judge was led to understand that the witness
    would be speaking as to his statement the absence of his  doing  so  is
    significant.

20.  In the absence of clear and direct evidence as to  precisely  what  the
    Judge said to the representatives I place very little weight upon  that
    challenge.

21.  The third challenge is  essentially  that  the  Judge  reached  adverse
    conclusions without having first considered al the evidence as a whole.
     It is said that he did not fully engage with  the  newspaper  articles
    that were presented, particularly in their original form, nor with  the
    photographs, nor indeed with the circumstances  overall.   It  is  said
    that  the  Judge  unreasonably  concentrated  upon  the  issue  of  the
    genuineness of the FIR and arrest warrant and allowed the  findings  on
    that matter to taint the other findings.

22.  For my part I find no error of approach in the practicalities  of  this
    matter.  The very focus of the case was the allegation that as a result
    of a particular meeting in Pakistan FIR and arrests warrants  had  been
    issued.   The  matter  was  considered  in  considerable   details   at
    paragraphs 49 to 53.  The Judge did not find the suggestion put by  the
    appellant that there  were  corrupt  officials  who  did  not  want  to
    acknowledge that they issued an FIR  because  they  somehow  wished  to
    attract the appellant back to Pakistan to seek retribution against him.
     The appellant  relies  upon  those  documents  claimed  to  have  been
    received from a Pakistani lawyer. Perhaps unusually in  this  case  the
    respondent had been proactive in making enquiries about those documents
    and had received information that they were false.  Reasons  are  given
    for that and a document verification report is relied upon.

23.  The Judge for sustainable reasons has found  that  the  documents  were
    false, not at the instigation of the police but because of the  attempt
    to deceive by the  appellant.   The  Judge  found  therefore  that  his
    credibility is wholly and fundamentally damaged by the product of false
    documents.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  entirely   reasonable   in   the
    circumstances of this case.

24.  It cannot be said that the Judge simply ignored the other evidence,  it
    is clear, particularly from paragraphs 54 and 55, that  other  evidence
    particularly newspaper articles and photographs were considered as  was
    indeed the statement of Gul Zaman.  For sustainable reasons  the  Judge
    did not find that evidence to be of any assistance to the appellant  in
    establishing the credibility of his case.

25.  The conclusion of the Judge that the appellant has sought to provide  a
    false documents  in  support  of  a  wholly  contrived  and  fabricated
    application for asylum was properly open to be made.  The  Judge  found
    that the allegations  made  against  the  Pakistan  police  force  were
    unfounded and fabricated.  In the circumstances it comes as no surprise
    that the appeal was dismissed.

26    I  have  looked  at  the  three  challenges  both   individually   and
    collectively  and  can  find  no  material  error  of  law.   In  those
    circumstances the appeal of the appellant against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision shall stand, that being
    one in which the appellant's claim for asylum is dismissed as also  his
    claim for wider humanitarian or human rights protection.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]    Date 16 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
