
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04488/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|9 February 2018                               |10 May 2018                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [B M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr K Gayle, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent whom we shall call "the claimant" is a Kurdish  national
    of Iraq.  She claimed asylum on the basis of a fear of retribution from
    her family following her striking up a relationship  with,  and  having
    sexual intercourse with, a man who was different from the man whom  her
    father wanted her to marry.  Her claim was refused by the Secretary  of
    State, who, in the refusal letter dated 26 April 2017,  worked  through
    the claimant's  evidence  as  obtained  at  her  asylum  interview  and
    rejected it as lacking in credibility, being "internally  inconsistent"
    at a number of points.  The rejection of the claimant's evidence  about
    her history included rejection of her  claim  that  her  father  had  a
    position of authority in the PUK.

 2. The claimant appealed.  Her appeal was heard by Judge Suffield-Thompson
    in the First-tier Tribunal.   The judge heard oral  evidence  from  the
    claimant: the latter adopted  her  witness  statement  and  was  cross-
    examined by the Presenting Officer.  The judge heard  submissions  from
    the Presenting Officer.  She heard no  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.  In a written determination, she allowed the appeal.

 3. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  to  this  Tribunal  are  as
    follows:-

        "The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal has made a material error  of
        law in the Determination.

        Procedural Irregularity

        It is respectfully submitted that FTTJ Suffield-Thompson has  erred
        in law.  She states at paragraph 15 of her determination  that  she
        reserved her decision at the close of the hearing, however this  is
        in complete contradiction to the minute recorded by the  Presenting
        Officer (enclosed) which states that the FTTJ  did  not  even  hear
        submissions  from  the  Representative   and   allowed   the   case
        immediately in court.

        It is asserted that in doing  so  she  has  failed  to  demonstrate
        adequate consideration of the evidence or have due  regard  to  the
        submissions of the Presenting Officer it is submitted that this  is
        further demonstrated by the FTTJ's comment  during  the  Presenting
        Officers submissions that she "had a plan for the hearing", as such
        her decision to allow the appeal is rendered unsound."

 4. The Presenting Officer's note sets out a number of matters on which the
    Presenting Officer cross-examined the claimant.  The following  passage
    is of relevance:

        "While I was questioning how she was able to take time off work  at
        short notice and that no one would notice that [R], who she spent a
        lot of time with, was also off work, the judge stated  that  people
        would find a way to have a relationship and asked  me  to  move  on
        from that line of questioning.

        Additionally, when questioning the appellant about  her  answer  to
        Q.84 AI in which she said that her family were the  first  to  find
        out about the relationship, and that she didn't  know  if  [R]  had
        told his family, which contradicted her account  that  it  was  his
        uncle  that  informed  her  family  about  the  relationship,   the
        appellant said that she could only comment on her  family  and  her
        life, the judge said that this was a misinterpretation of  [sc  by]
        the home office.

        During my submissions the judge said that she had a  plan  for  the
        hearing.  She did not hear submissions from  the  [claimant's]  rep
        but allowed the appeal"

 5. Following the grant of permission, the judge was invited to comment  on
    the grounds.  We do not need to set out the part of her  response  that
    is a protest.  She asserts that if there is no reference to a  plan  in
    the Record of Proceedings, she did not say it.  She points out that  it
    is perfectly in order to give an indication at the hearing of what  the
    decision will be, although the decision  itself  is  contained  in  the
    written judgement.

 6. We had submissions from Mr Gayle and Ms Patterson.   We  have  examined
    the judge's note of the proceedings before her, her  written  decision,
    and other material on file.

 7. There is, we are satisfied, nothing in the  complaint  that  the  judge
    indicated at the hearing what her decision would be.  That  is  not  an
    irregularity of any sort.  In any event, it is  difficult  to  see  how
    there could be an irregularity given that  the  written  decision  does
    indeed reflect the indication given at the hearing.

 8. What is a greater concern  arises  from  the  judge's  "plan"  for  the
    hearing.  Whether or not that was declared, it is clear that the  judge
    did not require the appellant's representative to make the  appellant's
    case by any submissions, and is clear from the determination that, even
    without any submissions on behalf  of  the  appellant,  the  judge  was
    content to find in her favour, rejecting each of the challenges made to
    her evidence.

 9. We will look in some more detail at the determination shortly,  but  we
    must first consider the issues raised by the judge's  decision  not  to
    cal on the appellant's representative.  It is a feature of  immigration
    appeal hearings, going back in our own personal experience to the early
    1990's at least, that  after  the  evidence  has  been  heard,  closing
    submissions are  made  first  by  the  Home  Office  and  then  by  the
    appellant's representatives. This  is  despite  the  fact  that  it  is
    normally the appellant that has the burden of  establishing  the  case.
    In proceedings where the person needing to establish the case is  heard
    first (as in appeals to this Tribunal), it may frequently  be  possible
    and appropriate for a judge to reach the view after the  proponent  has
    done everything he can to make his case,  that  there  is  no  need  to
    respond to it.  There is, as it is sometimes said "no case to  answer".
    It will, however, be very rare indeed for a judge to be able  to  reach
    the contrary view, that is to say, having heard the answer, to conclude
    that the case succeeds without having been fully put.  We think it will
    only be on the rarest occasions that a conclusion of that sort will not
    properly suggest that a judge has not either  reversed  the  burden  of
    proof or failed to be open properly to arguments on both sides.  In the
    present case it must have been clear to everybody at the close  of  the
    Presenting Officer's submissions, when the judge did not  call  on  the
    applicant,  not  merely  that  the  judge  thought  that  all  material
    difficulties had been resolved in the claimant's favour, but  that,  in
    addition, the claimant's case, on the basis of all the evidence  before
    the judge, and without any argument in its favour,  was  sufficient  to
    succeed.

10. The circumstances in which the in which the judge reached that view now
    need to be examined.  At paragraphs 22 to 24 the judge  sets  out  that
    there is an issue as to credibility, and indeed asserts that "the  only
    area of dispute in this case is the credibility of the appellant."  The
    judge then goes through a number of the aspects of the claimant's  case
    on which the Presenting Officer had cross-examined  her.   On  each  of
    these points she says simply that she accepts the claimant's  evidence.
    She declines to discover any inconsistencies and provides  explanations
    for the inconsistencies alleged by the Home Office Presenting  Officer.
    So far as concerns the assessment of the evidence, this  might  not  be
    objectionable, were it not that at paragraph 26, in explaining  why  it
    is credible that the  claimant  would  know  nothing  of  her  father's
    business or political affiliations, the judge  writes  "the  respondent
    cannot impose elements of western  culture  onto  people  such  as  the
    appellant".   At paragraph 31, however,  dealing  with  the  Presenting
    Officer's submission that  the  claimant's  evidence  of  a  long  term
    intimate relationship between two colleagues being  wholly  secret  was
    implausible, the judge writes:  "many  people  are  able  to  carry  on
    relationships together for many years without being discovered".  That,
    however, does appear to be imposing a  western  interpretation  on  the
    evidence.  The judge cites no evidential  support  that  her  assertion
    would be valid in Iraq.  These are matters which, no doubt,  the  judge
    ought to have heard the parties' various submissions on.  It  is,  with
    respect, very difficult to see why a western interpretation  should  be
    imposed in order to explain an implausibility in the claimant's favour,
    but should be inadmissible if detected  as  part  of  the  respondent's
    case.  In particular, it is difficult to see that that treatment of the
    issue properly reflects the fact that it was for the claimant  to  make
    her case.

11. As we have  said,  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  deals  with  the
    claimant's credibility, and the judge identified that issue as the only
    issue in the case.  Once the judge accepted the claimant's credibility,
    however, other issues obviously arose.  In particular, (bearing in mind
    again that it was for the claimant to prove her case), if her story was
    the truth, was she at risk of persecution?  That required an evaluation
    of what the actual risk to her would  be,  whether  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection against it, and whether she could relocate to
    another part of Iraq.  The judge deals with these matters in paragraphs
    33 to 39.  The only relevant submission before  her  was  that  of  the
    Presenting Officer, briefly noted (whether  or  not  briefly  made)  as
    "could go to IKR".  There was a substantial bundle of country evidence.
     The judge dealt with  this  by  setting  out  6  sentences  from  that
    material which she says "have been helpful to me in making my  findings
    and decision".   She concludes at paragraph 36 that the claimant "would
    be at real risk from all the male members of her family if she were  to
    go back.  She cannot turn to  the  State  as  they  do  not  adequately
    protect women and I accept that honour killings are  a  part  of  their
    culture and society".  So far as internal relocation is concerned,  the
    judge again refers to a few sentences of  the  material  and  concludes
    that the claimant would be at real risk of physical harm in the IKR and
    that it would be unfeasible to expect her to go there.

12. It is clear that at this part  of  the  determination,  the  judge  was
    taking a great deal on herself.  The Secretary of State  had,  as  yet,
    given no consideration to what the position would be if the  claimant's
    story were the truth; and the claimant's representative was not invited
    to make a case on that basis.   Instead,  the  judge  appears  to  have
    decided to do all the work herself, justifying her conclusion solely by
    those parts of the country evidence which  she  thought  supported  the
    claimant's case.

13. This process demonstrates,  in  our  view,  the  danger  of  proceeding
    without hearing submissions on behalf of the claimant.  It is, frankly,
    extraordinary that she was able to conclude so much in  the  claimant's
    favour and nothing against her  without  hearing  the  claimant's  case
    being made.  Again, whether or not she declared that she had  a  "plan"
    for the hearing, it  is  clear  from  her  decision  that  without  the
    claimant's assistance she was  able  to  read  a  substantial  body  of
    country evidence in a way that so clearly favoured the claimant's  case
    that no attention needed to be given to any parts of it  which  pointed
    in the other direction.

14. The most apparent and public aspect  of  the  judge's  conduct  of  the
    hearing was evidently that  she  did  not  hear  submissions  from  the
    claimant's representative.  The reasons why she did not need to  do  so
    are, in our judgment, apparent from the determination.  It seems to  us
    that a well-informed observer of the hearing (including the  points  at
    which the judge refused to allow the Presenting Officer  to  press  the
    claimant in her evidence) and the determination would  reach  the  view
    that judge was not exercising an independent  and  impartial  judgment,
    but was at all stages viewing the matter  in  a  way  which  tended  to
    favour the claimant and disfavour the respondent.  We  have  therefore,
    with regret, reached a view that this is a case where the judge  showed
    apparent bias.

15. In the circumstances, the position is that the parties have not  had  a
    fair hearing.  We set aside Judge Suffield-Thompson's determination and
    remit the claimant's appeal for redetermination by a different judge in
    the First-tier Tribunal.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 24 April 2018.

