
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04603/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision  & Reasons           |
|                                             |promulgated                   |
|On 25 January 2018                           |On 26 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     HTH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr A Khan instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
(Wimbledon)
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hussain promulgated on 29 August 2017 in which  the  Judge  dismissed
       the appeal on both protection and human rights grounds.



Background

    2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam born on 15  August  1960.  The
       appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally in March 2009  and  on
       10 January 2016 was arrested but  granted  temporary  release.  On  8
       March 2017 he was detained on reporting conditions and  on  31  March
       2017 applied for asylum, which was refused on 2 May 2017. It was  the
       appeal against that refusal that came before the First-tier Tribunal.
    3. The appellant claimed that if returned to Vietnam he will be arrested
       and attacked by the police because of his religion, being a  follower
       of the Pure Hoa Hou Buddhist faith.
    4. The  Judge  considered  the  evidence  provided  before  setting  out
       findings of fact between [32 - 54] of the decision  under  challenge,
       the key elements of which may be summarised in the following terms:


             a. According to the report of  the  country  expert,  the  1992
                Constitution  of  Vietnam  allows  free  practice   of   all
                religions and beliefs but such beliefs  and  practices  were
                subject to strict  approval  by  the  government.  Religious
                groups  in  Vietnam  were  required  to  register  with  the
                government who must approve its operation  under  government
                control management board. The Pure Hoa Hou Buddhism followed
                by the appellant has not been  approved  by  the  government
                [34].
             b. The appellant's religion is an ambitious political religion.
                The division  followed  by  the  appellant  is  against  the
                government. The evidence supports the claim the religion the
                appellant follows exists and is not permitted to operate  in
                Vietnam  and  that  those  who  support  and  practice  that
                religion might be considered  as  political  activists.  The
                local  authority  and  police  applied  violent  methods  to
                suppress  forbidden  religious  gatherings   including   the
                appellant's [35].
             c. The Judge notes, at [37], an extract  taken  from  paragraph
                4.3 of the expert report in the following terms:


                    "If  returned  to  Vietnam,  the  appellant  might  face
                    numerous serious penalties as he would be prosecuted for
                    the crimes of infringing  upon  national  securities  as
                    mentioned in paragraph 4.1 above. If the  appellant  was
                    prosecuted for the above-mentioned crimes. This could be
                    classed as the kind of persecution and  treatment  which
                    contrasts with article 3 of the European  Convention  of
                    Human Rights. However, was this could happen, it is  not
                    true  to  say  that  it  would  happen.  A  more  likely
                    occurrence  would  be  that  the  appellant   would   be
                    subjected  to  excessive   scrutiny   because   of   his
                    activities, family profile and his time in the UK".


             d. The Reasons for Refusal  letter  did  not  accept  that  the
                appellant was the subject of any adverse interest  owing  to
                his religious activity [42].
             e. Having considered the totality of  the  evidence  the  Judge
                concludes there is no truth in the appellants  claim,  other
                than his claim which the Secretary of State  accepted,  that
                he was a follower of the faith [44].
             f. The Judge found it damaged the appellant's credibility  that
                he had been in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2009  and  only
                applied for asylum in March 2017, and that  whilst  claiming
                to have been in a relationship for  two  years  he  had  not
                discussed with his partner his difficulties back in his home
                country [45].
             g. The appellant had not provided a  single  item  of  evidence
                that corroborates his claimed arrests and detentions. Whilst
                noting corroboration is not required in asylum cases,  there
                is no objective  or  independent  corroboration  making  the
                significance of the appellant being a credible witness  more
                important [46].
             h. The appellants written statement gives  an  account  of  his
                many arrests and detentions. The claim  that  the  appellant
                was on one  occasion  detained  for  a  year  without  being
                formally charged is contrary to his own  expert's  evidence.
                At paragraph 5.2 of the  expert  report  it  is  stated  the
                maximum period a person may  be  detained  is  seven  months
                where someone is accused of an "extremely  serious  felony".
                In this case the appellant was not even charged [47].
             i. The appellant's expert  claims  at  paragraph  4.3  that  if
                returned  to  Vietnam  the  appellant  will  face   numerous
                penalties and prosecution is contrary to his  own  evidence,
                that despite being arrested and no less than six  occasions,
                when on each occasion the authorities came to  be  aware  of
                his previous arrests and detentions, he was not  prosecuted.
                This shows that either the appellants claims are not true or
                that there is no risk of any prosecution simply  because  he
                is the follower of the religion [48].
             j. Taken at its highest, the appellant is no more than a simple
                follower  of  his  religion.  He  has  never   assumed   any
                leadership role in his country or elsewhere.  It  is  likely
                that if returned to his  home  country  he  will  engage  in
                prayers  privately.  The  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
                appellant attended any congregations as he was not made  the
                subject of any adverse  interest  by  the  Vietnamese  state
                [49].
             k. There is no real risk of the appellant being  persecuted  if
                returned to his home country [50].
             l. It is accepted the appellant is in a genuine and  subsisting
                relationship with his partner although  could  not  conclude
                they had been living together for two years [51].
             m. The appellant could not satisfy the definition of a  partner
                under the Immigration Rules because he was unable to satisfy
                the eligibility requirement to show he met the definition of
                a 'partner' as he had not proved he is either married to his
                girlfriend  or  that  they  have  lived  together  for   the
                requisite  two-year  period  [52].  Considering  this,   the
                appellant's family life claim under  the  Immigration  Rules
                must fail [53].
             n. Outside the Rules, nothing  exceptional  in  the  appellants
                circumstances  was  not  considered  under  the  Rules.  The
                appellant cannot satisfy the  requirements  of  276  ADE  in
                relation to his private life. The circumstances do not merit
                consideration outside the Rules [54].


    5. The Judge went on to consider  entitlement  to  be  recognised  as  a
       refugee considering the factual findings made in which it  is  stated
       at [57]:


           "Given the above factual conclusions, I find that the  appellant
           has discharged the burden of proof of having a well-founded fear
           of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason. I conclude  that
           the appellant's removal would not cause the United Kingdom to be
           in breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention."


    6. The Judge similarly concluded the appellant  had  not  shown  he  was
       entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection or that there will  be
       a breach of any convention of the European Convention on Human Rights
       if the appellant was returned.
    7. The appellant sought permission to appeal relying  on  three  grounds
       namely (a) that the Judge applied the wrong standard of proof at [31]
       of the decision under  challenge,  (b)  that  the  Judge  misdirected
       himself about the background evidence including  misrepresenting  the
       content of the expert report, and, (c)  that  the  Judge  misdirected
       himself about his consideration of the appellant's article 8 claim.
    8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another  judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal but renewed to the Upper Tribunal  where,  on  19
       December 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

Error of law

    9. Ground 1 raises  a  procedural  issue  relevant  to  considering  the
       fairness of the decision under challenge. At [31] of the decision the
       Judge writes:


           "... the burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard of
           proof required is the balance of probabilities".


   10. This, on the face of it, is  a  clear  misdirection  of  law  as  the
       appropriate standard in a protection claim is  the  'lower  standard'
       and not the civil standard referred to by the Judge.
   11. In relation to Ground 2 it is argued the Judge, when referring to the
       expert report, makes adverse findings based on selective quotes  from
       that report. There is specific reference to the fact the  report  did
       confirm that, in principle, the authorities could detain somebody for
       twelve months without charge contrary  to  the  Judge's  findings  in
       [47]. The finding at [48] is also criticised  as  it  was  the  clear
       opinion of the expert that prosecution was possible  and  that  extra
       scrutiny was a more likely occurrence.
   12. It is also asserted the  Judge's  conclusions  about  the  background
       evidence are incoherent. The grounds  specifically  referred  to  the
       conclusions at [32] in which the Judge states "I have looked at  that
       [background] evidence and find nothing  there  that  is  inconsistent
       with the appellants claims", yet goes on to claim that the appellants
       evidence is inconsistent with that evidence  and  in  the  paragraphs
       addressed above. This  indicates  either  that  the  Judge  has  made
       incoherent findings, or not applied anxious scrutiny to the matter.
   13. Ground 3 asserts the Judge misdirected himself in  considerations  of
       the appellants claim pursuant to article 8 is it was accepted at [51]
       that the appellant is in a relationship with a refugee although finds
       the appellant's removal to Vietnam would not violate  his  article  8
       rights.
   14. It is arguable the Judge erred in finding on the facts that there was
       no need to consider the merits of the claim outside the Rules. As the
       Supreme Court have reminded us the jurisdiction of  both  the  First-
       tier and Upper Tribunal is a human rights jurisdiction which requires
       proper consideration, in a structured  manner,  of  article  8  ECHR.
       Whilst the Rules form part of a structured  assessment,  setting  out
       the respondent's view on how article 8 should be  interpreted,  there
       is a requirement for a decision maker to assess the merits the  claim
       by reference to the Razgar guidance. The Immigration Rules  may  not,
       arguably, be the sole answer to the human  rights  claim  considering
       all the facts as known.
   15. In her Rule 24 reply dated 10 January 2018 the respondent states  she
       does not oppose the application.
   16. I find the errors pleaded in relation  to  the  correct  standard  of
       proof, treatment of the  expert  evidence  and  failure  to  consider
       Article 8 ECHR to be made out.  This is also a religious  persecution
       case in which there is no analysis of the HJ (Iran) principle. It may
       not have been pleaded but may, arguable, need  consideration  on  the
       next occasion considering the finding that the appellant  would  pray
       discreetly. It is the reason why this may be the case that  may  have
       to be considered.
   17. The failure to apply the correct standard  of  proof  is  a  fairness
       issue. Considering which there can be no preserved findings.   I  set
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside. As there will have  to
       be a complete rehearing of this appeal I  remit  the  matter  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross to be heard  by  a  judge
       other than Judge Hussain. Further case management direction shall  be
       given by the Resident Judge upon receipt of the file.

Decision

   18. The Immigration Judge materially  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
       decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remit the  decision  to
       the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross.

  Anonymity

   19. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 25 January 2018
