
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04045/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2017                       |On 2 June 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     TB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, TB, claims to have been born in 2000 and to be a citizen
    of Afghanistan.  The appellant applied for asylum but  his  application
    was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision dated  18  December
    2015.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge I  Howard)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 13 October  2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the appeal hearing at Bradford  on  23  May  2017,  I  informed  the
    representatives that I intended to set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  I now briefly give my reasons.

 3. Judge Howard had found that the appellant was not 16 years  old  as  he
    had claimed.  At [25], he  wrote,  "when  assessing  all  the  evidence
    available the appellant has not satisfied me it is more likely than not
    he is 16".  It is clear the judge has applied the standard of proof  of
    the balance of probabilities.  In doing so, he  erred  in  law  (Rawofi
    [2012] UKUT 00197).  The correct standard of proof  was  the  so-called
    lower  standard,  that  is  the  standard  of  reasonable   likelihood.
    Secondly, at [24], the judge wrote:
         "Finally and it is a small point but at his initial  interview  the
         appellant is asked his occupation to which he replied 'brickmaker'.
          Given his account and claimed age it is impossible to  reason  how
         he ever came by that occupation."

 4. I accept  Miss  Khan's  submission  that  the  judge  has  applied  the
    standards of 21st Century Britain to the economy of  Afghanistan.   The
    judge has not found by reference to any evidence before him that  there
    is no child labour in Afghanistan; accordingly, the  appellant's  claim
    to have been a brick maker at an age under 16 years was,  at  the  very
    least, plausible.  Indeed, had the same question been asked of a  child
    of similar age in Britain in 1850, a positive response would  not  have
    appeared surprising.  Thirdly, I find that  the  judge  has  made  this
    finding  without  giving  the  appellant  or  his  representative   any
    opportunity to explain what he considered  to  be  an  anomaly  in  the
    evidence.  That the appellant had worked as a child in Afghanistan  did
    not appear to have troubled the Secretary of State (the refusal  letter
    is silent on the matter) and nor does it  appear  from  the  record  of
    proceedings that the matter was  ever  put  to  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing.  By failing to give the appellant that chance to comment,  the
    judge perpetrated a procedural unfairness.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    entire analysis of the evidence has been vitiated by these errors and a
    new fact-finding exercise will need to  be  conducted.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal is best placed to conduct that  exercise  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 13 October  2016
    is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.   The  appeal
    will be returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Ian Howard)  for
    that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 30 MAY 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 30 MAY 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

