
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04979/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 December 2019                 |On 3 December 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms M Butler, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malcolm promulgated 27.8.19, allowing  on  human  rights
    grounds but dismissing on protection grounds,  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  19.4.19,  to
    refuse his asylum claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Feeney  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.10.19.

 3. The grounds argue that the judge  erred  by  following  the  overturned
    (remitted) Country Guidance of AS (Afghanistan) [2018]  UKUT  118;  not
    giving reasons for declining to depart from Country  Guidance;  failing
    to consider article 15(c); and failing to take  into  account  findings
    that amounted to a finding of refugee status.

 4. The respondent's Rule 24 response, dated 27.11.19, does not oppose  the
    application for permission to appeal, accepting that "the  findings  of
    fact and consequent issue of internal relocation to Kabul  are  unclear
    and it was arguably erroneous for the FTTJ to rely on AS  (Afghanistan)
    given the Court of Appeal's decision in the same case."

 5. However, the respondent submits that the threshold  for  Article  15(c)
    risk in Kabul has not been reached and thus  any  failure  to  consider
    this was not material.

 6. The respondent invited the Upper Tribunal to relist the  matter  for  a
    CMR pending the decision of the Upper Tribunal following the  rehearing
    of AS, which is awaited, on the basis that the  Country  Guidance  will
    have direct relevance to the appeal.

Error of Law

 7. For the reasons summarised below, I found errors of law in  the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that it should  be  set
    aside and remade by allowing the appeal.

 8. The previous First-tier Tribunal decision dismissed the appeal  on  the
    basis that it would be reasonable to expect the appellant  to  relocate
    to Kabul, where there would be a sufficiency of protection.

 9. There was no issue of credibility in this appeal; the question was  the
    risk of forcible recruitment  to  the  Taliban  and  reasonableness  of
    internal relocation to Kabul or Jalalabad, away from his home  area  of
    Nangahar.

10. Judge Malcolm made a number of positive  findings  in  the  appellant's
    favour:

      a) It was not in contention that the appellant's father was  a  member
         of the Taliban;

      b) The appellant had managed to escape Afghanistan with the assistance
         of his uncle;

      c) Given that he has had no recent contact  with  him,  the  appellant
         would not have the support of his maternal uncle in  relocating  or
         resisting his father's advances to force him to join the Taliban;

      d) It is plausible that given his father's position in the Taliban  he
         would want to  take  revenge  for  the  appellant's  resistance  to
         recruitment and flight from Afghanistan, considering that  his  son
         had dishonoured him. It follows that there was a risk to him should
         he be located by his father;

      e) There would be difficulties for him in returning to his  home  area
         of Nangahar;

      f) The risk that the father would be able to locate him if he returned
         to Kabul cannot be discounted;

      g) He would not have any network of support in Kabul;

      h) Whilst internal relocation to Kabul is possible, the appellant  may
         well be at enhanced risk due to his lack of any family  network  on
         which he could rely, the length of time which he  has  been  absent
         from Afghanistan, lack of integration and any current ties  to  the
         country, and his familial association with the Taliban;

      i) The judge accepted the expert opinion that it  is  highly  unlikely
         that the appellant would be able to integrate easily as he  has  no
         social  or  family  structure,  which  are  pivotal  in   obtaining
         employment;

      j) The judge also accepted the expert opinion that there was a  strong
         likelihood that the appellant could be found even if he  internally
         relocated to Kabul.

11. There is no merit in the ground that the  judge  did  not  address  the
    issue raised in submissions of article 15(c) risk  in  the  appellant's
    home area of Nangarhar. Having accepted that he would  be  at  risk  on
    return to his home area, the judge concluded that a  return  there  was
    not an option. In the circumstances, it was unnecessary to consider the
    article 15(c) risk there specifically.

12. However, considering herself bound by the Country Guidance of the Upper
    Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan) [2018] UKUT 118, the judge found that  the
    appellant did not fall within any of the stated categories  of  persons
    who would be at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul. The
    claim that he  would  be  additional  risk  because  of  mental  health
    problems was rejected. It was on that basis that the  protection  claim
    was rejected.

13. Nevertheless, the judge went on  to  consider  paragraph  276ADE(i)(vi)
    and, noting that he has been absent from Afghanistan since 2012, having
    arrived in the UK at the age of 15, found that  a  large  part  of  his
    formative years have been spent in the UK. Given the  factors  set  out
    above, the judge concluded that there would be "additional difficulties
    for  him  in  re-integrating  into  life  in  Afghanistan."  The  judge
    concluded that the particular difficulties which  the  appellant  would
    face on  return  to  Afghanistan  met  the  test  of  very  significant
    obstacles to integration. The judge also found that  removal  would  be
    disproportionate. The judge, therefore, allowed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds and, implicitly, dismissed it on protection grounds.

14. It had been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal that AS was no  longer
    valid Country Guidance, it having been remitted to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Reliance was placed by the  appellant's  representative  on  the  UNHCR
    guidelines  which  conclude  that  internal  relocation  to  Kabul   is
    presently   unavailable   and   unreasonable   for   anyone.   However,
    notwithstanding that AS had been overturned by the Court of Appeal, the
    judge gave no reasons for declining to depart  from  AS  and  purported
    applied its Country Guidance, stating only at [106] of the decision, "I
    require to observe the Country Guidance Cases."

15. Ms Butler's submission is that but for the  judge  considering  herself
    bound by AS, the findings would or should have lead to the appeal being
    allowed.

16. Mr Kotas submitted that the First-tier Tribunal decision is unclear and
    does not indicate that but for AS, the appeal would have been  allowed.
    He stated that it was unclear what the judge  actually  found  and  not
    clear whether the appeal could have been allowed on protection  grounds
    of a risk on relocation to Kabul. For example, at [97]  the  judge  did
    not accept that the evidence supported a finding that the appellant has
    a fragile mental state. Mr Kotas also submitted that if the  judge  had
    considered herself bound by AS, she could not have read it as  it  held
    that there was no likelihood that the Taliban can  trace  a  person  to
    Kabul.

17. I am satisfied, and as the respondent has conceded, it was an error  of
    law for the judge  to  rely  on  AS  to  dismiss  the  appeal.  AS  was
    overturned by the Court of Appeal in AS  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 873, so that the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  was  no  longer
    binding. It was an error of law for the judge to consider herself bound
    by it. Instead, the  judge  should  have,  and  largely  did,  make  an
    assessment of all the relevant evidence and facts to determine  whether
    there was a real risk of persecution, or alternatively serious harm, on
    return to Afghanistan and in particular relocation to Kabul.

18. The respondent has advanced no case to undermine the positive  findings
    made by the judge, as  set  out  above.  In  the  circumstances,  I  am
    satisfied that having accepted that  there  was  a  real  risk  of  the
    appellant being located by his father in Kabul and  that  if  found  he
    would be at risk from his father,  together  with  all  the  additional
    difficulties of relocating to Kabul identified by the  expert  opinion,
    which at [109] of the decision the judge also accepted,  it  cannot  be
    the case that there was a  viable  option  to  internally  relocate  to
    Kabul. These findings are outside the issue  of  being  traced  by  the
    Taliban per se or any more general article 15(c) risk.

19. The judge accepted and  made  findings  that  lead  to  the  inevitable
    conclusion that the appellant could neither safely return to  his  home
    area nor relocate to Kabul because of the risks from  his  father,  the
    absence of any support, all the other difficulties  identified  by  the
    expert, and his long absence from Afghanistan since the age of 15. Even
    if the judge was right to apply the  Country  Guidance  of  AS,  it  is
    difficult to see how and why the appeal was dismissed on  international
    protection grounds.

20. I am satisfied that with or without AS, the positive findings  made  in
    the appellant's favour should have led to  one  conclusion  only,  that
    relocation to Kabul would be unduly harsh, so that he  is  entitled  to
    international protection.

21. It follows that there is no point in  the  respondent's  suggestion  of
    waiting for the outcome of the Upper Tribunal's new decision in AS.

Decision

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it

     Signed




         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated    2 December 2019
