
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: PA/04530/2016

                                                        PA/04532/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                at                Manchester,                Piccadilly
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On                   12th                    October                    2017
        On 17th October 2017

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                            MRS KHOSHI HAMASHARIF
                          MR EZADIN MOHAMMAD RASHED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Pratt (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated on the 14th February 2017, in which  he
      dismissed their asylum appeals and claims for humanitarian  protection
      and under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

   2. The Appellants have now sought to appeal against that decision for the
      reasons set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  It is argued within the
      Grounds of Appeal that the Judge fell into error by taking against the
      Appellants' credibility points in  relation  to  Section  117  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, when  that  should  have
      played no part in the assessment of the appeal there being no  Article
      8 consideration within the appeal.  It said that at paragraph  15  the
      Judge made a number of findings in relation to Section 117 including a
      finding that "I consider that the restrictions  on  their  integration
      into local society require the  engagement  of  the  Public  Interests
      Protocol on Removal" and that the Judge therefore gave weight  to  the
      public  interests  considerations  on  removal  whilst  assessing  the
      Appellants' credibility.  It was argued the Appellants did  not  claim
      under Article 8 in this case.  It is argued that the  claim  is  based
      upon  credibility  of  the  Appellants'  account  and  that   improper
      considerations taken against credibility were material errors and that
      the decision requires remaking in its entirety.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle on
      the 5th June 2017 who found that it was arguable that the Judge should
      not have considered Section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 as there was no Article 8 claim within the appeal  and
      it was arguable that the Judge erred in referring to Section 117.

   4. Within the Rule 24 Reply from the Respondent dated the 12th June 2017,
      although it was conceded that the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to
      Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was an
      irrelevant consideration, it is argued that they  did  not  themselves
      form any part of the credibility findings of the Judge  and  therefore
      although an irrelevant consideration, the reference to Section 117 did
      not constitute a material error of law.

   5. I have also fully heard and taken account of the oral  arguments  made
      by Mr Pratt on behalf of the Appellants and Mr Bates on behalf of  the
      Respondent, which are fully recorded within the record of proceedings.



   Findings in Respect of Error of Law and Materiality

   6. At both [18] and at [50], the Judge noted that there was not Article 8
      claim in respect of the Appellants' private or family life in  the  UK
      under the ECHR.

   7. Section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
      makes  it  clear  that  it  is  dealing  with  the   public   interest
      considerations when the court or tribunal is considering Article 8  of
      the ECHR under Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002.  It states  specifically  at  Section  117A(1)  that  this  part
      applies where a court or tribunal is required to determine  whether  a
      decision made under the immigration acts:

     a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and  family  life
        under Article 8; and

     b) as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of the  Human  Rights
        Act 1998.

   8. In such circumstances, the considerations under Section 117A-D of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, had no relevance to  the
      Appellants'  asylum  claim.   At  [15]  of  his  decision,  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Fox has gone on to make findings under Section  117  of
      the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  found  that
      neither presented any form of qualifications demonstration  competency
      in the English language and  he  was  satisfied  that  their  lack  of
      English may present an obstacle to integrating into local society.  He
      further found that neither Appellant would  be  an  easily  marketable
      commodity in the local job market and they had  not  demonstrated  any
      skills or assets  that  would  make  them  attractive  to  prospective
      employers and they had not sourced any education  courses  that  might
      help with their English language skills,  nor  had  they  demonstrated
      that they would be successful in the local job market.   He  therefore
      found that each of the Appellants would be likely to be a drain on the
      public purse in the immediate and near future and therefore  he  found
      that  the  "restrictions  on  their  integration  into  local  society
      required the engagement of the Public Interests Protocol".

   9. Although clearly  Judge  Fox  was  in  error  by  making  findings  in
      reference to Section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002, and although that was a finding he made  under  his  section
      entitled "Credibility  and  Findings",  I  am  not  satisfied,  having
      carefully considered this appeal and the written and oral  submissions
      made, that in fact, the Judge's findings in  respect  of  Section  117
      have been taken by him as affecting the credibility of the Appellants'
      account as to their risk upon return to Iraq.   Although  the  Section
      117 findings at [15] are part of the background,  the  Judge  has  not
      specifically stated that these  have  impacted  upon  his  credibility
      assessment. The Judge at [16] has gone on to make findings damaging to
      credibility under Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
      of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, and between [17] and [38] inclusive, has
      given  clear,  adequate  and  sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  the
      Appellants' account that they would be unlawfully killed by members of
      the First Appellant's family for having helped  her  sister  avoid  an
      arranged marriage by fleeing Iraq, and thereafter, having remained  in
      contact by telephone with her.  Those findings were  specifically  not
      challenged by Mr Pratt of Counsel at the  appeal  hearing  before  me.
      Indeed, as Mr Bates correctly points out, in the summary paragraph  at
      [38], although the Judge brings together the reasoning  for  rejecting
      the Appellants' account regarding the risks said to be faced  by  them
      upon returning to Iraq, he has not  within  that  paragraph  made  any
      reference  to  the  adverse  findings  pursuant  to  Section  117   of
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   Such  findings  under
      Section 117, do not amount to credibility findings, and  there  is  no
      evidence having closely and carefully read the  decision  to  indicate
      that Judge  Fox  actually  took  those  findings  into  account,  when
      assessing the credibility of the Appellants' claim.

  10. In such circumstances, although clearly the Judge did err by reference
      to Section 117, I am not  satisfied  that,  in  fact,  the  error  was
      material, and I am satisfied that  the  Judge  would  reach  the  same
      conclusions, given his findings on credibility, irrespective  of  that
      error.

  11. In such circumstances I dismiss the  Appellants'  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox as  the  decision  does  not
      contain any material errors of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox does not contain any  material
error of law and is maintained;

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order having been  made  by
the First-tier Tribunal and no such order having been sought before me.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 12th October 2017


