
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04550/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19 May 2017                        |On 08 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                    mr fr
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISON AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on [  ]  1981.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 17 November 2011 with a Tier 4  (General)
    Student visa.

 3. He claimed asylum on 18 November 2015.  On 22 April 2016 the respondent
    refused the appellant's application for asylum.  The respondent did not
    accept that the appellant was homosexual and therefore did  not  accept
    that he would be at risk of persecution  in  Pakistan.   The  appellant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 29 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Turquet dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal  did
    not accept the appellant's account and found that the appellant was not
    therefore at risk of persecution on return to  Pakistan.    The  First-
    tier Tribunal also considered that the appellant did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules under Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE.  The appeal was dismissed on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and on 30  March  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Baker granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Submissions


 6. The appellant filed a skeleton argument which amplified submissions
    made in the grounds of appeal.  These were further amplified in oral
    submissions.

 7. Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was aware of the history of sexual abuse claimed by the  appellant  but
    did not pay any regard to the Presidential guidance note on  vulnerable
    witnesses.  This led to material procedural unfairness.

 8. Ground 2 asserts that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  Surendran
    (Surendran v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (19197))
    guidelines.  It is asserted that these guidelines  are  to  be  applied
    when the respondent has failed  to  defend  her  decision.   Where  the
    respondent is not represented at a hearing the Tribunal can only  raise
    matters in the decision which are not raised in the refusal letter with
    notice  by  raising  any  matters  with  the  appellant  and/or   their
    representatives at the hearing.  The grounds assert that there is not a
    single reference in the decision  to  the  Surendran  guidelines  being
    noted, let alone applied by the Tribunal.

 9. The Tribunal exacerbates  this  approach  by  omitting  to  record  the
    appellant's  replies  to  the  adverse  credibility  findings  in   the
    protection decision.   These responses  would  procedurally  act  as  a
    starting point to determine the approach of the Tribunal  with  respect
    to outstanding matters.  There is a complete lack of recording  in  the
    decision of the appellant's response to the adverse credibility  points
    in the decision, so that the clear omission to record  those  responses
    and use them to act as a starting point for further investigation where
    there is a vulnerable witness is procedurally unfair and unlawful.   In
    his skeleton argument  Mr  Chelvan  corrected  this  ground  of  appeal
    referring to paragraph 15 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision setting
    out: 'the Tribunal do record reference to: "In  his  witness  statement
    the appellant gave more details of  his  claim  and  responded  to  the
    Reasons for Refusal"'.   During  the  course  of  oral  submissions  Mr
    Chelvan submitted that this reference to the appellant's reply  is  not
    in sequence and ought to have been identified following  the  recording
    of the respondent's case and that this amounted to a material error  of
    law. The appellant had provided responses to the issues raised  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter, however the judge recorded the  appellant's
    case and then the respondent's  case,  and  then  moved  straight  into
    findings without, in essence, recording the appellant's responses as  a
    reply to the respondent's case



10. Ground 3 asserts that the Tribunal's focus on the  appellant's  illegal
    status was a  key  finding  in  rejecting  credibility.   A  number  of
    paragraphs in the Tribunal's decision are referred to: paragraphs 1, 35
    and 49 where it is asserted that the judge has materially erred in  law
    by making an inaccurate finding  that  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  The appellant refers to paragraph 49  where  the  Tribunal
    finds that "this would appear to indicate that he would  have  remained
    in the United Kingdom illegally".  It is asserted that at paragraph  50
    the finding that the appellant was a person of no credibility was based
    on the immigration history and that the Tribunal's  personification  of
    the appellant as an individual in the UK illegally based  on  a  wholly
    inaccurate and misleading interpretation of the facts led to a material
    conclusion of no credibility and a fabricated asylum claim.


11. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Chelvan  indicated  that  Mr  Clarke
    accepted that the appellant was not in the United Kingdom unlawfully at
    the time of the application.  I confirmed with Mr Clarke that that  was
    accepted, to which he indicated that it was.  Mr Chelvan submitted that
    from paragraph 34 onwards of the decision there is no recording of  the
    evidence from the appellant at  the  hearing.  He  submitted  that  his
    strongest ground was that in assessing credibility the judge had made a
    material mistake of fact.  As now accepted by the respondent, this  was
    an error of law.  The appellant was not illegally overstaying.  He  had
    leave to remain  until  24  November  2015  and  had  made  his  asylum
    application on 18 November 2015.  It was submitted that the  assessment
    of credibility was considered through the prism of an unlawful stay  in
    the  United  Kingdom.   Reference  is  made  to  paragraph  49  of  the
    Tribunal's decision and it was submitted that  it  is  clear  that  the
    judge was  clearly  considering  that  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK
    illegally when making the finding that his credibility was damaged.  In
    the grounds of appeal specific reference is made to  paragraph  50  and
    the final sentence of the paragraph.  It is  asserted  that  the  judge
    concludes in that paragraph that the  appellant  was  a  person  of  no
    credibility.


12. In ground 4 it  is  asserted  that  the  Tribunal's  treatment  of  the
    corroborative  witness  evidence  is  irrational   and   unfair.    The
    appellant's former partner submitted a  statement  in  support  of  the
    appellant's appeal.  He is mentioned by the  appellant  in  his  asylum
    interview.  The Tribunal found, in relation to W, that as  someone  who
    was claiming asylum on the basis of his sexuality it is consistent that
    he would be attending LGBT organisations, whilst for the  appellant  it
    rejects the appellant's attendance at  LGBT  community  support  groups
    such as the Naz and London Friend prior to his claiming  asylum.   This
    inconsistency and approach is irrational and  grossly  unfair.   It  is
    asserted that there are two points relied on by the Tribunal:  firstly,
    a difference in address in the reply notice and  claimed  address,  and
    the appellant's claim that he was unaware of the  witness's  employment
    history whilst they were in a relationship.  It is asserted that  there
    is no reference in the decision  to  either  point  being  put  to  the
    appellant or the witness. The approach to the corroborative witness has
    been  clouded  by  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  credibility.  It  was
    submitted that the use of the words "consistent with" in relation to  W
    attending LGBT is supportive of the asylum claim.

13. Ground 5 asserts that the adverse credibility findings  illustrate  the
    lack of fairness.  Reference is made to the findings  of  fact  by  the
    Tribunal that it was not credible that the appellant would have had sex
    at school, is not credible that the appellant's father  only  beat  him
    once in 2006, that it was not credible that a 19 year old boy  who  had
    transgressed strict Islamic conduct would have been  accompanied  by  a
    family member and forced to attend the Mullah and that no gay club  bar
    membership card was available.  It is submitted that in  rejecting  the
    evidence of the appellant regarding having sex  at  school  this  would
    exclude all claims for asylum where the narrative includes being caught
    by third parties engaging in sexual conduct outside the  home.   It  is
    submitted that the finding of fact is both  irrational  and  materially
    unfair.  It is submitted that it is clear from the evidence at question
    39 that following the beating by his mother, when his father next  came
    from Dubai he hit him as well, and that the  appellant  does  not  date
    this as occurring in 2006.  He faced this beating at the time  when  he
    was sent to the Mullah in 1998, referring to "not wanting to be  beaten
    again by my father".  In 2006 it was as a result of the discovery of  A
    having sex with a child that resulted in A's  father  beating  him  and
    then his father beating him.  This was not a single incident as held by
    the Tribunal.  It is  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  in  rejecting  as
    credible or plausible that a 19 year old would have been accompanied by
    his cousin and forced to attend  the  Mullah  ignores  the  context  of
    strict Islamic values and applies a global  north/UK  analysis  of  the
    decision making process contrary to the case of Kasolo v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home  Department  (13190).   It  is  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal makes adverse findings on the basis that the appellant had not
    provided any evidence from any gay bar or club.

14. Mr Clarke submitted that the judge set out the appellant's evidence and
    looked at it in detail considering the medical evidence, but  does  not
    accept the appellant's account.  Therefore it  is  not  clear  why  the
    judge ought to have considered the appellant as a  vulnerable  witness.
    In any event, he indicated that the appellant  has  not  been  able  to
    identify anything  within  the  decision  that  would/could  have  been
    considered differently had he approached the matter in a different way.



15. He submitted that the judge has not considered the attendance  or  lack
    of attendance  with  the  Mullah  from  a  northern  perspective.   The
    appellant was supposed to be going to see the Mullah every  week  as  a
    result of a very serious issue.  He submitted that  the  situation  and
    the events in Pakistan underpin the reasoning of the  judge.   Why  did
    the Mullah not on any occasion go to the appellant's  mother  over  the
    two years when he was waiting each week for the appellant to arrive?

16. With regard to the argument that there  was  no  consideration  of  the
    Surendran guidelines he submitted that paragraph 19 of MNM v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department 00/TH/02423 sets out  clearly  that  a
    Tribunal must not get involved with the questioning of  witnesses.   He
    referred to paragraph 4 of the guidelines:

         '4. Where matters of  credibility  are  raised  in  the  letter  of
         refusal, the Special Adjudicator should request the  representative
         to address these matters, particularly in his  examination  of  the
         appellant or, if the appellant  is  not  giving  evidence,  in  his
         submissions. Whether or not these  matters  are  addressed  by  the
         representative, and whether or  not  the  Special  Adjudicator  has
         himself expressed any particular concern, he is  entitled  to  form
         his own view as to credibility on the basis of the material  before
         him.'

17. He submitted the judge was entitled to form her  own  view  as  to  the
    credibility of the witness from all the evidence that was available.  A
    judge can look at everything and form her own view on  credibility  and
    does not need to raise and put every piece of evidence to the  witness.
    With regard to the argument that at paragraph 43 where the judge  found
    that the statement in respect of living openly to be inconsistent  with
    the account he has given of not telling anyone  in  the  UK,  that  was
    dealt  with  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  at  paragraph  30.
    Therefore, clearly this was an issue raised by the respondent regarding
    the inconsistency between the appellant's accounts.  There  is  nothing
    new in this issue for the judge to have put  to  the  appellant.   With
    regard to the assertion that the judge ignored the photos  and  adopted
    the reasoning of  the  Secretary  of  State  at  paragraph  44  of  the
    decision, he submitted that it is clear that the judge was aware of the
    photographs and attendance at the LGBT, but found that the  photographs
    appeared staged.  This was a finding on the basis of the evidence  that
    was before the judge and was not a complete unreasoned adoption of  the
    Secretary of State's case.  With regard to the NAZ letter at  paragraph
    47, the judge considered and took into  account  the  letter.   In  the
    previous paragraph the  judge  had  noted  the  recent  access  to  the
    appellant's GP.  Clearly the judge has taken  all  this  evidence  into
    account.

18. With regard to the third ground, the focus on the  illegal  status,  Mr
    Clarke accepted that the judge had made a mistake  but  submitted  that
    this was not material.  In referring to paragraph 49 he submitted  that
    the judge clearly made her findings without taking  into  consideration
    whether or not the appellant was in the United Kingdom  illegally.  The
    judge considered that to be irrelevant. The judge was  considering  the
    delay in the failure to  make  the  asylum  claim  at  that  point  and
    considered simply that his explanation that he had leave until November
    2015 was not  an  adequate  explanation.   Similarly,  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 49 the judge was referring  to  the  appellant's  explanation
    regarding the suspension of the fast  track  process  rather  than  his
    claim.

19. With regard to the corroborative evidence referred to in support of the
    appellant's claim, he submitted that the judge was correct and entitled
    to take into account that  this  evidence  only  came  about,  or  only
    started a few months before the appellant's claim.  With regard to  the
    inconsistencies noted by  the  judge  he  referred  to  the  answer  at
    question 7 of the screening interview and submitted it was a clearly an
    inconsistent assertion that he came to the UK to claim asylum  and  the
    time taken i.e. June 2012 to  2014  after  the  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom to make his claim.  The inconsistency in the account  as
    to the reasons why he was late in applying for asylum  was  part  of  a
    changing  story  that  the  judge  took  into  account   in   assessing
    credibility.   With  regard  to  the  treatment  of  the  corroborative
    witness, he submitted that  the  treatment  was  not  irrational.   The
    Tribunal made two points regarding the difference of  the  address  and
    that he was unaware of the partner's employment history, but the  judge
    looked at the evidence of the partner at paragraph  44  and  the  judge
    clearly indicates that she has considered the evidence  of  W  together
    with all the other evidence in reaching the conclusion.   The  entirety
    of the reasoning set out in paragraph 44  is  what  led  to  the  judge
    placing little weight on the statement or the evidence of W.

20. With regard to the fifth  ground,  he  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider all the inconsistencies, that this was an evolving
    and changing chronology and a chaotic case.  It is not  just  a  single
    strand where the judge was simply looking  at  attitudes  in  Pakistan.
    The judge considered the appellant's own fear in light of his  asserted
    account of what happened as to  whether  or  not  that  would  make  it
    credible that he would have had sex at school and therefore it is  both
    a subjective and objective range of factors that the  judge  took  into
    consideration in arriving at that conclusion.  With regard to the issue
    over the number of beatings he referred to  the  asylum  interview  and
    submitted that the grounds missed the point that the judge's  reasoning
    was concerned about this developing and changing story.  At question  7
    the appellant was very specific that his father beat him  in  2006  and
    that this was when the fear started.  He was sent to  his  grandmother,
    but the judge finds the account inconsistent.  The appellant failed  to
    mention the problems with A in 2006.  This was  inconsistent  with  his
    witness statement at paragraph 13.  There were  many  issues  that  the
    judge was concerned about.  With regard to the evidence and  membership
    of the gay bar, he submitted that this misrepresented the reasoning  of
    the judge at paragraph 43.  He submitted that the judge notes the claim
    that he lives openly and  the  judge's  findings  are  not  just  about
    membership but about other people that he met there.  He submitted that
    the judge was not requiring  corroborative  evidence  but  was  looking
    holistically  at  what  the  appellant  had  not  provided  that  could
    reasonably have been available.

21. In reply  Mr  Chelvan  submitted  that  there  was  a  global  northern
    assessment contrary to the Kasolo case at a number  of  points  in  the
    First-tier's decision.  He had provided corroborative evidence  from  W
    which the Tribunal rejected.  He submitted that the expectation of  the
    judge was that the appellant should have  relationships,  so  the  fact
    that he has not had any other relationships in a six month period means
    that he cannot be gay is completely  ridiculous.   He  referred  to  HM
    (Iraq) & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1536 and submitted that the role of the judge is inquisitorial  not
    adversarial.

22. I reserved my decision. In the event that I  was  to  find  a  material
    error of law both parties  indicated  that  they  considered  that  the
    matter ought to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  full
    findings of fact.

Discussion

Ground 1

23. With regard to the first ground of appeal (that the judge had failed to
    treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness) this issue was not  raised
    by the appellant's legal representative at the hearing.  The  appellant
    has not identified any specific issues with regard to the treatment  of
    the evidence by the judge. Whilst a judge should  take  the  point,  if
    obvious, even if not raised by the legal representative, in  this  case
    the judge has rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  and  therefore  the
    appellant was not, in the view of the judge, a vulnerable witness.

Ground 2

24. Ground 2 of the grounds of appeal assert that the judge has  failed  to
    record any of the appellant's  responses  to  the  adverse  credibility
    points taken by the respondent and failed  to  consider  the  Surendran
    guidelines The judge has set out in considerable detail  the  responses
    that the appellant made to the issues raised in the Reasons for Refusal
    Letter. These commence at paragraph 15 and go through to paragraph  18.
    These are lengthy paragraphs.  Reference is made to the  points  raised
    in the respondent's  decision  and  in  paragraphs  21  to  35  of  the
    appellant's witness statement  (which  contain  the  responses  to  the
    respondent's decision letter).  Although the skeleton argument makes  a
    correction, and in oral submissions Mr  Chelvan  appeared  to  indicate
    that the point being made was that it was the  sequence  in  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal  dealt  with  this  issue,  that  was  not  a  full
    retraction of what is set out with considerable force in the grounds of
    appeal.  I have considered paragraphs  21  to  35  of  the  appellant's
    witness statement  and  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  not  only  has
    considered them, but has set out each assertion in some detail  in  the
    paragraphs I have referred to, i.e. paragraphs 15 to 18.  The fact that
    these are set out in the section 'appellant's case' rather  than  being
    set out as a reply after the recording of respondent's  case  does  not
    amount to an error of law.  The judge was setting out in full the whole
    of the appellant's case.  The judge  refers  at  paragraph  19  to  the
    appellant's skeleton argument.  Clearly,  that  was  provided  for  the
    hearing and gives a further indication that the judge was  setting  out
    in a comprehensive format  the  whole  of  the  appellant's  case.   At
    paragraph 36 the judge records:-

         "In coming to my decision I have to set down my  findings  in  some
         sort  of  order.   The  order   does   not   indicate   that   some
         considerations are more important than others.  There are  accounts
         given by the appellant himself in his  interviews,  statements  and
         oral evidence... "

    As indicated by the judge, there must be  some  order  to  a  decision.
    There is no merit in this ground of appeal. Contrary to the  assertions
    of the appellant  the  judge  in  this  case  set  out  in  detail  the
    appellant's responses to the issues raised by the respondent.

25. Although it is asserted that the judge failed to take into account  the
    Surendran guidelines no specific evidence is referred in ground 2  that
    was relied upon by the judge that had not been put  to  the  appellant.
    There are however two points said to be relied upon  by  the  judge  in
    respect of the corroborative witness's evidence that were  not  put  to
    the appellant. These are that there was a difference in the address and
    the appellant's claim that he was unaware of the witness's employment.

26. In MNM paragraph 6 of the Surendran  guidelines,  as  annexed  to  that
    decision, provide:

         6. It is our view  that  it  is  not  the  function  of  a  special
         adjudicator to adopt an inquisitorial role in cases of this nature.
         The system pertaining at  present  is  essentially  an  adversarial
         system and the  special  adjudicator  is  an  impartial  judge  and
         assessor of the evidence before him. Where the Home Office does not
         appear  the  Home  Office's  argument  and  basis  of  refusal,  as
         contained in the letter of  refusal,  is  the  Home  Office's  case
         purely and simply, subject to any other representations  which  the
         Home Office may make to the special  adjudicator.  It  is  not  the
         function of the special adjudicator to expand upon  that  document,
         nor is it his function to raise matters which are not raised in it,
         unless these are matters which are apparent to him from  a  reading
         of the papers, in which case these matters should be drawn  to  the
         attention of the appellant's  representative  who  should  then  be
         invited to make submissions or call evidence in  relation  thereto.
         We would add that this is not necessarily the same  function  which
         has to be performed by a special adjudicator where he  has  refused
         to adjourn a case in  the  absence  of  a  representative  for  the
         appellant, and  the  appellant  is  virtually  conducting  his  own
         appeal. In such event, it is the duty of the special adjudicator to
         give every assistance, which he can give, to the appellant.

27. The judge does note the difference in address (as set out below) and  I
    accept that there might have been an explanation available if this  had
    been put to the appellant or W. I do not consider that this was 'relied
    on' by the judge as asserted. However, even if it were relied on it was
    only one of very many factors that the judge took  into  account.  With
    regard to the lack  of  knowledge  of  W's  employment  the  judge  was
    entitled to make an adverse credibility finding. This appears  to  have
    arisen during the course of evidence. The judge analysed  the  evidence
    as presented setting out (paragraph 44):

         "...I note that he said in interview that W lived in Willesden  and
         that he had only been there to visit and had not stayed for a  full
         night.  When the appellant's  reply  notice  was  completed  on  16
         September 2016 the address for W  was  given  as  London  NW2  3DA,
         although W said that he had been living in Bedford for four months.
          He also said that he had been living  with  his  girlfriend  since
         April, five months before September.   They  have  had  an  Islamic
         marriage and their baby is due in December.  He is a  self-employed
         taxi driver and before that was working at some  grocery  shops  in
         Bedford.  I note that the appellant, when asked  about  W  he  said
         that he did not know if he was working  during  their  nine  months
         relationship.  I do not find it credible that if  they  were  in  a
         relationship that he would not know what his partner did..."

28. The judge considered  the  evidence  in  detail  and  noted  very  many
    inconsistencies. It is not the role of the judge to put each and  every
    inconsistency to the appellant in the absence of  a  representative  of
    the respondent. The Tribunal was not bound,  as  a  matter  of  natural
    justice, to point out all the  inconsistencies  and  evidence  that  he
    considered was not credible. I do not accept  Mr  Chelvan's  submission
    that HM (Iraq) is authority for the proposition  that  the  role  of  a
    judge, in the absence of representation of one party, is inquisitorial.
    In that case the court did not need to decide the issue.

Ground 5

29. It is appropriate at this stage to consider ground 5.  It  is  asserted
    that a number of adverse credibility  findings  illustrate  a  lack  of
    fairness. These were, that it was not credible that the appellant would
    have had sex at school, is not credible  that  the  appellant's  father
    only beat him once in 2006, that it was not credible that a 19 year old
    boy who  had  transgressed  strict  Islamic  conduct  would  have  been
    accompanied by a family member and forced to attend the Mullah and that
    no gay club bar membership card was available.

30. It is submitted  that  in  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the  appellant
    regarding having sex at school this would exclude all claims for asylum
    where the narrative includes being caught by third parties engaging  in
    sexual  conduct  outside  the  home.   The  finding  of  fact  is  both
    irrational and materially unfair. The appellant argues that  the  judge
    adopted a global north/UK analysis. The judge, after  setting  out  the
    appellant's account, considers the evidence:

         37. "...He made no mention of having problems with the  authorities
         or of being in fear.  When asked at question 38 what  it  had  felt
         like being caught and then expelled  from  school  because  of  his
         sexual orientation, he said all his locality were looking  down  on
         him in an insulting manner.  'I felt awful about what was happening
         to me.'  Given the  background  evidence  and  the  latest  country
         guidance, which indicates inter alia that same-sex sexual acts  are
         illegal  in  Pakistan,  homophobic  attitudes  are   prevalent   in
         Pakistan, there is widespread and systematic discrimination against
         LGBT persons including harassment  and  violence,  which  might  in
         individual cases amount to  persecution,  I  find  the  appellant's
         answer, which indicates that he is going out and about and that the
         community know about his sexuality yet the  only  problem  is  that
         they look at him in an insulting manner is  inconsistent  with  the
         background evidence.  In the event  that  his  sexual  relationship
         with S was known about in the public domain,  I  find  it  unlikely
         that he would go out and about.  If he did, I find it  likely  that
         he would have suffered more  than  insulting  looks.   He  did  not
         mention being worried about being arrested.

    38.  I find the appellant's answers in interview about how he  came  to
         realise his sexual orientation and how he had felt about it  to  be
         unconvincing.  When asked about his first relationship,  he  merely
         said that he went to his friend's house, watched a  porn  film  and
         then had sex.  There was no account of either boy  having  feelings
         for the other or having discussed their sexuality.  When asked what
         he personally believed about being a homosexual, he said 'I enjoyed
         being a homosexual', which is a very simplistic answer.  When asked
         what he was told about homosexuality  by  his  family,  school  and
         society, he said that he had not known much about it  and  that  it
         was only after coming to the UK that he heard more about it however
         his desires were more towards boys.  When it was put  to  him  that
         the Home Office would want to know about the emotions he  felt,  he
         said that he had felt a tightness and pressure inside  him  knowing
         that society was not accepting it.  He then said that A  had  raped
         him and continued to do this  every  week  until  'I  also  started
         feeling that I had  a  homosexual  partner  and  so  we  were  both
         conducting sex together'.  He had also said that he got  a  lot  of
         pleasure and excitement by indulging in homosexual sex.  He did not
         mention having any feelings for his sexual partners.

    39.  The appellant's accounts of his problems in Pakistan in respect of
         his sexuality have been  inconsistent  and  unconvincing.   In  his
         asylum interview he stated that he came to realise about his sexual
         orientation, when he was 15 years old and in class  with  S.   This
         would have been in 1996/1997.  The Principal had called his mother.
          He said in his asylum interview that they had sex at S's house and
         at school.  I do not find it credible  in  light  of  the  attitude
         towards same sex relationships, that they would  have  indulged  in
         sex at school.  ... "

31. The judge's finding in respect of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant
    engaging in sexual conduct at school was made in the context of all the
    factors set out in the above paragraphs. In Y v SSHD 2006 EWHC 1223 the
    court held that a decision maker was entitled to  regard  a  claimant's
    account as incredible by drawing  on  his  own  common  sense  and  his
    ability as a practical and informed person to identify what was and was
    not plausible but as held at paragraph 27:

         "27 ... he must take care not to do so merely because it would  not
         seem reasonable if it had happened in this country."

32.  It is important to view events from an appellant's point  of  view  in
    the context of the conditions in the country from which he  comes.  The
    judge specifically referred to  the  background  evidence  and  country
    guidance case law.  In  this  case  the  judge  took  into  account  in
    particular the conditions in Pakistan, specifically  attitudes  towards
    homosexuality in assessing the credibility of the appellant's account.

33. It is argued that the judge erred in finding  that  the  appellant  was
    beaten by his father on one occasion only. This is not the  finding  of
    the judge. What  the  judge  found  lacked  credibility  was  that  the
    appellant's father had not returned from Dubai in an 8 year period:

         "39. ...When asked when his fear  began,  he  said  in  2006.   His
         father had been in Dubai and came back and beat him up.  After 2006
         he became increasingly more scared.  However at question 39 he said
         that his mother beat him up, after S's father had beaten  him,  and
         that when his father next came on a visit, he beat him  up.   Given
         that he said that his relationship with S finished in 1998, I  find
         that his father would have visited before 2006, a period  of  eight
         years, given that Dubai is not far from Pakistan."

34. I accept that the appellant's account (although one has to 'read  into'
    what was said in the asylum interview and in his witness  statement  in
    order to discern this) is that he was beaten by his father in 2006  and
    in 1998.  However, I do not consider the judge's (understandable) error
    to be material given the overall findings of the judge and  the  number
    of inconsistencies and lack of credibility in the appellant's account.

35. It is argued that the judge erred in finding it not credible that a  19
    year old boy who had transgressed strict  Islamic  conduct  would  have
    been accompanied by a family member and forced to  attend  the  Mullah.
    The judge made the following credibility finding:

         "40. The appellant claims that his relationship with A  started  in
             2000 and that this was after his mother had  started  to  send
             him to see the Mullah.  The account in respect of A  was  that
             his mother had asked A to take him to the Mullah  as  she  was
             not available and on the second occasion instead of taking him
             to the Mullah had taken him to his home and raped  him.   This
             went on every week.  In the event that his mother had arranged
             the meetings with the Mullah after the S incident in  1998,  I
             find it unlikely that they were  still  continuing  two  years
             later.  In the event  that  he  was  continuing  in  2000  but
             stopped going to the Mullah because A was taking him  home,  I
             find that the Mullah would have informed the mother.   If  the
             appellant were being raped, I do not find it credible that  he
             would have continued going with A.  In 2000 he would have been
             19 and of an age when he would be able to make his own way  to
             appointments and too big  to  be  forced  into  going  with  a
             cousin."

36. The appellant's description of the judge's finding is not accurate. The
    judge found it incredible that the Mullah would not have contacted  the
    appellant's mother when the appellant failed  to  attend  the  arranged
    meetings that were, by the appellant's account,  to  have  been  taking
    place on a weekly basis over a 2 year period. This is a  finding  that,
    on the evidence, was open to the judge.

37. The appellant argued that the judge's adverse finding on the basis that
    the appellant had not provided evidence of membership from any gay  bar
    or club was irrational.

         "43. The appellant said in his statement that when he came here  he
             wanted to be alive, be himself in respect of his sexuality and
             also be free.  He stated that the Home Office  were  aware  of
             the fact that it was a crime in Pakistan if he were  found  to
             have any homosexual relationship and that it was only a matter
             of time, as he lives openly in the UK, that he would be  found
             to be a homosexual.  I  find  this  statement  in  respect  of
             living openly to be inconsistent with the account he has given
             of not telling anyone in the UK in his community  about  being
             gay.  The people he lives with do not  know.   Only  U  and  W
             respectively knew of their relationships with  him.   Although
             he says he met U in a gay club, he has provided no  supporting
             evidence of club membership or from other people he met there.
              He has provided no evidence from any gay bar or club, despite
             now having been in the  UK  for  five  years.   He  could  not
             remember U's other name in  his  interview,  although  he  has
             given the name M in his witness statement.  I do not find that
             he gave a satisfactory explanation for saying in  interview  I
             only knew him as U.  Given the length of  time  he  claims  to
             have been in a relationship (June 2012  to  December  2014)  I
             find it reasonable to expect  him  to  have  evidence  of  the
             relationship for example birthday cards and  photographs.   If
             they met in a gay club, which they both frequented, I  do  not
             find it credible  that  nobody  knew  about  the  relationship
             except them.

         ...

         48.  Although the appellant has been in the UK since 2011 there  is
             no supporting evidence of attendance  at  gay  clubs  or  LGBT
             organisation or even a Gay Pride March until 2015 just  a  few
             months before he claimed asylum.  Apart from W no witness came
             to support his case at the hearing.  There is little  evidence
             of the appellant taking  advantage  of  the  liberal  attitude
             towards homosexuals in this country and of the  gay  scene  in
             London.  For the above reasons the appellant has not satisfied
             me on the lower standard of proof that he is a homosexual."




38. It is clear that the judge was not focused simply on 'membership' of  a
    gay club or bar. The adverse findings were made in the context  of  all
    the evidence set out in the above paragraphs and were  ones  that  were
    open to the judge.

Ground 3

39. The appellant asserts that the  Tribunal's  focus  on  the  appellant's
    illegal status was a key finding in rejecting credibility. In paragraph
    1  the  judge  notes  that  the  appellant's  leave  was  curtailed  on
    24.12.2013 and in paragraph 35 finds he did  not  claim  asylum,  until
    November 2015 'when he was without leave'.  It has been accepted by the
    respondent that this is an error. In fact the appellant had valid leave
    at the time he made his asylum claim. The issue  is  therefore  whether
    that error was material. I do not  accept  the  appellant's  submission
    either that the First-tier Tribunal 'focussed' on the incorrect finding
    about the appellant's status or that it was a key finding in  rejecting
    credibility. The judge's focus at paragraphs 49  and  50  were  on  the
    belated claim for asylum not  on  the  lawfulness  of  the  appellant's
    status in the UK at the time he claimed asylum. The judge recorded:

         "49. The appellant did not claim asylum until  November  2015.   As
         stated before he claimed in his screening interview that he came to
         the UK to claim asylum.  However in his asylum  interview  he  then
         said that he did not know much about it.  In March 2014 U told  him
         about asylum and said that he should apply, when his visa ran  out.
         The appellant did have a visa until November 2015  however  it  was
         curtailed because his sponsor's  licence  was  suspended.   He  got
         another CAS and was then told by the Home Office that he had to  do
         another English test.  Whether or not he thought he had leave until
         November 2015, I do not find that this explains why  he  failed  to
         make an earlier asylum claim, especially as  he  said  he  came  to
         claim asylum.  I note that in his statement he said that, when  the
         UKLGIG told him that the Home Office had suspended the  fast  track
         process, he took immediate  steps  to  claim  asylum.   This  would
         appear to indicate that  he  would  have  remained  in  the  United
         Kingdom illegally.[emphasis added]

         50.  I find that the appellant made efforts to obtain evidence  for
         an asylum claim based on him being  homosexual  before  making  his
         claim.  He provided evidence of visits to  his  GP  from  September
         2015, of attending Naz from  June  2015  and  of  attending  London
         Friend from October 2015.  I find his behaviour falls under Section
         8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act
         2004 and that his credibility  is  damaged.   In  TP  (Credibility)
         Zimbabwe [2004] UKIAT 00159 the Tribunal stated:-

             'The adjudicator was, in the circumstances of this case, fully
             entitled to have regard to  the  immigration  history  of  the
             appellant and in particular the precise circumstances in which
             the claim for asylum was belatedly made and to  conclude  from
             all this that the appellant was a person of no credibility.'

40. It is clear from the above passages that the judge was considering  the
    explanations in respect of determining whether the  delay  in  claiming
    asylum adversely affected his credibility under section 8 of the Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004. The judge  was
    required to take into account explanations for  the  delay.  The  judge
    clearly considered that it was immaterial whether or not he  had  leave
    as  even if he did have leave it did not  explain  the  4  year  delay,
    especially as he said he came to the UK claim asylum. The error of  law
    in finding at paragraph 35 that the appellant did not have valid  leave
    when he claimed asylum was neither the  focus  nor  a  key  finding  in
    respect of credibility. It was not a material error of law.

Ground 4

41. It is  argued  that  the  Tribunal's  treatment  of  the  corroborative
    witness's evidence is irrational and unfair.  In essence  the  argument
    is that in finding that it is consistent with a claim for asylum that W
    would be attending LGBT organisations it was irrational to  reject  the
    appellant's attendance at LGBT community support groups.   I have dealt
    above with the difference in address and the lack of knowledge  of  the
    employment history.

         "44. The appellant has provided photographs of himself with W, whom
             he said he started having a relationship seven to eight months
             before  the  hearing.   There  are  also  photographs  of  him
             attending LGBT  events.   Many  of  the  photographs  appeared
             staged.  He said in his asylum interview that they  met  at  a
             UKLGIG meeting.  He described the relationship as being on and
             off and not consistent.  ...  He also said that  he  had  been
             living with his girlfriend since  April,  five  months  before
             September.  They have had an Islamic marriage and  their  baby
             is due in December...   I note that at the time of the claimed
             relationship, Mr W was waiting for his asylum decision,  which
             was granted in March this year.  This is the same time  it  is
             claimed that the relationship finished and his girlfriend  was
             pregnant.  As someone who was claiming asylum on the basis  of
             his sexuality I find it consistent that he would be  attending
             LGBT organisations...

42. The judge simply noted that it was consistent with a claim  for  asylum
    on the basis of  sexuality  that  a  person  would  be  attending  LGTB
    organisations. This does not indicate that the  judge  considered  that
    this was a factor that would determine whether as a matter of fact that
    a person was homosexual. The judge, in paragraph 48 of the decision, as
    set out above, considered that 'Although the appellant has been in  the
    UK since 2011 there is no supporting  evidence  of  attendance  at  gay
    clubs or LGBT organisation or even a Gay Pride March until 2015 just  a
    few months before he claimed asylum.'  There  is  no  irrationality  or
    unfairness in the judge's treatment of  W's  evidence.  The  judge  was
    entitled  to  take  into  account  the  very  recent  attendance   when
    evaluating the appellant's evidence of attending LGTB organisations  as
    probative of the appellant's claim.

43. There was no appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's findings on Human
    Rights.

44. There were  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.



Notice of decision

There were no material errors of law on the First-tier Tribunal's  decision.
The decision of the Secretary of State therefore stands.







Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 7 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
