
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04436/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 January 2017                         |On 08 February 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                                Miss K ESHUN
                        A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                   Between

                                     F D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kerr, Counsel instructed by Karis Solicitors
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 20 March  2000.   He  has
    been granted permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Monson  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  26
    September 2016, dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of
    the Secretary of State to recognise him as  a  refugee  on  account  of
    being the victim of a blood feud.

2.   Permission was granted to the appellant on the  basis  that  the  judge
    erred in  his  approach  to  the  request  by  the  respondent  for  an
    adjournment for  approximately  two  months  in  order  to  verify  the
    genuineness  of  a  court  decision  issued  in  Albania,   purportedly
    confirming the murder conviction of the  appellant's  father.   In  his
    decision refusing the adjournment request, the judge held  that  whilst
    the request was a reasonable one, it only went to a peripheral issue in
    the case, which was whether there had been an event in the  past  which
    might have triggered a blood feud.  Even  if  the  court  document  was
    authenticated, the Tribunal was not going to be any wiser as to whether
    there was an active blood feud in consequence of the two  murders,  for
    which RD (the appellant's father) had been  punished  by  the  Albanian
    state.  The grounds argued that rather than being  peripheral,  if  the
    veracity of the court document could be verified, this went  towards  a
    central  issue  of  the  appellant's  case,  providing  proof  of   the
    provenance of the blood feud.

3.   Mr Kerr relied on these grounds to argue that the judge's  decision  to
    refuse the adjournment request was an error of law.

4.   Mr Kerr identified a further error which he said was committed  by  the
    judge.  This was in respect of paragraph 51 of the  determination.   In
    that  paragraph  the  judge  had  relied  on  the  court  document   as
    undermining the credibility of the appellant's core claim.  The  reason
    being that one of the claims made in  the  certificates  was  that  the
    appellant's father was not apprehended by the police following the  two
    murders, but managed to evade arrest with the consequence that  he  was
    tried and convicted in absentia.  The judge found that this proposition
    was undermined by the defendant being represented by a defence  lawyer.
    The court  document  referred  to  the  defendant's  current  place  of
    residence.  The judge found that  it  was  not  credible  that  if  the
    defendant was being tried and convicted in absentia, the court document
    would not have recorded this.

5.   Mr Kerr argued that the appellant  was  not  asked  about  whether  his
    father was tried in absentia.  This was not a matter  that  was  raised
    with the appellant's Counsel in court.  The judge erred in  not  giving
    the appellant an opportunity to respond to this point.

6.   Mr Kerr raised a third issue which he argued was Robinson  obvious  and
    which had not been part of the appellant's grounds of appeal.  This was
    in relation to a report from the British  Embassy  in  Tirana  dated  2
    March 2016 which was referred to in the refusal letter.  The HOPO below
    sought permission to adduce this report  but  the  appellant's  Counsel
    below said it should not be submitted into evidence.  The  judge  ruled
    in favour of the appellant's Counsel and excluded the report.  Mr  Kerr
    argued that in the circumstances the judge was wrong at paragraph 56 to
    consider the report by the British Embassy as being entirely  congruent
    with the appellant's own case, namely that his mother  and  sister  are
    not confined, and never have been, because  they  are  women;  and  his
    maternal uncle, ND, was not living in confinement, and never has  been.
    Mr Kerr argued that the judge's consideration of the excluded  document
    went to the heart of  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    credibility.

7.   Mr Staunton relied on the Secretary of State's  Rule  24  response  and
    submitted that the judge did not materially err in law in his decision.



8.   The appellant's core claim is that he was only 4 or 5 months  old  when
    his father was killed.  His father was involved  in  an  argument  with
    members of the Peka and Muca families and ended up killing  one  member
    of each family.   His  father  was  charged  with  murder  and  he  was
    convicted of this crime by the court.  His father ran away but  he  was
    tracked down by the police who shot him and  killed  him,  rather  than
    arrest him.  His mother had told him the story.  Not satisfied with his
    father's death, the Peka and Muca families now wanted to kill him.   He
    was threatened that he would be killed at the age of  16  years.   This
    was Kanun law.  As the only male member of his family, his life was  in
    immediate danger.  He said in oral evidence that he was  threatened  on
    two occasions by members of the two families; the  first  when  was  12
    years old and the second when was 14 years  old.   Since  then  he  had
    feared them.

9.   In support of his appeal the appellant submitted three documents.   The
    first document was a decision in open court by the Kukes District Court
    on 17 June 1998, at the conclusion of a criminal prosecution of RD (his
    father).  RD was  found  guilty  of  premeditated  murder,  intentional
    homicide and illegal possession of weapons and sentenced to  25  years'
    imprisonment.

10.  The second document was a certificate dated 25  July  2015  purportedly
    issued in Krume, Has Municipality, by the  Mayor  of  Has  and  by  the
    village chairman whose name the judge noted was ND (the same surname as
    the appellant's surname).  The document certified  that  the  appellant
    was born on 20 March 2000 and was the son of RD.  The document said the
    appellant had been forced to leave his family because his family was in
    a blood feud with the Peka family due to the  dispute  of  the  moment,
    from which the Peka family suffered casualties.  As a result his father
    had been sentenced by a court decision  in  absentia  to  25  years  in
    prison.  On 21 August 2000 he was killed in the courtyard of  his  home
    as the police special forces tried to arrest him.  The judge noted that
    the document continued to say that "traumatised by the fear of  revenge
    from the Peka family, his son ... was forced to remain locked into  the
    house for a long time but later he left his home".    The  judge  noted
    that the certificate concluded with the declaration that it was  issued
    "at the request of the interested party".

11.  The third document was  a  certificate  dated  3  May  2016  which  was
    purportedly  issued  by  the  Golaj   Village   Elder's   Office,   Has
    Municipality.  The judge noted that the document was signed and  sealed
    by ND, the same ND who signed the other certificate, and by  the  mayor
    of Has.  The appellant in evidence said that ND was his paternal uncle.
     The document certified that following the incident  in  1997  when  RD
    killed the son of Rexhep Peka and his nephew, the whole of  the  family
    was, according to the Kanun, forced to confine themselves within  their
    house.  On 20 August 2000 RD was killed by police special forces.   His
    family,  including  small  children,  "remain  without   support"   and
    "confined within the house".  RD was only  5  months  old.   From  that
    date, until he turned 14, the child according  to  the  Kanun  had  the
    right to get out of the house.  So during that period he  continued  to
    go to school as part of his compulsory education.  When  he  became  14
    years old, FD, due to the circumstances and the Kanun,  was  forced  to
    stay indoors because of the blood feud.  As he could not go  to  school
    and had become incapable of helping his mother and sister, FD had  fled
    home to travel to the west, arriving in the United Kingdom.  From  1997
    to this day, the family of FD was confined within their house.

12.  The judge's findings are  set  out  at  paragraphs  50  to  61  of  the
    determination.

13.  I take the first ground of appeal which argued that the judge erred  in
    determining that the  issue  of  the  blood  feud  was  peripheral  and
    consequently refused the adjournment by the  HOPO  below  to  have  the
    court document verified.  I can accept that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    refuse the adjournment request on the basis that verification only went
    to a peripheral issue, which was whether there had been an event in the
    past which might have triggered a blood feud.  This is because a  blood
    feud by its very nature is triggered by  a  past  event,  such  as  the
    killing of the members of the Peka and Muca families by the appellant's
    father if the court document was indeed genuine.  As  it  happens,  the
    judge did accept at paragraph 58 that the appellant was the  son  of  a
    convicted murderer, RD.  The question that arose, which  was  correctly
    identified by the judge, was whether RD's conviction  for  murder  gave
    rise to a credible claim of a blood feud, by which the  Peka  and  Muca
    families wished to exact their revenge on the appellant by  seeking  to
    kill him.

14.  The judge found that  in  one  important  respect  the  court  document
    undermined the credibility of the appellant's core claim.  One  of  the
    claims made in the certificate was that the appellant's father was  not
    apprehended by the police following the two  murders,  but  managed  to
    evade arrest with the consequence that he was tried  and  convicted  in
    absentia.  The judge found that this position  was  undermined  by  the
    defendant RD being represented by a defence lawyer.  The court document
    referred  to  the  defendant's  current  place   of   residence.    The
    combination  of  these  two  features  pointed  very  strongly  to  the
    defendant being in custody and being present at the trial.  He found in
    the circumstances it was not credible that if the defendant  was  being
    tried and convicted in absentia, the  court  document  would  not  have
    recorded this.

15.  This brings into play the second ground raised by Mr  Kerr,  which  was
    that the issue of the defendant being tried and convicted  in  absentia
    would not have been recorded on the court document.  Mr Kerr  submitted
    that this issue was not raised with the appellant or  his  Counsel.   I
    find no error of  law  in  the  judge's  interpretation  of  the  court
    document.  The judge was not wrong to take the  document  at  its  face
    value and make the findings that he did.

16.  The judge said that this in turn cast serious doubt  on  the  next  key
    event  in  the  alleged  unfolding  of  the  blood  feud,  namely   the
    appellant's father being killed by the police when attempting to arrest
    him at the family home in August 2000.  The judge accepted  the  HOPO's
    submission that there was no death certificate  that  showed  that  the
    appellant's  father  was  dead,  let  alone  when  he  died,   or   the
    circumstances of his death.  He went on to say that if the  core  claim
    was true, the event would have been a matter of considerable  notoriety
    and  widespread  public  interest.   The  appellant's  mother  has  not
    produced any article  from  a  local  or  national  Albanian  newspaper
    reporting the alleged death of the appellant's father at the  hands  of
    the police in August 2000.  I find no error of law in these findings as
    they are reasonable and sustainable.

17.  The final argument made by Mr Kerr was that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    consider the report from the British Embassy  in  Tirana  when  he  had
    earlier excluded it.

18.  I accept that the judge was wrong to consider a document  that  he  had
    excluded.  Nevertheless, I find that the error does not  undermine  the
    judge's findings at paragraph 56.  The judge found that it was not true
    that when he became 14 years old, he was forced to stay indoors because
    of the blood feud.  It was not true that he  stopped  going  to  school
    because of the blood feud.  His departure from Albania  coincided  with
    the end of the academic year, and the appellant did not suggest in  his
    asylum interview that he stopped  school  prematurely  because  of  the
    blood feud.  The judge noted a further unclear truth in the certificate
    which was the claim that from 1997 to the present day the family of  FD
    have been confined within their  house.   Nobody  has  been  or  is  in
    confinement, on the appellant's case.  It was thus  illogical  for  the
    appellant to contest the accuracy of what is reported  in  the  refusal
    letter, namely that no-one in his family is  in  confinement.   I  find
    that the judge's findings are sustainable on the evidence.

19.  I found a further  discrepancy  which  was  fatal  to  the  appellant's
    claim.  It was recorded at  paragraph  15  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant had said in his Statement of Evidence that the Peka and  Muca
    families had beaten up his paternal uncle's son.   However, in his oral
    evidence, recorded at paragraph 25, it  was  his  father's  brother  FD
    (same surname as the appellant, but different first name) who had  been
    beaten up by Behar Peka.  Counsel took instructions from the  appellant
    on this matter.  The appellant's response was that the term "cousin" is
    a catchall word which encompasses family or siblings of his father.   I
    did not find  the  explanation  credible.   The  inconsistent  evidence
    totally undermined the credibility of the appellant's  claim.   Indeed,
    there was a further credibility issue. At paragraph 15 it  is  recorded
    that his father had approached the Peka and Muca families to  find  out
    why, an argument unfolded in which his father shot  a  member  of  each
    family.  Whereas at paragraph 25, it is recorded  that  at  a  location
    known as the town of Krume's crossroad, his father had seen the  victim
    in a private bar.  He then stopped and fired at him several times  with
    is automatic weapon.  The other victim Edmir Muca happened to be at the
    scene and was shot dead.  There was no evidence of an argument  between
    the victim and the appellant's father  prior  to  the  shooting.    The
    inconsistency with respect to the  shooting  of  the  two  men  further
    undermined the credibility of the appellant's claim.

20.  I find no error of law in the judge's decision.  The  judge's  decision
    dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date:  3 February 2017

Miss K Eshun
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

