
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04861/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 June 2021                               |On 13 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Hashmi
For the Respondent: Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1983. He appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 3 May 2019 dismissing his international  protection  and  human
    rights claim  following  the  making  of  a  deportation  order.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Canavan, in a decision promulgated on 19 November  2019,
    found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 28 August 2019
    should be set aside. There has been a substantial delay in listing  the
    resumed hearing as a result of the coronavirus pandemic.

 2. At the resumed hearing, which took place face to face at Bradford on 25
    June 2021 with the Presenting Officer, Mr Bates,  appearing  via  video
    link, I told that the parties that  I  intended  to  allow  the  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision and gave my reasons. I shall,
    therefore, be brief in reiterating those reasons now.

 3. I heard evidence from the appellant who spoke in  Kurdish  Sorani  with
    the assistance of interpreter. The  burden  of  proof  remains  on  the
    appellant. The standard of  proof  is  whether  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that the appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution or ill treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR if returned  to
    Iraq.

 4. The parties accept that the appellant has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 2001. He told me that the he lost  contact  completely  with  his
    family in Iraq some years ago. Notwithstanding that the  appellant  had
    been found by a previous Tribunal (in 2004) to have been untruthful,  I
    accept that, after a very considerable lapse of time  (20  years),  the
    appellant is no longer in touch with his close family.  I  accept  that
    the appellant is also not in touch with members  of  his  wider  family
    although it is possible he might, with some effort,  establish  contact
    with them.

 5. The protection appeal turns  on  whether  the  appellant  (who  has  no
    currently valid travel or identity documents with  him  in  the  United
    Kingdom) could re-document himself so that he would be able  to  access
    the Kurdish region of Iraq from Baghdad (whither he will  be  returned)
    so as to avoid suffering conditions which would breach Article  3  ECHR
    (see SMO, KSP and IM (Article 15(c);identity documents) Iraq CG [20199]
    UKUT 400). The background material indicates that, in  the  appellant's
    home area of Iraq, a new identity document (the INID) is replacing  the
    CSID. To obtain an INID, the appellant needs to be  physically  present
    at a registration centre in order to provide biometric information. The
    country  guidance  clearly  shows  that  he  cannot,  without  identity
    documents, safely reach his home area from Baghdad. Mr Bates  submitted
    that some registration centres may be still be issuing  CSID  and  that
    distant family members might help  him  to  re-document.  I  find  that
    submission fails when submitted to the test of  reasonable  likelihood.
    It is not reasonably likely either that the appellant would be able  to
    find a centre which continues to issue CSIDs whilst  I  do  not  accept
    that he would be able to contact and then persuade a  non-close  family
    member to go to the  considerable  trouble  of  obtaining  a  CSID  and
    sending it to the appellant in the United Kingdom. Without  a  CSID  in
    his possession before he enters Baghdad, the appellant would be exposed
    to risk. For that reason, I find that his Article 3 ECHR appeal must be
    allowed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 3 May 2019 is allowed on human rights (Article 3  ECHR)  grounds.
    It is dismissed on all other grounds.


         Signed                              Date 30 June 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

