


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04379/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 July 2019                      |On 17 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     M H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr U Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant first sought asylum in the UK  on  31  July  2007.   That
    claim was unsuccessfully exhausted in  various  proceedings.   He  made
    further representations on 12 September 2017, saying he had nothing  to
    add to his previous  claim,  but  would  be  at  risk  because  he  has
    converted from Islam to Christianity.

 2. The respondent rejected the claim on 8 March 2018, declining to  accept
    that  the  appellant  had  "genuinely  converted",  or  that  he  would
    evangelise on return (paragraph 34).

 3. FtT Judge Buchanan dismissed the appellant's appeal to  the  FtT  by  a
    decision promulgated on 15 May 2018, finding  at  paragraph  8.38  that
    "... the appellant's involvement in Christianity is not  by  reason  of
    any true faith, but is founded on a desire to remain in the UK."

 4. By a decision dated 18 June 2018, FtT Judge Keane  declined  to  extend
    time for applying for permission to appeal to the UT, and did not admit
    the application.

 5. By a decision dated 20 September 2018, UT Judge Rintoul  extended  time
    and admitted the application for permission, but refused permission.

 6. The appellant sought judicial review of the decision  of  20  September
    2018, founding on TF and MA v SSHD [2018]  CSIH  58,  dated  30  August
    2018, which of course had not been available to the FtT.   Counsel  for
    the parties entered into a joint minute:

          "...

          2.  They consider that the UT ...  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
          adequately consider the ...  ground  of  appeal  relating  to  the
          treatment of the evidence of Reverend Margaret Johnston.

          3.  They consider that there are compelling reasons  to  interfere
          with the decision of the UT ... in light of  ...  TF  and  MA  ...
          Where the decision of the UT is inconsistent with an authority  of
          a higher court (TF and MA) this constitutes  a  compelling  reason
          for the Court to interfere ..."

 7. The Court accordingly reduced the decision of the UT.

 8. By a decision dated 22 May 2019, the Vice President of the  UT  granted
    permission to appeal to the UT, in light of  the  Court's  interlocutor
    and of the joint minute.

 9. Mr Aslam submitted that the FtT erred in law,  and  that  its  decision
    should be set aside and the case should be remitted for fresh hearing.

10. Mr Diwyncz submitted that the FtT was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's apparent conversion was not sincere,  and  while  that  was
    often a difficult matter to determine, the grounds of appeal were  only
    disagreement with factual findings, and did not show error on any point
    of law.

11. Mr Aslam in reply said that the FtT did not  analyse  the  evidence  of
    Reverend Johnston in the way required by TF and MA.

12. I reserved my decision.

13. The submission of Mr Diwyncz is plausible,  as  far  as  it  goes,  but
    difficult to reconcile with the position taken by the respondent in the
    Court, and he did not attempt to show that the decision of the  FtT  is
    consistent with TF and MA.

14. I find that the FtT's approach to the independent evidence of a  church
    witness, by reference to the later authority of TF  and  MA,  erred  in
    such a way that its decision falls to be set aside.

15. The decision of the FtT stands only as a record of what was said at the
    hearing.  The nature of the case is such that it is  appropriate  under
    section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to  remit
    to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.  The  member(s)  of  the  FtT
    chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Buchanan.

16. The appellant's representatives have indicated  that  they  "intend  to
    rely upon the Church of Scotland Act 1921",  apparently  to  re-run  an
    argument which was rejected by the FtT.  Parties should be aware of  an
    unreported decision of the UT.  As such, it is of course  not  binding,
    but it may be  permissible  to  refer  to  it.   The  case  is  readily
    available on the tribunal website,  PA/07454/2017,  promulgated  on  13
    December 2018.

17. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


            [pic]


            12 July 2019
            UT Judge Macleman




