
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04524/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 9 January 2020                    |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    S. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    French promulgated on 19 July 2019 in which the Appellant's  protection
    appeal was dismissed.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Tunisia.   He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom clandestinely on 16 July 2018 at which point he  was  15  years
    and 9 months old.  An application for asylum was  made  on  18  October
    2018.

3.    The  core  of  the  Appellant's  claim  was  based  on   having   been
    conceived/born out of wedlock, and the difficulties he said had  arisen
    in consequence from members of his mother's family.  It is  appropriate
    to note that during the course of his asylum  interview  the  Appellant
    was seemingly unable to give any great detail  or  particulars  of  the
    nature of the difficulties that his mother had experienced by reason of
    having him out of wedlock.  Be that as  it  may,  the  Respondent  gave
    consideration to all aspects of the Appellant's claim: the core account
    was not accepted; however, in  circumstances  where  the  Secretary  of
    State felt she could not be satisfied in respect  of  arrangements  for
    reception upon return, it was decided  that  the  Appellant  should  be
    granted a period of discretionary leave in accordance  with  policy  in
    respect of unaccompanied asylum seeking children.

4.   The Appellant appealed the refusal of his protection claim to the  IAC.



5.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out  in  the  decision  of
    Judge French.

6.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal which was granted on  28
    August 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach.

7.   Before me this morning Mr Mills on behalf of the  Respondent  does  not
    seek to resist the Appellant's challenge. He concedes that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed for error of law such that  it  is
    required to be set aside and the Appellant be afforded  an  opportunity
    of putting his case again to a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

8.   The Respondent's concession is  essentially  made  on  the  basis  that
    there is no clear indication in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    as to the approach to be taken in analysing the evidence  of  a  minor.
    Necessarily the Appellant was a minor at the time of  the  events  upon
    which he relies and in those circumstances a degree of caution needs to
    be taken to the manner in which he is able to recall such  events.   He
    was also a minor when he was interviewed and was a minor at the  appeal
    hearing; this should inform any consideration of the manner in which he
    is able to relate events.

9.   Mr Mills identifies in particular one example  where  the  caution  and
    approach to the evidence of a  minor  does  not  appear  to  have  been
    accorded any consideration or  due  weight.   At  paragraph  6  of  the
    Decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  refers  to  the  Appellant's
    failure to claim asylum en  route  to  the  United  Kingdom;  Mr  Mills
    acknowledges that reliance upon such a circumstance given the Appellant
    was only 15 years old during the journey  to  the  United  Kingdom  was
    inappropriate.

10.  I do not go behind the concession made by the  Secretary  of  State  in
    this regard.  The consequence is that the evaluation by  the  Judge  of
    the Appellant's overall claim is flawed to an extent that it cannot  be
    allowed to stand.  It is common  ground  between  the  parties,  and  I
    agree, that the appropriate remedy is for the decision in the appeal to
    be remade before the First-tier Tribunal by a different Judge with  all
    issues at large.



Notice of Decision

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

12.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge French  with
    all issues at large.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 20 January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

