
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04049/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th March 2019                        |On 21st March 2019                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [R S]
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes (Counsel), Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mather, promulgated on 9th November 2018, following a hearing  at
    Manchester on 22nd October  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Russia,  and  was  born  on  1st
    January 1992.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 26th February  2018,  refusing  his  claim  to
    asylum and humanitarian protection pursuant to  paragraph  339C  of  HC
    395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he  worked  at  the  Chernobyl  Plant  in
    Russia.  He was  exposed  to  radiation  after  the  Chernobyl  nuclear
    disaster in April 1986.  His father also worked at the Chernobyl Plant.
     He was arrested together with his friend and jailed for two  or  three
    years when his father  was  accused  of  allegedly  financing  unlawful
    military units.  After his release his father had no problems with  the
    Russian authorities until December 2016 when he was abducted in Grozny,
    by Chechen security forces.  The Appellant did not report his  father's
    kidnapping to the police as the people who took his father told him not
    to do so.  Following his father's kidnapping,  the  Appellant  and  his
    family experienced financial  difficulties.   On  9th  March  2017  the
    Appellant was abducted by five or six men in black uniforms, similar to
    those who had abducted his father, and he was driven by a  vehicle  for
    some twenty minutes to a wet basement where he was beaten and tortured.
     He has scars on his elbows and inside his arms.  He was then  detained
    a second time at night at the end  of  August  2017.   He  secured  his
    release by the  payment  of  a  bribe.   Two  weeks  later  his  friend
    contacted him to tell him that there was an  order  that  he  would  be
    killed if he was detained again.  The Appellant  travelled  to  Moscow.
    He stayed some two weeks  there  with  a  cousin.   He  then  left  the
    country.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the medical report  by  Mr  Graham  Johnson,  a
    consultant in accident and emergency medicine at St James's  University
    Hospital in Leeds (see paragraphs 16(i) to  (j)).   There  was  also  a
    report before the judge from Mr Robert Chenciner, and he concluded  (at
    paragraph 16(k)) that the Appellant was perceived  by  the  authorities
    because Ramzan Kadyrov, who is charge of Chechnya,  has  threatened  to
    destroy families  of  terrorists.   This  expert  had  also  said  that
    sufficiency of protection was not  available  because  Chechnya  was  a
    police dictatorship.  It was further stated  by  the  expert  that  the
    Appellant was able to leave Russia because he had not been charged with
    terrorism or murder or any other criminal offence.  He had left  Russia
    on a routine student visa.  Since then, if he  had  been  charged  with
    murder or assisting terrorism, then there would be local wanted  notice
    in Grozny against him.  The judge observed  how  it  was  stated  that,
    "even if there was not a wanted notice, then as a recognisable  Chechen
    may return from UK with his visa expired, he  would  be  questioned  on
    arrival and the security people would contact the FSB in  Grozny  which
    would result in him being detained" (paragraph 16(k)).

 5. The judge then went on to come to firm findings of fact under a section
    headed "Conclusions", in which the judge stated that she accepted  that
    the  Appellant  was  a  credible  witness,  accepted  the   conclusions
    contained in the reports of Mr Johnson and Mr Chenciner (paragraph 19),
    and accepted that the Appellant had been  persecuted  in  the  past  in
    Russia (paragraph 20).

Grounds of Application

 6. The  grounds  of  application  simply  state  that  in  coming  to  her
    conclusions, the judge had failed to give  any  reasons  at  all.   The
    conclusions reached at paragraphs 18 to 21, (with  the  latter  stating
    that the Appellant had discharged the burden of proof), simply provided
    no reasoned basis for these conclusions.   That  being  so,  the  judge
    erred in law.

 7. On 5th December 2018 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    it was arguable that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons  and
    that specifically, there was no explanation as to why  the  Appellant's
    account is accepted and nor any reasons for  why  the  extra  witnesses
    were accepted at face value.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Tan, appearing on behalf of the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, submitted that he could do no better than to  refer
    to the grounds of application.  This was a case where the judge had not
    addressed, by way of reasons, the main points that were  in  contention
    in the appeal before the Tribunal.  He submitted that  there  were  two
    halves to a decision.  One half was to do  with  the  medical  evidence
    which the judge set out.  The other half in this case, however, was  to
    do with the reasons, and in this respect, the judge had failed to  give
    adequate reasons for coming to the conclusions that she did.

 9. For his part, Mr Holmes, submitted that there was no challenge  to  the
    medical evidence.  That being so, the judge was entitled to take it  as
    it stood.  If that evidence was taken into account, then  what  it  did
    was to paint a picture of the Appellant coming from Chechnya, which was
    controlled by Ramzan Kadyrov, where even without a "wanted notice",  he
    would be recognisable as a Chechen male returning from the UK with  his
    visa expired, and that would lead to his being detained and mistreated.
     That was a conclusion that the judge was entitled to reach  given  the
    objective evidence that was before her.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of a error on a point of law  (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This is a case where the  judge,
    having set out the evidence before her in meticulous detail,  and  with
    care and completeness, nevertheless, failed to provide reasons for  the
    conclusions that were reached.  When the judge states that,  "I  accept
    the Appellant to be a credible witness" (paragraph 18), no reasons  are
    given for this.  When the judge states that, "I accept the  conclusions
    contained in the reports of Mr Johnson and Mr Chenciner  for  the  same
    reasons given by them" (paragraph 19), the judge neglects in  providing
    a reasoned basis herself for the acceptance of these  reports.   It  is
    well-established that it is "necessary for First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    to identify and resolve the key conflicts in the evidence  and  explain
    in clear and brief terms their reasons for preferring one case  to  the
    other so that the parties can understand why they  have  won  or  lost"
    (see Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  00341).   The
    failure by the judge to do so in this case amounts to an error of law.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remake
    the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge  C.  Mather,
    pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2.(b) because the nature or extent  of
    any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for the  decision
    in the appeal  to  be  remade  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

12. An anonymity order is made.

13. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th March 2019



