
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04299/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 17 June 2019                      |On 20 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between


  MJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vokes, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of  Iraq  who  was  born  in  1994.  He
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 18 March 2018  refusing  his  application  for
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 May 2018, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. During the course of submissions, Mrs  Aboni  that  told  me  that  the
    Secretary of State considered that the decision of the judge was flawed
    by legal error. I am grateful to her for that indication  and  grateful
    to both representatives for their helpful submissions. In the light  of
    the respondent's indication, my reasons shall be brief.

 3. I agree  with  the  submission  of  Mr  Vokes,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, that the country guidance case of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA  Civ
    944 should have been the judge's starting point  for  the  analysis  of
    risk on return to Iraq. The Practice Direction at 12.4 provides that  a
    judge is likely to fall into legal error if reasons are not  shown  for
    the departing from existing country guidance. Although the judge refers
    to AA (Iraq) at [79], no attempt has been by  the  judge  to  apply  or
    consider the  guidance  save  for  what  she  says  regarding  internal
    relocation at [95]. The judge departs fundamentally  from  the  country
    guidance by placing reliance upon the recent CPIN at [76] but makes  no
    reference to it in that part of her  analysis.  Moreover,  judge  notes
    that the CPIN indicates that conditions in Kirkuk no longer breach  the
    threshold of Article 15 (c) protection but overlooks the fact that  the
    appellant claims that he is from Tuz which is a drive of at  least  one
    hour from Kirkuk. Is not clear that the  judge  has  properly  assessed
    risk in the appellant's actual home area before moving on  to  consider
    the internal flight alternative.

 4. As regards the internal flight alternative, she makes  further  errors.
    The appellant does not possess a CSID but it is quite unclear from  the
    judge's analysis how exactly the appellant  is  expected  to  go  about
    obtaining a replacement. The first sentence of [77] is obscure although
    it appears to relate to the availability of direct flights to Erbil. At
    [78],  the  judge  appears  to  agree  with  the  presenting  officer's
    submission that the 'appellant could go to one of the  offices  of  the
    contested area to obtain [a CSID] ... He would not need his  mother  or
    uncle to do this.'  At [80] however,  judge  says  that  'there  is  no
    satisfactory evidence that he cannot contact identify  the  details  to
    allow his CSI data be issued and I finally has family  rather  contacts
    would be able to assist him (sic).' Quite apart from the obvious  lapse
    in proofreading, it is not clear whether the judge  believes  that  the
    appellant does or does not require the assistance of family members  in
    Iraq to assist him in obtaining  a  new  identity  document.  There  is
    further  confusion  regarding  the  appellant's  ability  to  obtain  a
    replacement card from the Iraqi embassy in London. At [86],  the  judge
    says that she  does  'not  find  the  appellant  is  unable  to  obtain
    documents' (the resort two double negatives  throughout  this  decision
    does not assist its clarity) and  she  finds  that  the  appellant  can
    'contact his embassy to make enquiries about the passport and ID card.'
    Any reader of this decision will be left entirely  unclear  as  of  the
    reasons why the judge believes that  the  appellant  will  be  able  to
    obtain a new card without exposing himself to a real risk in Iraq.

 5. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision. None of the findings of
    factual stand. I am aware that the errors in the  decision  which  have
    been identified in the judge's decision concern the  analysis  of  risk
    rather than credibility but the errors are so extensive that I consider
    it necessary for there to be a determination of  the  appeal  de  novo.
    That task is better undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal to which this
    appeal is now returned for that Tribunal to remake the decision.  As  I
    mentioned to Mr Vokes, the next Tribunal will be assisted  by  evidence
    concerning the appellant's efforts to obtain a  replacement  CSID  from
    the Iraqi Embassy. Both parties may rely upon  fresh  evidence  at  the
    next hearing provided copies of  any  documentary  evidence  (including
    witness statements) are sent to  the  other  party  and  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal at least 10 days before the next hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 11 May  2018  is  set
aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is  returned  to
the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
