
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04458/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th September, 2017 and           |On 26th September 2017                |
|Signed and sent to                    |                                      |
|Promulgation 25th                     |                                      |
|September 2017.                       |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                            Nabard Aram Mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 25th December  1968.



2.   The appellant  left  Iraq  by  bus  in  August  2015,  and  from  there
    travelled to Turkey where he remained for a  week.   From  Turkey,  the
    appellant walked by foot to Bulgaria with the help of  an  agent.   The
    appellant was detained in Bulgaria for some fifteen days, but following
    his release he then went to  Serbia.   From  Serbia,  he  travelled  to
    Hungary where he remained for a couple of days,  after  which  time  he
    then went to Croatia.  The appellant then travelled to Austria  passing
    through Germany and on to France where he remained for two and  a  half
    months.  Whilst he was in France an agent put him in a lorry to come to
    the United Kingdom.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on  4th  December
    2015, and claimed asylum on being arrested by Kent Police.

3.   The Secretary of State considered and  refused  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum on 16th April 2016.  At the same time, a decision  was  made
    to remove the appellant as an illegal  entrant  by  way  of  directions
    under paragraphs 8 - 10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

4.   The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bircher at Manchester on 6th February 2017.

5.   The basis to the appellant's claim for asylum involved his  father  who
    owned a shop.  His father attended the mosque every day to pray and  on
    25th May, 2014, his father  was  killed  by  ISIS.   A  suicide  bomber
    exploded a device killing the appellant's father and other  victims  in
    the neighbourhood.

6.   The appellant's father was blamed for the  explosion,  because  he  was
    known to be a religious man.  Following his father's death,  ISIS  sent
    letters to the appellant on two occasions  inviting  him  to  join  the
    organisation, but he refused.

7.   The appellant claimed to be fearful of ISIS because he refused to  join
    their organisation and he also fears people in Jalawla, his home  area,
    because his father  was  thought  to  have  caused  the  explosion  and
    relatives of the dead would wish to extract revenge  for  the  loss  of
    their loved ones on the appellant.

8.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, but for  reasons  she
    sets out in her determination, she did not find  the  appellant  to  be
    credible.  The judge did not believe  that  members  of  the  community
    would have believed the appellant's father to  be  a  terrorist/suicide
    bomber given that he owned a shop in the neighbourhood, was known to be
    a religious and peaceful man and was known to many.  Given that he  was
    so well-known and respected in the community, the judge found  that  it
    was simply not credible that the neighbourhood should conclude that the
    appellant's father was the bomber.  The judge also  believed  that  the
    account of the explosion  which  allegedly  killed  his  father  lacked
    detail.

9.   The judge also found that it was not credible that ISIS  would  attempt
    to recruit the appellant by means of  delivering  two  letters  to  his
    home.  If ISIS had been intent on recruiting the  appellant,  then  the
    judge believed, they would have used greater force and would  have  had
    face to face meetings with him.

10.  The judge did not accept  the  appellant  had  lost  all  contact  with
    family members in Iraq  and  in  particular  with  the  uncle  who  had
    assisted him to travel  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  had
    confirmed at his interview that he did hold in Iraq the necessary civil
    status ID and nationality certificate, but claimed that he lost them on
    his travels to the United Kingdom.  In answer to a question put to  him
    during his asylum interview, he acknowledged that he could  go  to  the
    Iraqi Embassy and ask for a replacement  of  these  documents,  if  the
    Iraqi Embassy are able to do that.

11.  The judge found that the appellant  could  return  to  his  home  area,
    because Jalawla has now been liberated from ISIS.  As  an  alternative,
    he could also return to the  IKR  via  Baghdad.   The  judge  said,  at
    paragraph 48 that he need not necessarily return  to  IKR  via  Baghdad
    given that there are commercial  and  international  flights  from  the
    United Kingdom via Turkey to places such as Erbil and Sulaymania.  As a
    Kurd, he would be able to go to the IKR for a  limited  period  of  ten
    days during which time he could try and find employment.  At  paragraph
    50 of the determination, the judge said that there was  no  reason  why
    the  appellant  could  not  approach  the  United  Kingdom  based   IKR
    authorities to legitimise his entry on  arrival,  or  make  appropriate
    enquiries to secure ID.  The judge said that by his  own  admission  at
    his substantive  interview  the  appellant  recognised  that  he  could
    approach the Iraqi Embassy in the United Kingdom to secure  replacement
    documents.

12.   The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  maintains  he  suffers   from
    depression, back, joint and leg ache, but there was little  by  way  of
    medical evidence to demonstrate  that  these  were  serious  conditions
    impacting heavily on his day-to-day living.  The judge found that there
    was no reason why the appellant could not return to Iraq.  He would  be
    able to return to his home area or internally relocate within Iraq away
    from his home area and ISIS without relocation being unduly harsh.

13.  Dissatisfied with the judge's decision, the appellant  sought  and  was
    granted leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In granting leave First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale said this:-

         "4.  However, it is arguable that the judge erred in  finding  that
             the appellant would not be returned via Baghdad in  the  light
             of AA.  It is also arguable that the judge failed to  consider
             whether the appellant would be admitted to the IKR and  failed
             to assess the reasonableness of relocation to Baghdad.  Ground
             2 is arguable.  It is also arguable that the judge  failed  to
             consider the appellant's Article 8 claim  regarding  paragraph
             276ADE."

14.  Mr Howard, who appeared on behalf of the appellant, accepted  that  the
    second ground really stood or fell with the first ground and he did not
    address me on it.  He told me that return would be to Baghdad, but  the
    appellant does not have the necessary identity documents.   Those  that
    he did have he lost en route to the  United  Kingdom.   The  issue  was
    whether or not it would be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  return  to
    Baghdad.  Mr Howard accepted that the appellant was  not  found  to  be
    credible and that the judge found that he had lied about the  death  of
    his uncle being killed.  He asked me to bear in mind that the appellant
    is a Sunni Muslim who has little education and suffers from depression,
    back, joint and leg ache.  In deciding whether or not it  would  unduly
    harsh for him to pass through Baghdad, the fact  that  he  is  a  Sunni
    Muslim has limited education and has medical conditions all need to  be
    factored in with the issue that he has no identity documents.

15.  While the judge seemed to believe that the appellant acknowledged  that
    he could go to the Iraqi Embassy and ask for replacement documents,  Mr
    Howard emphasised that the appellant's answer to the question was  that
    yes he could, "if they do that".

16.  Mr Bates suggested that it was quite clear the appellant  could  obtain
    identity documents whilst in the United Kingdom.  He could either go to
    the IKY authorities or to the Iraqi Embassy in the United  Kingdom,  or
    he could ask his relatives in  Iraq  to  assist  him.   His  uncle  was
    clearly not dead and he may well  have  other  relatives.   As  far  as
    Baghdad is concerned, Mr Bates suggested that he  would  only  need  to
    transit it.  Given that he is a Kurd he would be able to go to the  IKR
    for  a  limited  period  during  which  time  he  could  try  and  find
    employment.  From IKR he would be able to return to Jalawa if he wished
    to.  Mr Bates suggested there was no error of law in the determination.
     The appellant would be returned to Baghdad.  But there  is  no  reason
    why he would not be able to remain there for a brief time  even  if  he
    were not able to  transit  the  same  day  to  Erbil.   His  ethnicity,
    religion and health issues do not make it unreasonable to expect him to
    go to Baghdad and it was certainly not unduly harsh to  expect  him  to
    transit Baghdad en route for Erbil and, if he chose to  to  go  to  his
    home area.

17.  Mr Howard pointed out that at the appellant's substantive interview  he
    had acknowledged that he could go to the  Iraqi  Embassy  and  ask  for
    replacement documents, but that he was not aware of whether or not they
    would be available at the Iraqi Embassy.  I asked Mr  Howard  if  there
    was any evidence that such documents would not be  available  from  the
    embassy and he told me there was not.

18.  I reserved my decision.

19.  In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
    considered, amongst other things, the question of  internal  relocation
    within Iraq, other than to the Iraqi Kurdish Region.  At Sections D and
    E of the headnote they said this:-

         "D.  INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IRAQI  KURDISH
         REGION)


         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
             harsh for a person  from  a  contested  area  to  relocate  to
             Baghdad city or (subject to paragraph  2  above)  the  Baghdad
             Belts.


         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
             P to relocate to Baghdad the following factors  are,  however,
             likely to be relevant:


             (a)  whether P has a CSI or would be able to obtain  one  (see
                  Part C above);


             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
                  likely to find employment);


             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
                  to accommodate him;


             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
                  difficulties than men in finding employment);


             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
                  rent accommodation;


             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;


             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
                  there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers
                  are provided with support generally given to IDPs.


             16.   There  is  not  a  real  risk  of  an  ordinary  citizen
                  travelling  from   Baghdad   Airport   to   the   southern
                  governorates, suffering serious  harm  en  route  to  such
                  governorates so as to engage Article 15(c).


         E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION


         17.  The respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
             from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the
             IKR authorities.  The authorities in the IKR do not require  P
             to have an expired or current passport or laissez passer.


         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free.  There is no  Article  15C
             risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


         19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
             entry for ten days as a visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permit for a further ten days.  If K finds employment,  K  can
             remain longer, although K  will  need  to  register  with  the
             authorities and provide details of the employer.  There is  no
             evidence that the IKR  authorities  proactively  remove  Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.


         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  expect  him
             to  avoid  any  potential  undue  hardship  in  that  city  by
             travelling to the IKR, will be fact-sensitive; and  is  likely
             to involve an assessment of (a)  the  practicality  of  travel
             from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Erbil  by  air);  (b)  the
             likelihood of K securing employment in the IKR;  and  (c)  the
             availability of assistance from family and friends in the IKR.


         21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home
             area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR."

20.  The appellant is a Kurd from an area outside the IKR.   As  to  whether
    or not he is able to obtain identity documents, it may or  may  not  be
    the case that he could obtain them himself from the Kurdish authorities
    in the United Kingdom, or from the Iraqi Embassy in the United Kingdom.
     But in any event there would appear to be no reason  at  all  why  the
    appellant's relatives could not obtain sufficient evidence of identity.
     He will of course be returned to Baghdad, but I agree with  Mr  Bates,
    he is only likely to be in Baghdad for a matter of days and it may very
    well be possible that he could transit on arrival and  go  straight  to
    Erbil.  If he were to voluntarily return to Iraq he would  be  entitled
    to a grant which would assist him to travel to Erbil and onto his  home
    area, if he wishes to return to it.  In Erbil he could remain  for  ten
    days as a visitor and then renew entry for a further  ten  days  whilst
    seeking employment.  I accept that he may only be able  to  obtain  the
    most menial of jobs, but given that he was prepared to  lie  about  his
    uncle's death I am not  prepared  to  accept  that  he  has  no  skills
    whatsoever that he could not  use  to  good  effect  on  behalf  of  an
    employer.  I have concluded that it would not be unreasonable or unduly
    harsh to expect the appellant to transit Baghdad.  If he chooses to  he
    can enlist the help of his relatives to obtain a  CSID.   I  appreciate
    that  he  may  not  have  friends  or  family  members  in  Baghdad  to
    accommodate him and he may not be able  to  speak  Arabic,  but  he  is
    unlikely to need to remain in Baghdad for more than a matter of  hours.
    I similarly do not believe it to be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
    expect the appellant to relocate to the  IKR  should  he  not  wish  to
    travel on to his home area.  I do not believe that the health  problems
    he claims to have are likely to seriously prevent him from  working  if
    he wished to. As AA makes clear, however, there is no evidence that the
    IKR authorities proactively removed Kurds from the IKR whose permanence
    have come to an end but there seems  no  reason  at  all  now  why  the
    appellant should not return to his home area in any event.

21.  I am grateful to Mr Howard for confirming that the fourth challenge  to
    the  determination  (leave  was  only  granted  on  two  of  the   four
    challenges) stands or fall with the other challenge on which leave  was
    granted.

22.  I have concluded that the making of the decision by the judge  did  not
    involve the making of  a  material  error  of  law  and  I  uphold  her
    determination.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum  grounds,
    on humanitarian grounds and on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee payable.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

