
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04596/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 December 2017                     |On 8 January 2018                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                           mr Jalal Jabar Mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Olley, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is an Iraqi national born on  1  March  1991.   He  is  a
    Kurdish Sunni Muslim from Kirkuk, Iraq.   He  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidson  dismissing
    his appeal against the refusal of the respondent to grant him asylum in
    the United Kingdom and  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds  and
    humanitarian protection grounds.

2.   There is no need to recite the appeal history of this case, suffice  to
    say that in previous appeals the appellant has been found  to  have  no
    well-founded fear of persecution were he to be removed to Iraq.

3.   The issues pleaded on the appellant's behalf  were  firstly,  that  his
    removal would be a breach of Article 3  and/or  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  It was argued on the appellant's behalf  that
    pursuant to AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC), Kirkuk is
    a contested area and he cannot  return  to  Kirkuk.   Secondly  it  was
    argued that as Kirkuk is a contested area, he cannot get  documentation
    from the Authorities in Kirkuk which will  place  him  in  a  difficult
    position with regard to internal relocation.

4.   Ms Isherwood conceded that the judge erred in law  in  her  finding  at
    paragraph 36(a) that Kirkuk (with  the  exception  of  Hawija  and  the
    surrounding areas) no longer meets the threshold of Article  15(c).   I
    find that Ms Isherwood was right to concede this point in the light  of
    the decision by the immigration Tribunal in AA (Iraq) which held
         "There is at present a state of internal armed conflict in  certain
         parts of Iraq, involving Government security  forces,  militias  of
         various kinds, and the Islamic group known as ISIL.  The  intensity
         of  this  armed  conflict  in  the  so  called  'contested   areas'
         comprising the governorates of ... Kirkuk ... is such  that,  as  a
         general matter, there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that
         any civilian returned there,  solely  on  account  of  his  or  her
         presence  there,  faces  a  real  risk  of   being   subjected   to
         indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within the  scope
         of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive".

5.   This decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal in  AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

6.   I also find that the judge erred  in  law  in  failing  to  mention  or
    address the issue of the CSID document which links in with the issue of
    internal relocation.  The CSID document is the document  the  appellant
    will require to  access  financial  assistance  from  the  Authorities,
    employment, education, housing and medical treatment.  I find that  the
    judge's failure to deal with this  issue,  which  is  material  to  the
    appellant's case, means that the judge materially erred in law.

7.   For these two reasons, I find that the judge materially  erred  in  law
    and that her decision cannot stand.

8.   The appellant's appeal is remitted to be reheard at Hatton Cross  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 4 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

