
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04174/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2018                   |On 18 January 2018                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     RI
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Mellon, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Issacs  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  17   June   2017,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
         dated 4 April 2017 refusing his protection and human rights claims.







Factual Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Albania,  date  of  birth  30  April
         1997. His claim for asylum stems from a large  loan  taken  by  his
         father to start a business which he did not pay  back.  His  father
         died in May 2011 from cancer. In  summary,  the  appellant  asserts
         that the lender(s), targeted him and his family in  an  attempt  to
         obtain repayment of the loan. Threatening phone calls were made and
         the appellant's brother was attacked in his presence on the  street
         in July 2013. In August 2013 their mother was  assaulted  in  their
         home. After residing with a cousin for a short time  the  appellant
         was followed by a black car. Following  this  he  fled  Albania  in
         September 2013. After  travelling  through  a  number  of  European
         countries the appellant claims to have arrived in  the  UK  in  the
         back of a lorry on 13  October  2013,  and  claimed  asylum  on  30
         October 2013. His asylum application was refused on 16 October 2014
         but he was granted leave to  remain  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum-
         seeking child until 29 December 2014. An  application  for  further
         leave  to  remain,  made  on  the  same  protection  grounds,   was
         ultimately refused on 4th of April 2017, which led  to  the  appeal
         before the First-tier Tribunal, heard on 1 June 2017.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      3. An application was made to adjourn the hearing to obtain a  medical
         report to determine whether the appellant was suffering from  PTSD.
         The judge refused to adjourn the hearing. She did not believe  that
         a diagnosis of PTSD would assist her because she had a letter  from
         the appellant's CBT (Cognitive Behavioural Therapy) therapist dated
         from January 2017 describing his mental state  and  treatment,  and
         the benefit of a statement and letters and oral  evidence  from  Mr
         Beige, a social worker formally engaged with the appellant who  had
         experience in psychiatric services. The judge  concluded  that  the
         interests of justice would not be served by delaying  the  case  to
         obtain further medical evidence.

      4. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant,  supported  by  a
         bundle of documents that included, inter alia,  2  statements  from
         him dated 25 November 2014 and 24 May 2017, documents  relating  to
         his private life, the CBT therapists letter, and an expert  country
         report provided by Dr Antonia Young, and a letter from Sachin  Dev,
         a Support Services  Manager.  The  judge  additionally  heard  oral
         evidence from Mr Beige, whose statement was also contained  in  the
         appellant's bundle.

      5. The judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness.  She
         gave 7 reasons, contained in paragraph 73 to 81 of the decision, in
         support of her decision. The judge did not find  it  credible  that
         the appellant was able to provide a lot of detailed about the  loan
         but did not know the identity of the lender. There were said to  be
         inconsistencies in his  evidence  as  to  whether  his  mother  and
         brother knew the identity of the lender, and it was not  clear  how
         the appellant knew certain details of the loan  when  his  evidence
         was that his father did not tell the family  about  the  loan.  The
         judge did not find it  plausible  that  the  lender  would  request
         repayment of the loan if the people he was threatening did not know
         his identity. The judge found the oral evidence "somewhat  evasive"
         in this regard. Nor was it credible that the lender would wait over
         2 years to seek to recover his money by threatening and hurting the
         appellant's brother. The judge found the evidence relating  to  the
         loan itself was vague and observed that  even  an  unofficial  loan
         might be recorded on some kind of paperwork. It  was  not  credible
         that the appellant's family would not notice  the  receipt  by  his
         father of a very large sum of money.  In  this  regard,  the  judge
         noted the appellant's claim in his 2017 witness statement that  his
         father was a drinker, gambler and drug taker, but there had been no
         mention of drugs or gambling before the 2017 statement.  The  judge
         concluded that this was an embellishment to explain what  the  loan
         was allegedly spent on.

      6. The judge found it implausible that the appellant's father was able
         to take out a 2nd loan having paid off no money towards the initial
         loan, and found  that  the  appellant  gave  inconsistent  evidence
         regarding the identity  of  the  lender  (in  his  'first'  witness
         statement the appellant  said  the  money  was  owed  to  a  single
         businessman, in his second statement he claimed the money was  owed
         to several brothers who were involved in drug dealing).  The  judge
         drew an adverse inference surrounding the  appellant's  account  of
         the report made by his brother to the police in June 2013, both  in
         respect of the delay in reporting the matter and in respect  of  an
         inconsistency relating to the reasons why  the  brother  failed  to
         make another report to the police. The judge also drew  an  adverse
         inference based on inconsistent evidence relating to the nature  of
         the telephone conversation the appellant had with his family  after
         he arrived in the UK. Having concluded that the appellant's account
         of his fear in Albania was not truthful, the  judge  dismissed  the
         protection claim. The judge found that the appellant did  not  meet
         the requirements of paragraph 276ADE, and concluded that there were
         no  exceptional  circumstances  outside   the   immigration   rules
         sufficient to warrant a grant of leave to remain under  article  8.
         The human rights appeal was also dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

      7. The grounds of appeal content  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
         refusing to grant the adjournment.  A  medical  assessment  of  the
         appellant's psychological state  and  well-being  was  said  to  be
         material to a lawful assessment of the plausibility and credibility
         of his account, and to determine whether there  were  any  barriers
         preventing him from giving clear and inconsistent evidence. It  was
         relevant in determining whether the  appellant  would  be  able  to
         access appropriate support in Albania on  article  8  grounds.  The
         letter from the CBT therapist was not adequate  and  did  not  even
         purport to provide a diagnosis or address any of the aforementioned
         issues. The  adjournment  application  was  made  at  the  earliest
         opportunity, when replying to the prehearing review  form.  It  was
         not a  speculative  application  as  records  before  the  tribunal
         indicated that the appellant had  previously  been  very  close  to
         attempting suicide and his social worker considered he had symptoms
         of PTSD. A specific expert had been identified and  timescales  and
         funding confirmed. Given the timescales (the case was listed within
         a month of the appeal being lodged and  just  2  months  after  the
         refusal letter), and the fact that  the  refusal  letter  expressly
         referred  to  the  lack  of  medical  evidence  relating   to   the
         appellant's well-being, it was fundamental that  the  appellant  be
         allowed time to produce a medical report.

      8. The grounds further contend that the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
         Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010:  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult
         and  Sensitive  Appellant  Guidance,  despite  accepting  that  the
         appellant had  been  under  stress  that  caused  him  anxiety  and
         depression and in light of the oral evidence from the mental health
         social worker that he had PTSD and that, at  one  time,  there  was
         concern that he may have schizophrenia.  The  judge  also  recorded
         evidence from the appellant's support worker that spoke of episodes
         of  significant  mental  health  deterioration  and  his  therapist
         recorded incidents where he wished to act on suicidal ideation. The
         failure to apply the Presidential Guidance note was said to  be  an
         error of  law.  The  judge's  failure  to  apply  the  Presidential
         Guidance Note, as well as her failure to  adjourn  the  hearing  to
         obtain  a  medical  report,  meant  that  her  criticism   of   the
         appellant's  presentation  of  evidence   at   the   hearing   (his
         evasiveness [75] and the generalisation of his  answer  [80])  were
         unsafe. There was no finding as to whether the appellant did suffer
         from PTSD, and the judge speculated without sufficient support that
         his anxiety/depression could be attributed to uncertainty  relating
         to his immigration status. In so doing it was argued that the judge
         inaccurately cited the CBT therapists letter.

      9.  The  grounds  additionally  contend  that  the  judge  failed   to
         adequately apply relevant guidance  relating  to  the  evidence  of
         children, details of which were included in the skeleton  argument.
         Although the judge referred to the appellant's age  she  failed  to
         refer to any specific principles or apply  any  of  those  relevant
         principles when assessing the evidence. Nor did the judge  consider
         the possibility that, as a child, the appellant may not be aware of
         all relevant matters constituting his protection claim. The grounds
         finally content that the appellant was either not given  sufficient
         opportunity to comment on adverse inferences held against him,  and
         that the judge failed  to  take  into  account  relevant  evidence,
         particularly evidence contained in his very 1st  witness  statement
         dated 8 January 2014 where the appellant explains how he was  aware
         of certain details of the loan and where he did previously  mention
         his father's gambling.

     10. Permission was granted on all  grounds.  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Landes commented that the appellant was, on  the  face  of
         it, a vulnerable witness but the judge did not explicitly treat him
         as such and did not consider whether any inconsistencies  could  be
         explained by his mental health. Judge Landes also found it arguable
         that the judge should have  adjourned  to  obtain  a  psychological
         report for the reasons set  out  the  grounds,  especially  as  the
         former social worker's oral evidence made clear  that  he  was  not
         qualified to give a formal diagnosis.

     11. Ms Mellon, who appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  who
         drafted the grounds of appeal,  adopted  and  expanded  upon  those
         grounds.  She  drew  my  attention  to  the  documentary   evidence
         indicating that the appellant's mental health had previously caused
         concern for those looking after him, and that the documents  relied
         on by the  judge  to  provide  her  with  a  full  picture  of  the
         appellant's mental health  were  demonstrably  inadequate.  In  the
         absence of a full assessment of the appellant's mental  health  the
         judge's conclusions relating to inconsistencies in the  appellant's
         account were unsafe. Ms Mellon reiterated  her  written  submission
         that the judge failed to consider the principles to be  applied  in
         assessing evidence from children, as  detailed  in  AA  (unattended
         minors) Afghanistan [2012] UKUT 00016, and that the judge  appeared
         to be unaware that there were in  total  three  witness  statements
         from the appellant. The fact that the judge only  referred  to  two
         witness statements strongly suggested that she had failed  to  take
         into account relevant evidence,  especially  given  that  the  very
         first statement undermined her conclusion that certain  aspects  of
         the appellant's claim were a recent embellishment.

     12. Mr Tufan submitted  that  the  judge  was  fully  entitled  to  her
         conclusion for the 7 reasons given. There was no evidence from  the
         appellant's mother or brother, and no evidence from his cousin. The
         judge was entitled to find it implausible that the appellant  would
         know a number of details of the alleged  loan,  but  not  know  the
         identity of the lender. Mr Tufan went through each of  the  reasons
         provided by the judge and submitted that they were all sustainable.



Discussion

     13. An application to adjourn the hearing to obtain  a  medical  report
         was first made on 16 May 2017, shortly after the matter was  listed
         for full hearing and before the pre-hearing review. The application
         referred to the Reasons For Refusal Letter which commented  on  the
         absence of any diagnosis of PTSD, and to the mental health problems
         encountered by the appellant. There does not appear to have been  a
         response from the First-tier Tribunal prior to the listed  hearing.
         The reason provided by  the  judge  for  refusing  the  adjournment
         application was that she already had sufficient evidence describing
         the appellant's mental state and treatment. This consisted  of  the
         CBT therapist letter dated  9  January  2017,  and  the  statement,
         letters and oral evidence from Mr Beige, who knew the appellant and
         had experience in psychiatric services.

     14.  The  letter  from  the  CBT  therapist  recorded  the  appellant's
         reporting  of  symptoms   of   depression,   including   difficulty
         concentrating, and that on an assessment he scored  in  the  severe
         range for depression and anxiety. The appellant  reported  that  he
         had been very close to acting on thoughts of suicide when  informed
         that he would be  returned  to  Albania.  The  letter  noted  that,
         although things had improved, he  continued  to  have  thoughts  of
         ending his life if something 'bad' happened.  The  therapist  noted
         that the appellant's anxiety was  very  common  and  understandable
         given the current instability in his immigration status, and  noted
         that he had been prescribed Citalopram.

     15. Mr Beige's statement indicated that he was a Senior  Mental  Health
         Social Worker and had over  28  years'  experience  in  the  mental
         health field. He noted that the appellant had been on the verge  of
         a mental breakdown a few months prior to his detention in 2016, and
         believed the appellant showed symptoms of PTSD. The  statement  did
         not indicate that Mr Beige was qualified to  give  a  diagnosis  of
         PTSD and no formal diagnosis was made.  In  his  oral  evidence  Mr
         Beige believed at one point that the earlier deterioration  in  the
         appellant's mental state could have been attributed to PTSD or  the
         onset of schizophrenia.

     16. A letter from Sachin Dev, a Support  Services  Manager  for  Peepal
         Tree  Support  Services,  which  supported  and  accommodated   the
         appellant at the date of his hearing, indicated that there had been
         a sharp decline in his emotional well-being around June 2015.  This
         letter referred to the appellant having thoughts of self-harm.

     17. It is apparent from the aforementioned evidence that  there  was  a
         clear evidential basis for concerns  relating  to  the  appellant's
         mental health. It is also apparent that  the  documentary  evidence
         before the judge did not contain a formal diagnosis of PTSD.  There
         was  no  assessment  of  the  appellant's  mental   health   by   a
         psychiatrist or suitably trained psychologist. The CBT  therapists'
         report, the statement from Mr Beige and the letter from the Support
         Services Manager did not consider whether the appellant's  account,
         or evidence given by him at a hearing or in his interview with  the
         Home Office or statements, could be affected by his mental  health.
         In particular, there was no  assessment  in  any  of  the  evidence
         before  the  judge  as  to  whether  any  inconsistencies  in   the
         appellant's account, or perceived evasiveness, could be  reasonably
         attributed to his mental health. I am consequently  satisfied  that
         the judge was not  entitled  to  refuse  the  adjournment  for  the
         reasons advanced by her. A reliable  analysis  of  the  appellant's
         mental health was relevant both to  the  approach  adopted  by  the
         judge  when  assessing  the  appellant's  oral  evidence,  to   her
         assessment of his earlier evidence, and in determining any possible
         causes for a diagnosis of PTSD.

     18. The application for an adjournment was made as soon as  the  matter
         was listed for a prehearing review,  and  very  shortly  after  the
         respondent's refusal of the protection claim. An expert had already
         been identified and timescales and  funding  confirmed.  Given  the
         relevance of a medicolegal report in assessing the  evidence  given
         by the appellant, and in light of the earlier decline in his mental
         health,  and  applying  the  principles   enunciated   in   Nwaigwe
         (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), I  find  that  the
         refusal to grant the adjournment deprived the appellant of  a  fair
         hearing. In reaching this conclusion I note  that  the  judge  held
         against the appellant his  perceived  evasiveness  in  answering  a
         question [75], and that another of his answers was a generalization
         [80],  matters  that  may  have  been  explicable  in  light  of  a
         medicolegal report.

     19. I am additionally satisfied that the  judge  failed  to  take  into
         account relevant evidence, namely, the very first witness statement
         written by the appellant which was dated 8 January 2014. In  total,
         the appellant produced 3 statements. His 1st statement was  written
         in support of his asylum application. It accompanied his  Statement
         of Evidence Form. This statement was contained in  the  respondents
         bundle at D4 to D10. It was not repeated in the appellant's  appeal
         bundle. The second statement was written on  25  November  2014  in
         response to the respondent's Reasons For Refusal  Letter  dated  16
         October 2014. The third statement was dated 24  May  2017  and  was
         written in response to the Reasons For Refusal Letter dated 4 April
         2017. Both the second and third statements were  contained  in  the
         appellant's appeal bundle.

     20. The judge only makes reference to two statements. This is  apparent
         at [18].  The  judge  does  not  appear  to  be  aware  that  three
         statements were made. This is further confirmed at [75], where  the
         judge quotes from paragraph 6 of  the  appellant's  "first  witness
         statement of 2014." The  quote  in  fact  appears  in  the  witness
         statement dated 25 November 2014, not the witness statement dated 8
         January  2014.  The  judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  based  on
         inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence relating to whether the
         lender was  a  single  businessman  or  to  a  group  of  men,  the
         appellant's failure to mention  in  2014  that  his  father  was  a
         gambler,  and  how  the  appellant  came  to  discover  information
         relating to the loan. Much of this was covered by the appellant  in
         his very 1st statement. In particular, the appellant indicated,  at
         paragraph 32, that his father started to gamble and  lost  all  the
         money. This undermines the judge's finding that this assertion  was
         a  recent  embellishment,  although  I  note  the  absence  of  any
         reference in the 1st statement to his father taking drugs.  In  the
         same paragraph the appellant also explains how he came to  know  of
         some details of the loan (his brother informed him on the telephone
         that their father had wanted to open a shop).

     21. I am satisfied that the above errors are material,  and  that  they
         render the judge's decision unsafe. It is not  therefore  necessary
         for me to consider the remaining grounds in any detail.  I  observe
         however that there was evidence before the judge that the appellant
         was, at the very least, suffering from anxiety and depression,  and
         that the judge  failed  to  refer  to  or  apply  the  Presidential
         Guidance Note on Vulnerable Adult Appellants, suggesting  that  the
         Guidance was not applied. Moreover, although the judge does  remind
         herself at [71] and [83] of the appellant's age at the time of  the
         events he described and of his original asylum  claim,  it  is  not
         apparent that she has considered or applied the principles relating
         to the assessment of evidence given by children, as outlined in the
         skeleton argument before her at paragraphs 12 to 15.

     22. There  remain  a  number  of  credibility  issues  surrounding  the
         appellant's account. These were properly identified by the judge. I
         cannot however be satisfied that the judge  would  inevitably  have
         reached  the  same  ultimate  conclusion  even  if  there   was   a
         medicolegal report before her and even if she explicitly considered
         the 1st witness statement. I  consequently  find  that  the  errors
         committed were material.

     23. In line with the representations  from  both  representatives,  and
         given that the error of law relates to core  credibility  findings,
         it is appropriate for the matter to be remitted back to the  First-
         tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a  material  error  of  law.
The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)
hearing, before a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Isaacs.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    16 January 2018
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
