
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04549/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision and Reasons promulgated  |
|on 26 September 2017                     |on 27 November 2017               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     ST
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Following a hearing on 19 July 2017  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  the
       First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law for the  reasons  set
       out in the error of law finding a copy of which is  to  be  found  at
       Annex A of this decision. The appeal was listed for a Resumed hearing
       to enable the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision with  the  caveat
       that all  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  those
       relating to the ability of the appellant to relocate to the  IKR  and
       reasonableness of the  internal  flight  option  shall  be  preserved
       findings.

    2. Reference to the Kurdish regions of northern Iraq appear as both  IRK
       and KRI in the decision but relate to the same areas.

Background


    3. The First-tier Tribunal set out its findings from [31] of the earlier
       decision. The preserved findings, which form the  starting  point  in
       this appeal, can be summarised in the following terms:

             i. There is a material inconsistency in the appellant's account
                relating to when his father was  killed  including  it  been
                noted by the Judge that the appellant in his  oral  evidence
                asserted he was not sure if his father was  dead  or  alive.
                The Judge states "I reject the appellant's  claim  that  his
                father was killed by ISIS and that  he  does  not  know  his
                mother's whereabouts. I find that he has fabricated this  in
                order to bolster his claim for asylum" [34].

            ii. The respondent accepted that the appellants  return  to  his
                home area in Mosul would amount to a breach of Article 15(c)
                of the Qualification Directive [35]

           iii. The  respondent  accepts  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
                appellant has access to the documents  needed  to  obtain  a
                passport or laissez passer making his  return  to  Iraq  not
                currently feasible [37].

    4. There is no challenge to the factual matrix enabling  the  matter  to
       proceed by way of submissions only  although  it  was  noted  at  the
       outset of the hearing that the Home Office view is that the appellant
       could provide identity documents although it was accepted that return
       to Mosul was still not feasible in light of country conditions.

    5. It was submitted on the Secretary State's behalf that  the  appellant
       had not established that he could not obtain a  passport  or  laizzer
       passer ('let it pass') and that the respondent would  assist  him  in
       obtaining  these  documents.  It  was  submitted  the  appellant  had
       therefore not established that he would not be able  to  possess  the
       necessary documents to make return feasible.

    6. The issue in the case was return to Baghdad initially and  thereafter
       relocation to the IKR.

    7. It was submitted the appellant will be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID  to
       enable him to access services on the basis that  he  had  not  proved
       that he could not obtain one, and that he would be able to obtain one
       if he had a valid passport or laizzer passer.

    8. It was submitted the appellant could fly  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR
       where he will be able to secure access.

    9. On behalf of the appellant it was argued by Mr Howard that  he  would
       face a real risk on return to Baghdad. It was submitted the  evidence
       did not show that the appellant will be able to obtain a CSID if from
       Mosul and accordingly would not be able to access the  services  that
       he required to provide him with assistance.

   10. It was also submitted that there needs to be a detailed consideration
       of the reality of the appellant being able to travel to the  IKR  and
       an acknowledgement that the point of return is to Baghdad.

   11. Without a CSID there is a strong likelihood of the appellant becoming
       destitute as he claims he has no family in  Baghdad  able  to  assist
       him, no siblings, and no sponsor in Baghdad which it is submitted  is
       a requirement.

   12. It was submitted that within Baghdad the  situation  will  be  unduly
       harsh, Mr Howard making reference to UN casualty figures increasing.

   13. It was also submitted that even if the appellant was able  to  access
       the IKR he  would  have  problems  securing  employment  or  economic
       opportunities and it was argued that there would also be a need for a
       sponsor and support letter from his local area. It  was  argued  that
       even if he has family in the area does not have adequate  support  in
       the IKR.

   14. The lack of identity documents and funds is also said to be  relevant
       to the ability of the appellant to fly to the IKR.

Case law


   15. The have been a number of decisions relating to return  to  Iraq.  In
       relation to the facts of this  appeal  the  most  relevant  ones  are
       summarised below.

   16. In AA (Iraq) v SSHD and SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the Court of  Appeal
       held (amending the 2015 CG by consent) that a CSID was not  simply  a
       return document.  It  was  feasible  that  someone  could  acquire  a
       passport or a laissez-passer without  possessing  or  being  able  to
       obtain a CSID.   The country guidance should be revised  by  consent.
       (i) Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will
       be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi
       authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to
       enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current or  expired  Iraqi
       passport relating to P, or a laissez passer; (ii) No  Iraqi  national
       will be returnable to Baghdad if not in possession of  one  of  these
       documents; (iii) In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF
       (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
       EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection claim  made  by  P  cannot
       succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm  arising  from  an
       absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport or a  laissez  passer,
       if the Tribunal finds that P's return is not  currently  feasible  on
       account of a lack of any of those documents; (iv)Where P is  returned
       to Iraq on a laissez passer or expired passport, P will be at no risk
       of serious harm at the point of return by  reason  of  not  having  a
       current passport.  However (v), regardless of the feasibility of  P's
       return, it will be necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or  will
       be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A  CSID
       is generally required in order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access  financial
       assistance from the authorities; employment; education; housing;  and
       medical treatment. If P shows there are no family  or  other  members
       likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in general likely
       to face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by
       the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary  of  State  or  her
       agents to assist P's return have been  exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
       likely that P will still have no CSID.

   17. Documentation: - Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will
       be necessary to decide whether P has a  CSID,  or  will  be  able  to
       obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq (see above).  In AA
       (Iraq) v SSHD and SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the Court of Appeal  said,
       amending country guidance, that (i) where return is  feasible  but  P
       does not have a CSID, P should as a general matter be able to  obtain
       one from the Civil Status Affairs Office for  P's  home  Governorate,
       using an Iraqi passport (whether current or expired), if P  has  one.
       If P does not have such a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID  may
       depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of  the  book
       holding P's information (and that of  P's  family).  P's  ability  to
       persuade the officials that P is the person  named  on  the  relevant
       page is likely to depend on whether P has  family  members  or  other
       individuals who are prepared to vouch for  P;  (ii)  P's  ability  to
       obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered if P is unable to  go
       to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's Governorate because  it  is
       in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring. As a result
       of the  violence,  alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar  and
       Saluhaddin have been established in Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence
       does not demonstrate that the  "Central  Archive",  which  exists  in
       Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to  those  in  need  of
       them. There is, however, a National Status Court in Baghdad, to which
       P could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of  identity.  The  precise
       operation of this court is, however, unclear.

   18. Return to Baghdad:- In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544
       (IAC) (unchanged by the Court of Appeal) it was held that (i)   As  a
       general matter, it will not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  for  a
       person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad City or  (subject
       to comments in this case on humanitarian protection and areas of  the
       country where there is an internal armed conflict) the Baghdad Belts;
       (ii) In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly  harsh  for
       and Iraqi national (P)to relocate to Baghdad, the  following  factors
       are, however, likely to be relevant:(a) whether P has a CSID or  will
       be able to obtain one; (b) whether P  can  speak  Arabic  (those  who
       cannot are less likely to find employment); (c) whether P has  family
       members or friends in Baghdad able to accommodate him; (d) whether  P
       is a lone female (women face greater difficulties than men in finding
       employment); (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel  room
       or rent accommodation; (f) whether P is from  a  minority  community;
       (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there is
       some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are  provided  with
       the support generally given to IDPs. (iii) there is not a  real  risk
       of an ordinary  civilian  travelling  from  Baghdad  airport  to  the
       southern governorates,  suffering  serious  harm  en  route  to  such
       governorates so as engage Article 15(c).

   19. Return to IKR:- In AA (unchanged by the Court of Appeal) it was  held
       that (i)  the Respondent will only return an Iraqi  national  (P)  to
       the IKR if P originates from the IKR and P's identity has been  "pre-
       cleared" with the IKR authorities. The authorities in the IKR do  not
       require P to have an expired or current passport, or laissez  passer;
       (ii) the IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
       risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR; (iii) A Kurd  (K)  who  does
       not originate from the IKR can obtain entry for 10 days as a  visitor
       and then renew this entry permission for a  further  10  days.  If  K
       finds employment, K can remain for longer, although K  will  need  to
       register with the authorities and provide details  of  the  employer.
       There is no evidence that the  IKR  authorities  pro-actively  remove
       Kurds from the IKR whose permits have come to an end; (iv) whether K,
       if returned to Baghdad, can  reasonably  be  expected  to  avoid  any
       potential undue harshness in that city by travelling to the IKR, will
       be fact sensitive; and is likely to involve an assessment  of  (a)the
       practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to  Irbil  by
       air - there is not a real risk of  an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
       from Baghdad airport to the southern governorates, suffering  serious
       harm en route to such governorates  so  as  engage  Article  15(c).);
       (b)the likelihood of K's securing employment in the IKR; and (c)  the
       availability of assistance from family and friends in the IKR; (v) As
       a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home  area  in
       Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

   20. Observe that in R (on the application of H) v Secretary of State  for
       the Home Department (application of AA (Iraq CG)) [2017]  UKUT  00119
       (IAC) the Upper Tribunal noted that background material  before  them
       indicated that onward travel from Baghdad  to  the  IKR  was  "highly
       problematic" (hearing date 6 January 2017).

Discussion


   21. In addition to the above case law  the  respondent  has  published  a
       document entitled "UK Home Office, 'Country  Policy  and  Information
       Note  -  Iraq:  Return/Internal  relocation  (September   2017)'   22
       September 2017".

   22. The source references in that report include the cases set out  above
       both by reference to the citation and quoted principles.

   23. In relation to the feasibility of  return  it  is  not  disputed  the
       appellant is an Iraqi national from Mosel. It has not been shown  the
       appellant has obtained a current Iraqi passport  or  has  an  expired
       passport and if his is unable to obtain an emergency travel  document
       (laizzer passer) he will not  be  permitted  to  enter  Iraq  through
       Baghdad. Applications for  such  documents  are  made  to  the  Iraqi
       Embassy in London in relation to which the Upper Tribunal in AA found
       the applicant needs to produce a CSID, Iraqi Nationality  Card  (INC)
       or photocopy of a previous passport and a report confirming  that  an
       emergency travel document has been lost or stolen. If a  person  does
       not have any of these documents they cannot obtain a travel  document
       and therefore cannot be returned.

   24. The Secretary of State specifically  submits  that  even  though  the
       appellant currently does not have any of  these  documents  she  will
       assist in obtaining  one  to  enable  the  appellant  to  secure  the
       emergency travel document hence  making  return  feasible.  The  main
       issue  of  concern  however  is  whether  the  appellant,   even   if
       returnable, will be able to obtain a Civil Status Identity Card.  The
       country information  states  that  this  and  the  Iraqi  Nationality
       Certificate (INC) were the two most important documents and that  the
       Iraqi Nationality ID Card replaces the INC and CSID.

   25. The country information at paragraph 2.4.10 finds "it is likely  that
       most people who do not possess a CSID, and whose return is  feasible,
       (i.e. they possess a  current  or  expired  passport,  or  a  laissez
       passer), will be able to obtain a CSID  from  the  Iraqi  embassy  in
       London, or through proxies in Iraq". See AA at [170].

   26. The Tribunal in AA at [177] state:

           "It is possible for any Iraqi living in the UK to obtain a  CSID
           through the consular section of the Iraqi  Embassy,  if  such  a
           person is able to produce a current or expired  passport  and/or
           the book and page number for their family registration  details.
           For persons without such  a  passport,  or  who  are  unable  to
           produce the relevant family registration  details,  a  power  of
           attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq who  can  thereafter
           undertake the process of obtaining the CSID for such person from
           the Civil Status Affairs Office in their home governorate".

   27. The claim by the appellant that his father had been  killed  was  not
       found credible by the First-tier Tribunal  indicating  the  appellant
       has family members within  Iraq  although  he  claims  to  have  lost
       contact with them when the family fled in the face of the approach by
       ISIS, an aspect of his claim also found to lack  credibility  by  the
       First-team Tribunal Judge.

   28. If the appellant is able to contact family members in Iraq it has not
       been made out they will not be able to obtain a  power  of  attorney.
       Whilst in light of the current military operations it may be arguably
       feasible that it is not possible to approach the Civil Status Affairs
       Office in Mosul it is not made out that no alternative office or body
       is unavailable in this area of Iraq.

   29. The Upper Tribunal in AA did also consider  whether  a  person  could
       acquire the CSID in Iraq. At [166] the Tribunal found:

           "... That an Iraqi national should as a general matter  be  able
           to obtain a CSID from the Civil Status Affairs Office  for  that
           home governorate, using an Iraqi passport  (whether  current  or
           expired), if they have one. If they do not have such a passport,
           their ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether  they  know
           the page and volume number of the book holding their information
           (and that of their family members). Their  ability  to  persuade
           the officials that they are the person  named  on  the  relevant
           page is likely to depend on whether they have family members  or
           other individuals who are prepared to vouch for them'.

   30. The Home Office report at section 6.3 notes  reference  to  a  letter
       written by the British Embassy on 22 January 2012 that a person could
       report to the Iraqi Ministry of Displacement and Migration (Mo  D  M)
       who will be able to support  the  transfer  of  the  records  from  a
       person's home area to the area  where  they  now  wish  to  live,  an
       application that can be made to the Iraqi embassy in London. This may
       enable any family records held relating to the appellant in Mosul  to
       be transferred to Baghdad where he  would  have  access  to  original
       family records this is where he wished to settle.  The  appellant  in
       his asylum interview at [51] confirmed he had  been  issued  with  an
       Iraqi Identity Document but not a  passport,  indicating  that  there
       must be in existence a record referring to the  appellant's  identity
       and therefore the book page information which could be obtained  from
       that source. It is noted above that the  Iraqi  Nationality  ID  card
       replaces the CSID and the appellant has  failed  to  show  that  this
       would not be an option available to him.  Even though  the  appellant
       will be required to attend in person to obtain a new card it is noted
       at 6.3.14 of the respondents document that  there  appears  to  be  a
       repetitive theme that a person would need to  know  their  book  page
       number; although it is states  that  most  Iraqis  do  know  this  or
       relative could confirm their identity. There is insufficient evidence
       to support a finding that the appellant would not know his book  page
       number or that he would not have access to assistance by lawyers from
       the  Protection  Assistant  Centre,  which  is   run   by   non-state
       organisations on behalf of the UNHCR to update the ID card,  or  that
       family in Iraq could not assist.

   31. It has not been made out to the required standard that the  appellant
       would not be able to obtain a replacement Iraqi ID  Card  or  a  CSID
       within  a  reasonable  time  if  returned  to  Baghdad  or  transited
       elsewhere within Iraq.

   32. In relation to the relevant factors  identified  in  AA  material  to
       assessing whether such relocation will be reasonable, it is noted the
       appellant is of Kurdish  ethnicity  and  from  a  minority  religious
       group, the appellant claims he has  no  family  in  Baghdad  who  can
       accommodate  him,  no  siblings  and  does  not  know  his   mother's
       whereabouts and has not done so since June 2014. Arabic is  not  said
       to be the appellant's first language as his main language is  Kurdish
       and in his screening interview he claimed not  to  be  to  speak  any
       other language, the  appellant  has  no  sponsor  who  could  provide
       accommodation, and contends he has no support  available  to  him  in
       Baghdad.

   33. If the appellant is unable to arrange immediate transit from  Baghdad
       to the IKR will be require him to remain  and  establish  himself  in
       Baghdad for however long it takes to make such arrangements. There is
       no evidence that those returning  to  Baghdad  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
       would be subjected to ethnic or religious discrimination in  relation
       to procedures at the airport. It is said to be relevant to note  that
       if a person who originates from the Kurdish area is the subject of an
       enforced return via Baghdad they will already  have  been  re-cleared
       for arrival and have a valid or expired passport or emergency  travel
       document and, assuming they have no outstanding  warrants  of  arrest
       for criminal activity and related to immigration matters,  they  will
       not be detained. The lack of real risk also applies to those who  may
       have left the country illegally.

   34. A letter from the British Embassy dated 7 April 2014,  section  4.1.8
       of the country information, states:

           "The MOI and MoDM have told  us  that  one  of  these  documents
           [expired or valid passport, or laissez passer] is sufficient  in
           the first instance to pass  through  checkpoints  on  return  to
           their home or temporary accommodation following which they  need
           to regularise their Civil ID card.  The  UNHCR  [United  Nations
           High  Commissioner  for  Refugees]/IRC   [International   Rescue
           Committee] said they were not aware of the  policy  of  allowing
           passage through  a  checkpoint  using  an  expired  passport  or
           laissez  passer   travel   document.   To   the   knowledge   of
           UNHCR/IRC/Qandil and the Embassy there has been no case to  date
           in which the airport authorities have  provided  a  facilitation
           letter but we have been advised by the MoDM and MOI that passing
           through checkpoints is permitted upon  first  entry  and  return
           home  and  there  have  already  been  a  number  of  successful
           returnees who have returned using an expired passport" [8]

   35. At 4.1.9 it is stated the above was corroborated by  a  third  letter
       from the Baghdad Embassy dated 8 April 2012 referring to  a  November
       2011 UNHCR Baghdad paper stating that no civil documentation will  be
       issued at the airport, but a letter would  be  issued  to  facilitate
       individual's movement back to their place of origin/relocation.

   36. It  has  not  been  made  out  that  the  appellant  would  have  any
       difficulties in physically entering Baghdad; the question being  what
       would happen thereafter.

   37. The respondent provides returnees with a rehabilitation/reintegration
       package which includes sufficient financial resources  to  assist  an
       individual in returning to their home area. It has not been made  out
       that it would be impracticable or unreasonable for the  appellant  to
       be able to arrange a flight from Baghdad to the IKR to  tie  in  with
       his point of return or shortly thereafter. It is not  made  out  that
       any support provided would not be sufficient to meet the cost of  the
       airfare which, if the statement  by  the  respondent  that  a  return
       package covers such costs is correct, must include the same.

   38. The Tribunal in AA refers to difficulties that will be encountered by
       those trying to settle in Baghdad and in this respect the  appellants
       profile, as outlined by Mr Howard, would suggest that  relocation  to
       Baghdad on a more permanent basis, when the appellant has  no  longer
       access to funds provided  on  return,  may  be  unreasonable  as  the
       appellant does not have the required language skills making  it  less
       likely he will find employment, has no family or friends  in  Baghdad
       to accommodate him, will be unable to rent accommodation, and is from
       a religious and ethnic minority community.

   39. Although the appellant is  not  from  the  IKR  he  is  a  Kurd.  The
       available information shows that a person arriving  in  the  IKR  can
       stay for one to two weeks as a tourist which would  not  require  the
       need to apply for a residence permit including presenting a sponsor.

   40.  The  respondent's  country  report  at  7.2.2  discussing  residency
       requirements in the IKR states:

           7.2.2 the British Embassy  in  Baghdad,  in  a  letter  dated  4
           December 2014, noted:

           'A  significant  change  in  November  is  that   the   previous
           requirements to have a sponsor who is resident  in  the  Kurdish
           Region prior to admission has been  removed  (allegedly  because
           sponsorships were being openly sold at certain checkpoints)  and
           instead a new procedure is now in operation which requires IDP's
           to  present  themselves  to  the  nearest  Asayish  office   for
           screening and approval. Once approved, IDP's are issued  with  a
           residency card that entitles them  to  move  freely  within  the
           governorates and  rent  private  houses.  Transit  opportunities
           still exist for  those  who  have  valid  plane  tickets.  Those
           arriving by air at Erbil and Sulamaniyah airports, are similarly
           being directed to  report  to  the  nearest  Asayish  office  to
           regularise their stay. It is worth reiterating  the  point  that
           admission does remain at the discretion of  Kurdish  immigration
           and border  officers  and  the  temporary  restrictions  can  be
           imposed and withdrawn without notice'.

   41. The appellant, as he will possess an  emergency  travel  document  to
       enable him to enter Baghdad, has not made out that  he  will  not  be
       able to enter the IKR. Although there may be concerns in the minds of
       members of the IKR immigration officials in relation  to  those  from
       areas previously occupied by ISIS, the  appellant  has  a  wealth  of
       evidence showing that since that group invaded his area  he  has  not
       lived there and has been in the United Kingdom.

   42. The appellant arguably has a greater prospect of reuniting  with  his
       family members the IKR, in relation to which it was found  his  claim
       his father had been killed and that he  had  lost  contact  with  his
       mother was not credible, with assistance  from  the  UNHCR  or  other
       organisations assisting with  tracing  family  members  of  displaced
       persons if required.

   43. The appellant states that his skills within  the  family  were  as  a
       farmer in relation to which it is reasonable to assume that work of a
       similar nature may be available  to  the  appellant  as  this  is  an
       important area of the economy in the IKR when  there  is  a  need  to
       provide sufficient food for those who live there.

   44. In  relation  to  the  sponsorship  requirement,  it  is  noted  that
       sponsorship is not required if an Iraqi citizen comes as a IDP  which
       arguably applies to the appellant as a person who  had  to  flee  his
       home area as a result of the advance of ISIS; although  the  IRC  are
       recorded as having stated that sponsorship  is  not  imposed  on  IDP
       living in the camps whereas those living outside  the  camps  face  a
       sponsorship requirement if they wish to seek work.

   45. It is noted in relation to Erbil that Kurds are  generally  permitted
       to enter this or the Dohuk governorate without pre-existing residence
       documents although they may face increased security restrictions.

   46. The country information states:

           "With regard to IDP's wishing to enter  Sulaimania,  the  lawyer
           working for an international NGO said that  they  must  approach
           the checkpoint with the required documents,  and  permission  is
           given to enter in the form of a tourist visa valid for 30  days.
           The source added  that,  after  these  30  days,  the  IDP  must
           register at the Bureau of Displacement and Migration (BoDM)  and
           the local mukhtar as  well  as  find  a  sponsor,  depending  on
           whether or not the sponsorship is being enforced  at  the  given
           time".

   47. It is noted in the country information there is  reference  to  entry
       across the land borders to the IKR being  prevented/restricted  as  a
       result of the huge influx of refugees following the invasion by  ISIS
       and steps taken by the Iraqi and  Kurdish  authorities  to  push  the
       invaders out, now successfully achieved. These  restrictions  do  not
       apply to access by air and at 7.3.2 there is reference  to  a  Danish
       fact-finding mission observing:

           "Various sources said that IDP's can enter KRI by  air.  Two  of
           the sources said that Iraqi citizens can enter KRI  through  the
           airport without having a sponsor. In  addition,  IRC  said  that
           most IIDP's are currently arriving in KRI  by  plane,  and  that
           most of these flights are coming from Baghdad.   IOM  said  that
           IDP's arriving  from  Baghdad  usually  have  money  to  support
           themselves and will  be  welcome  in  KRI.  If  they  arrive  by
           domestic airline, not by  car.  The  international  humanitarian
           organisation further stated that entry through the airports  was
           without problems, but that the IDP's cannot  stay  indefinitely,
           and they would have  to  register  by  the  authorities  at  the
           airport. According to UNHCR,  short-term  residential  documents
           are issued at the airport to those who come by air  from  abroad
           or from other places in Iraq and are extended at  the  place  of
           residence upon issuance of security  clearance  by  Asayish.  In
           this respect, IDP's are  able  to  settle  in  KRI  temporarily.
           UNHCR and two sources stated different durations of  the  short-
           term residence permit. According to two sources, this short-term
           residence  permit  is  being  issued   by   the   Asayish.   The
           international humanitarian organisation explained that a  person
           might be able to get away with not registering upon  arrival  at
           the airport, but that person would then  not  be  able  to  move
           around freely inside KRI, and an unregistered person  would  not
           be able to rent a place to live.

   48. The appellant has failed to establish to the required  standard  that
       his return is not feasible, that he would not be  able  to  obtain  a
       replacement ID document or CSID, that  he  would  not  have  adequate
       resources to enable him to return to Baghdad and to  transit  to  the
       IKR by air or enter the IKR lawfully. It is a case that the appellant
       would have some funds provided by the UK government but  is  accepted
       that these would not be sufficient to enable  him  to  live  for  any
       length of time in the IKR as a person of independent means.

   49. The appellant has failed to establish to the required  standard  that
       he will not be able to contact organisations with a view to  tracking
       down family members or, if the  practicalities  of  the  security  or
       humanitarian situation permitted, returning to the family home  which
       the appellant claimed been taken by ISIS when they entered Mosul,  if
       it is still habitable. Reference in the country  guidance  report  at
       7.1.5 to a source stating that Iraqi citizens  not  originating  from
       the KRI must travel onward to the area he or she is  originally  from
       when arriving through an airport in the KRI has not been shown to  be
       a  requirement  arguably  applicable   to   a   person   who   cannot
       realistically return to that area.

   50. The issue that arises is the  question  of  how  the  appellant  will
       support himself in the IKR if any stay there requires him  to  obtain
       employment. If the appellant cannot  secure  employment  he  will  be
       required to  seek  the  assistance  of  either  family,  the  Kurdish
       authorities, or international organisations.

   51. The country information at 7.1.5 notes:

           "Three sources said that  ethnic  Kurds,  including  Kurds  from
           Kirkuk  who  can  freely  enter  KRI,  are  exempted  from   the
           requirement of a sponsor. Human Rights Watch  said  that  it  is
           possible for ethnic Kurds with long residency in Kirkuk to  gain
           access to KRI. With regard to the  possibility  for  Kurds  from
           Kirkuk not only to enter KRI but to  settle,  Qandil  said  that
           ethnic Kurds have no problem settling in  KRI.   However,  Human
           Rights Watch found it uncertain  if  ethnic  Kurds  from  Kirkuk
           could settle in KRI, and added that there are examples of  IDP's
           are able to get into Kirkuk but not able to go  from  Kirkuk  to
           KRI.  An  international  humanitarian  organisation  said   that
           whether or not ethnic Kurds can gain access to KRI would  depend
           on the political affiliation of the individual person, and  that
           it  might  still  be  complicated.  Head  of  General   Security
           Directorate, Asayish, Esmat  Argushi,  however,  said  that  for
           ethnic Kurds  with  long-term  residency  in  Kirkuk,  the  same
           procedure for entry into KRI applies  as  for  all  other  Iraqi
           citizens."

   52. It is being suggested elsewhere that there may be  political  reasons
       for the Kurdish authorities wishing to keep Kurds within Kirkuk as  a
       result of the historical conflict between Kurds and Arabs in relation
       to control of this area. This matter has in some respects resolved by
       the intervention of  the  Iraqi  government  who  seized  control  of
       Kirkuk. By contrast Mosul is to the north of Iraq, away from the oil-
       rich areas, and not subject to the same historic  disputes.  This  is
       Iraq's second city  and  was  recaptured  by  members  of  the  Iraqi
       security forces and the Kurdish Peshmerga. There is no suggestion  in
       any of the material that ethnic  Kurds  from  this  area  are  denied
       access to the IKR.

   53. The country material at 7.2.3 speaks of the requirement for a sponsor
       in order to work in the IKR. The same report also records:

           "IOM  stated  that  Kurds,  including  Kurds  from  Kirkuk,  are
           exempted from the  sponsorship  requirement.  The  international
           humanitarian organisation said that there are some exemptions to
           the sponsorship requirement if for instance  the  IDP  concerned
           needs to enter medical reasons, or if the IDP's are single women
           or female-headed  households  with  children.  UNHCR  said  that
           exemptions have  been  made  in  cases  where  local  tribal  or
           religious leaders succeeded in negotiating  access  for  certain
           groups of IDP is to Kurdish-controlled areas. UNHCR added  that,
           in  Kirkuk,  some  local  leaders,  for  example,  succeeded  in
           negotiating access and temporary residence with the governor."

   54. It is important in this context to recall that not all IDP's or those
       fleeing from other areas of Iraq to the safety of  the  IKR  will  be
       ethnic Kurds. When ISIS took control  of  territory  from  the  Iraqi
       government a large number of minority groups such as  Christians  and
       others were forced to flee together with Iraqis of Arab ethnicity.

   55. The situation facing the appellant is not as clear as it may  be  for
       some in relation to Iraq or  other  countries  as  a  result  of  the
       changing nature of the security situation in Iraq and reliance by the
       appellant  upon  statements  that  he  cannot  return  or  reasonably
       internally relocate together with  country  material.  That  material
       indicates that the application relies upon some things  that  in  one
       part of report are stated in clear terms but which may not be applied
       or enforced; there being reference  to  inconsistent  application  of
       some policies.

   56. In relation to economic opportunities in the IKR the  country  report
       states:

           7.2.4 the sources also commented on  economic  opportunities  in
           the KRI:

           'Three sources said that the number of job opportunities in  the
           KRI is very limited for the host community as well as for IDP's.
           In this respect, ERC stated that, due to the financial crisis in
           KRI, even people from the host community are losing their  jobs.
           Three sources indicated that the private sector is  affected  by
           the crisis, including the  construction  business  and  the  oil
           business. Being among these sources, IRC added that many jobs in
           the oil sector are occupied by foreign labour.

           When asked in what  fields  IDP's  typically  find  jobs,  three
           sources said that IDP's who managed to get a job will often find
           it in low skilled fields, for instance  construction  or  casual
           work in agriculture or  restaurants.  IRC  further  stated  that
           IDP's with an education may be able  to  find  work  with  NGOs;
           however, the number of jobs available in this field is low.

           It was stated by three sources that the  public  sector  is  not
           adding new jobs, and three sources pointed to the fact that  the
           Kurdish Regional Government  (KRG)  has  not  paid  salaries  to
           government employees since June 2015.  IOM said that it  is  not
           possible to live on a  salary  of  a  civil  servant  under  the
           Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) administration.

           Various sources stated that publicly employed  IDP's  are  still
           supposed to receive their salary from the central government  in
           Baghdad. Two sources, however, said that as of  September  2015,
           there is a delay in the payment.

           Different figures were given by three  sources  on  the  current
           unemployment rate in KRI, ranging from 6.5% to 35%.

           Three sources pointed to competition for  jobs  in  KRI  between
           host community members, IDP's and Syrian refugees. Three sources
           said that IDP's are typically willing and able to work for lower
           salaries than members of the host  community.  IOM  stated  that
           they, as  an  organisation,  are  facing  difficulties  to  find
           employment for Kurdish returnees  who  went  back  to  KRI  from
           Europe, as many companies downsize their workforce.

   57. Although relocation to the IKR will clearly be  a  challenging  event
       for the appellant that is not the test. The question is whether it is
       unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect him to internally relocate  in
       light of the fact that at the current time it has not been  made  out
       that he can return directly to his home area; although  this  may  be
       feasible in the future following the defeat of ISIS.

   58. None of the country guidance cases support a finding that a person of
       Kurdish ethnicity cannot relocate to another part of Iraq.  It  is  a
       fact specific assessment in relation to each case. The appellant is a
       healthy single male of working age with  experience  of  agricultural
       work, an ethnic Kurds, who possesses the required  language.  He  has
       family in northern Iraq  who  can  vouch  for  his  identity  and  in
       relation to whom it  is  not  been  shown  they  cannot  provide  the
       required sponsorship. The claim that his father died was dismissed by
       the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  indicating  that  the  issue  is  the
       ability to trace such family members rather than whether they  exist.
       The claim the appellant had lost contact with his mother was rejected
       as not to be incredible indicating that  the  appellant  is  able  to
       advise them of his return to enable appropriate  arrangements  to  be
       made. The appellant has failed to provide any credible evidence  that
       this is not the case. A claim he would not have  the  opportunity  of
       benefiting from family support on return was not established even  to
       the applicable lower standard. The appellant has failed to  establish
       that his return to Iraq and internally relocate is unreasonable.

   59. On that basis, this appeal is dismissed.



Decision

   60. The Immigration Judge materially erred in law. I have set  aside  the
       decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake the decision  as
       follows. This appeal is dismissed.

   Anonymity.

   61. The First-tier Tribunal make an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 23 November 2017


                                   ANNEX A


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04549/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision promulgated         |
|on 19 July 2017                               |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     ST
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Gurung-Thapa promulgated on 27 January  2017  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  both  protection  and  human
        rights grounds, although Mr Howard confirmed at the hearing on  the
        appellant's behalf that he was not seeking to  rely  on  Article  8
        ECHR outside the Immigration Rules [40].



Error of law


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 January 1995.
     3. The Judge sets out the evidence `provided leading to  findings  and
        reasons at [31] - [41] of the decision under challenge.
     4. Judge notes inconsistencies in the  claim  such  as  [2]  and  [34]
        leading to it being found that the  applicant  had  fabricated  his
        claim his father was killed by ISIS and that he did  not  know  his
        mother's whereabouts in order to bolster his claim for asylum [34].
     5. The Judge notes the Secretary State  accepts  that  return  to  the
        appellant's home area in Mosul would amount to a breach of  Article
        15(c) of the Qualification Directive as it is a contested area [35]
        and that the issue was one of internal relocation.
     6. The respondent accepted there was no evidence  that  the  appellant
        has access to the documents needed to obtain a passport or  laissez
        passer making return to Iraq currently not feasible [37].
     7. The Judge finds  at  [39]  that  when  the  appellant's  return  is
        feasible he can relocate to the IKR. The Judge did not  accept  the
        appellant was not in contact with his family  and  found  he  would
        have the support of his family on  return.   The  Judge  finds  the
        appellant will be able to obtain entry to the IKR for 10 days as  a
        visitor and to renew that upon  finding  employment  which  he  has
        experience of,  according  to  his  evidence,  working  as  both  a
        shepherd and a farmer in Iraq and as a labourer in Turkey.
     8. The Judge rejected the  submission  made  by  Mr  Howard  that  the
        appellant was entitled to leave to  remain  under  the  Immigration
        Rules by reference to paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) [40].
     9. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting  a  failure  to
        apply country guidance  by  reference  to  AA(Article  15(c))  Iraq
        [2015] UKUT 000544 in which it  was  held  that  return  of  former
        residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be to the IKR  and
        for all other Iraqis to Baghdad.
    10. The Judge does not find the appellant is a former resident  of  the
        IKR and was therefore arguably required  to  consider  the  initial
        point of return to Baghdad and whether it was reasonable in all the
        circumstances for the appellant to internally relocated to Baghdad.
        If, as the Judge implies, the appellant  will  be  able  to  secure
        entry to the IKR as a visitor, it was necessary for  the  Judge  to
        consider the practicalities of how the appellant will  travel  from
        Baghdad to the IKR.
    11. Despite the Secretary of State asserting that no material error  of
        law was made, I find  the  Judge  fails  to  properly  analyse  the
        reasonableness of internal flight in  light  of  the  Secretary  of
        State's published policies  and  country  guidance  caselaw,  which
        requires consideration in relation to return to Baghdad and  onward
        travel thereafter by reference to both AA and the later case of  BA
        [2017] UKUT 18 which specifically considered the level of  violence
        in Baghdad.
    12. The grant of permission  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  renewed
        application provides an additional steer in relation to  the  error
        where it is stated:


         "The applicant is a Kurd from a contested area (not the IKR). It is
         arguable that the judge failed to apply AA (Article 15(c)  Iraq  CG
         [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) correctly to the factual matrix. Although a
         judicial review case, R (on the application of H) v  The  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department (application of AA (Iraq  CG)  IJR
         [2017] UKUT 00199 (IAC) has given guidance as to  how  AA  (Article
         15(c)) should be interpreted.


    13. I find the Judge has materially erred in law for  the  reasons  set
        out in the grounds seeking permission as reflected in the grant  of
        permission  to  appeal  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  out   above.
        Accordingly, I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        although all findings other than those relating to the  ability  of
        the appellant to relocate to the IKR and the reasonableness of  the
        internal flight option shall be preserved findings.
    14. The following direction shall apply to  the  future  management  of
        this appeal:




   i. List for a Resumed hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson  sitting
      at Birmingham on 26 September 2017 or such  other  date  as  shall  be
      available subject to the requirements of the effective  management  of
      the Tribunal's lists, time estimate three hours.
  ii. A Kurdish (Bahdini) interpreter shall be provided.
 iii. The appellant must no later than 4 PM 14  days  before  the  allocated
      hearing  date,  file  with  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  send   to   the
      respondent's representative  a  consolidated,  indexed  and  paginated
      bundle containing  all  the  documentary  evidence  the  appellant  is
      seeking to rely upon, including statements of all witnesses who it  is
      intended to call to give evidence  on  the  appellant's  behalf.  Such
      witness statements must be signed, dated, and contain a declaration of
      truth. The witness statements shall stand as the evidence in chief  of
      the maker who shall be tended for cross examination and re-examination
      only. Evidence not filed in accordance with any time limit provided by
      these direction shall not be admitted without permission of the  Upper
      Tribunal for which a written application is required to be made  prior
      to the expiry of any  relevant  limitation  date  confirming  (a)  the
      reason for the failure to  comply  with  directions,  (b)  the  person
      responsible, (c) the nature of the evidence that has not  been  filed,
      (d) the significance of that evidence to the issue(s) in  the  appeal,
      (e) when such evidence will be available to be filed and  served,  (f)
      whether the other party consents to the evidence being filed late, (g)
      the prejudice to either party of either allowing or refusing to  allow
      the evidence to be admitted late, (h)  the  effect  on  any  allocated
      hearing date of late filing of the evidence being permitted.
  iv. All findings of the First-tier Tribunal other than those  relating  to
      the  ability  of  the  appellant  to  relocate  to  the  IKR  and  the
      reasonableness of  the  internal  flight  option  shall  be  preserved
      findings.

Decision

    15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. The appeal shall be listed  for
        a Resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal in accordance with  the
        direction set out above, to enable that Tribunal  to  substitute  a
        decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.




   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make an anonymity order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure          (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4 August 2017



















