

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA049882016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 June 2017                             |On 7 June 2017                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     GTC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify GTC or any of his family members. This direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to Contempt of Court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity  of  GTC  whose  protection
       claim, for reasons that will become clear, remains outstanding.

    2. The Respondent refused GTC's application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection on 6 May 2015. His appeal against this was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox ("the Judge") following a hearing on 6
       September 2016.

The grant of permission


   3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted permission to appeal  (23
      February  2017)  as  it  is  arguable  (in  essence)  that  the  Judge
      materially erred in not recognising  that  GTC  was  the  child  of  a
      refugee, going behind the Respondent's concession on that, and  making
      adverse findings on that and the impact it had on his protection claim
      without giving GTC the chance to comment on it.


Respondent's position

    4. Despite what was submitted in the rule 24 notice (3 March 2017), Mrs
       Pettersen conceded that the  Judge  had  materially  erred  for  the
       reasons given above [3].


Discussion

    5. Given the entirely appropriate and correct concession  made  by  Mrs
       Pettersen, I am satisfied that a material error of law  occurred.  I
       am also satisfied having heard from the representatives that  it  is
       appropriate to remit the matter de novo  as  the  errors  go  beyond
       those contained within the Presidential Guidance  for  retention  in
       the Upper Tribunal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing,
    not before Judge Fox.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
6 June 2017
