

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04231/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2018                       |On 20th September 2018     |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                    M A H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Symes (counsel) instructed by Londonium solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  To preserve the anonymity  order  deemed  necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Thomas promulgated on  26  June  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.


Background


3. The  Appellant  was  born  on  3  January  1977  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh. On 14 March 2018 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's
protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Thomas ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  27  July  2018  Judge  Haria
gave permission to appeal stating

      2. The grounds assert that the judge erred in:


      (a) A  failure  to  take  account  of  relevant  country  and  medical
      evidence, and
      (b) in considering it acceptable for the  appellant  to  suppress  his
      political opinion, and
      (c) In failing to make a finding about how the appellant was  able  to
      leave the country whilst charges against him were outstanding,
      (d) The assessment of  best  interests  of  a  qualifying  child,  the
      daughter (...) and failing to give the fact that she had been  in  the
      UK  for  seven  years  significant  weight  and  failing  to  identify
      "powerful reasons" as to why leave should not be granted.


      3. It is arguable that the Judge may have erred in the  assessment  of
      the best interest of the qualifying child. Accordingly,  I  find  that
      there is an arguable error of law.


      4. All grounds may be argued.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant Mr Symes moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told  me
that the first three grounds of appeal  relate  to  the  appellant's  asylum
appeal. The fourth  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  article  8  ECHR.  Miss
Willocks-Briscoe immediately  volunteered  that  the  respondent  no  longer
resists the fourth ground of appeal.

(b) Mr Symes told me that the Judge  failed  to  take  account  of  relevant
country guidance and medical evidence, and made findings of  fact  based  on
speculation only. He took me to the appellant's witness statement which,  at
paragraph 35, rehearses the contents of the  medical  document  produced  by
the appellant. He told me that the Judge  does  not  refer  to  the  medical
documents and take no account of the  evidence  of  the  injuries  that  the
appellant says he sustained in an assault.

(c) Mr Symes took me to background materials and then referred  me  to  [28]
of the decision where, he told me, the Judge has  misinterpreted  background
materials. The Judge makes a finding  that  politically  motivated  assaults
happen in Bangladesh. Mr Symes told me that the Judge's findings at [28]  do
not reflect  the  respondent's  own  country  policy  and  information  note
January  2018,  which  says  that  corruption   is   endemic,   that   state
institutions are highly politicised, and whilst  the  authorities  have  the
ability to provide effective protection, they may not have  the  willingness
to provide the protection to somebody from the political opposition.

(d) Mr Symes took me to [30] of the decision. There the Judge refers to  the
documentary evidence which includes letters from politicians in  Bangladesh.
He told me that the Judge's decision  not  to  place  any  weight  on  those
documents is not safe.

(e) Mr Symes then took me to [32] of the  decision  and  told  me  that  the
Judge's conclusion in the penultimate sentence (that internal relocation  is
a viable alternative) is unsafe  because  the  conclusion  proceeds  on  the
assumption that the appellant will conceal his political affiliation.

(f) Mr Symes then turned his attention to [12] and [26] of the decision.  At
[12] he said the Judge's findings are incomplete and lack clarity.  He  said
that [26] appears to be either a suggestion  that  the  appellant's  account
lacks credibility or a suggestion that any charges the appellant  faces  are
false or do not exist.

(g) Mr Symes told me that the Judge has disregarded  material  evidence  and
given unsafe reasons for discounting documentary evidence. He told  me  that
those are material errors of law and the decision should be  set  aside.  He
told me that a renewed hearing the First-tier Tribunal is necessary.

6.(a) Ms Willocks-Briscoe told me that the  decision  on  the  asylum  claim
does not contain errors of law. She took me to [6]  of  the  decision  where
the Judge sets out the background, and then to [28] of  the  decision  where
(she said) the Judge made clear findings about the appellant  claimed  fear.
She told me that the background materials have been properly  considered  by
the Judge against the circumstances of the appellant's case on the facts  as
the Judge found them to be.

(b) Ms Willocks-Briscoe told me that the Judge  made  clear  findings  which
were well within the range of findings and conclusions open  to  the  Judge.
She told me that the Judge's findings in  relation  to  internal  relocation
are made on the basis  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  the  political
profile he claims. She told me  that  the  Judge  carefully  considers  each
strand of evidence and reached evidence-based findings of  fact.  She  urged
me to dismiss the appeal relation to the asylum claim.

(c) Ms Willocks- Briscoe told me that the Judges article  8  assessment  and
treatment of the best interests of the appellant oldest child is  flawed  by
material error of law. She referred me to MT & ET (child's  best  interests;
ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88(IAC) and to  the  respondent's  own
policy position and asked me to substitute my  own  decision  on  article  8
ECHR grounds if I dismiss the appeal against the  Judge's  decision  in  the
asylum appeal.

Analysis

7. The first ground of appeal argues that the Judge failed to  take  account
of the medical evidence, dealt inadequately with the  documentary  evidence,
and dealt only superficially with the background materials.

8. The Judge summarises the appellant's position between  [5]  and  [11]  of
the decision. At [10] and [11] the Judge clearly sets  out  the  documentary
evidence relied on by the appellant.

9. The Judge's findings start at [23] of  the  decision.  Between  [25]  and
[32] the Judge makes  evidence-based  findings  of  fact.  The  Judge  gives
adequate reasons for the facts as he finds them to be.  At  [30]  the  Judge
takes account of the documentary evidence and takes  guidance  from  Tanveer
Ahmed [2002]  UKAIT  00439  before  finding  that  he  cannot  rely  on  the
documentary evidence.

10. [25] to [32] of the decision makes it clear  that  the  Judge  considers
all of the evidence in the round. The Judge  reaches  conclusions  that  the
appellant does not like, but the conclusions he reaches are well within  the
range of reasonable conclusions available to the Judge.

11. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  Judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the Judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

12. It was noted in MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  1958  that  adequacy
meant no more nor less than that.  It  was  not  a  counsel  of  perfection.
Still less should it provide  an  opportunity  to  undertake  a  qualitative
assessment of  the  reasons  to  see  if  they  are  wanting,  perhaps  even
surprising, on their merits.  The purpose of the duty to  give  reasons,  is
in part, to enable the losing party to know why she has lost and it is  also
to enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what  the  reasons  for  the
decision are so that they can be examined in case there has  been  an  error
of approach.

13. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge took  account
of each strand of evidence. The Judge considered  the  background  materials
as part of an holistic assessment of all of the evidence. There  is  nothing
wrong with the Judge's fact-finding exercise.  In  reality  the  appellant's
appeal (brought against the asylum, Humanitarian Protection and article 2  &
3 grounds of appeal) amounts to little more than  a  disagreement  with  the
way the Judge has applied the facts as he found them to  be.  The  appellant
might  not  like  the  conclusion  that  the  Judge  arrived  at,  but  that
conclusion is the result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal  equation.  The
correct  test  in  law  has  been  applied.  The  decision  on  the  asylum,
Humanitarian Protection and article  2  &  3  appeals  does  not  contain  a
material error of law.

14. It is now a matter of agreement that there is a material  error  of  law
in relation to article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal. The  appellant's  wife  and
two children are dependent upon the appellant's claim. Every member of  this
family is a Bangladeshi national.  The  appellant's  oldest  daughter  is  a
qualifying child.

15. The Judge deals  with  the  best  interests  of  the  children  and  the
question of whether it is reasonable  for  the  appellant  oldest  child  to
leave the UK between [33] and [35]. The  Judge's  article  8  assessment  at
[34] is flawed. The Judge focuses  on  the  qualifying  child's  ability  to
remain with her  family  and  return  to  Bangladesh.  The  Judge  does  not
consider the guidance given in MT & ET (child's best interests;  ex  tempore
pilot) Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT  88(IAC),  nor  does  the  Judge  consider  the
respondent's own IDIs. Nowhere in the decision does  the  Judge  finds  that
there are powerful reasons to remove a qualifying child.

16. The decision on article 8 ECHR grounds  contains  a  material  error  of
law. I set it aside. I am asked to substitute my own decision.

The Facts

17. The appellant entered the UK in January 2011 as a student. His leave  to
remain was curtailed in January 2015. In April 2015 he made  an  application
for leave to remain on ECHR are grounds, that application was  refused.  The
appellant claimed asylum on 12 September 2016.  His  claim  for  asylum  was
refused by the respondent on 14 March 2018.

18. The appellant's wife and two children are dependent on  the  appellant's
claim. The appellant's youngest child was born in the UK in April 2015.  The
appellant oldest child was born in Bangladesh in 2006 and came to the UK  on
January 2011. She is a qualifying child in terms  of  section  117B  of  the
2002 Act.

19. The appellant oldest daughter  is  immersed  in  the  English  education
system. She  has  just  finished  primary  school,  where  he  distinguished
herself. She  is  an  intelligent  hard-working  schoolgirl,  who  has  just
started secondary school. Her principal language is English.

20. The appellant lives with his wife and two daughters. He  has  a  genuine
and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child.

Article 8 ECHR

21.   Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that immigration control is  in
the public interest. Family  life  within  the  meaning  of  article  8  is
established for the appellant. The respondent's decision is an interference
with that family life. The burden therefore shifts  to  the  respondent  to
show that the interference was justified. The respondent relies  solely  on
the public interest in effective immigration control.

22. The appellant's oldest daughter is a  qualifying  child.   S.117B(6)  of
the 2002 Act,  says

    (6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

23.  The focus in this case is on sub-section (6) of Section  117B.  Section
117B(6) is in two parts which are conjunctive. Section 117B(6)(a) weighs  in
favour of the appellant because he has a  genuine  and  subsisting  paternal
relationship with qualifying children. It is  Section  117B(6)(b)  which  is
determinative of this case.

24. By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means  a  person  who  is
under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has  lived  in
the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years  or  more.   If  a
child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section  117B  of  the  2002
Act as amended, the issue is whether it is not reasonable for that child  to
return.

25.  I remind  myself   of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009. In ZH  (Tanzania)  (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC  4   Lady  Hale  said
that "Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of  particular
importance in assessing the best interests of any child".

26.  In R(on the application MA (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
held that in light of the jurisprudence of the  Supreme  Court,  courts  and
tribunals were not mandated to approach the proportionality  exercise  where
the best interests of the child were in issue in any particular  order  such
that it was an error of law for them to fail to do so:.  Although  it  would
usually be sensible to start with the child's best interests, ultimately  it
did not matter how the balancing exercise was conducted  provided  that  the
child's best interests were treated as a primary  consideration  (paras  49,
53-57 and 72).   In  Kaur  (children's  best  interests  /  public  interest
interface) [2017] UKUT  14  (IAC)  in  which  it  was  held  that  the  best
interests assessment should normally be carried out at the beginning of  the
balancing exercise.

27. In Kaur (children's best interests / public interest  interface)  [2017]
UKUT 14 (IAC) it was held that the "little weight" provisions in Part 5A  of
the 2002 Act do not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or  concept;
"little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-contained
boundaries, will  result  in  the  measurement  of  the  quantum  of  weight
considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.

28.  The guidance given by the respondent in the IDIs  on  Family  Migration
(February 2018) is that the questions a decision maker should pose are:

      (i) is there a genuine and subsisting parental relationship?
      (ii) is the child a British citizen or have they lived in the UK for a
      continuous period of at least 7 years?
      (iii) will the consequence of the refusal of the application  be  that
      the child is required to leave the UK?
      (iv) would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK.  In
      many cases where one parent has a right to remain in the UK, the child
      would not leave?

29. The respondent's guidance suggests that the test is  whether  the  child
would be likely to leave rather than actually be  required  to  leave.   The
Home Office now say in those circumstances EX.1 (a) and s.117B(6) would  not
apply but the impact on the child of the appellant's departure from  the  UK
should be considered taking into account the best interests of the child  as
a primary consideration and if refusal would  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh
consequences, then  leave  can  be  granted  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
circumstances.

30. It does not follow that section 117B(6) should  be  interpreted  in  the
same way as the SSHD  interprets  his  immigration  rules.   In  R  (on  the
application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705 it was held (see [19])  that
when applying section 117B(6) only three questions needed  to  be  asked  as
long as the applicant was not liable to  deportation,  and  those  questions
are

      (i) is there a genuine and subsisting parental relationship?
      (ii) is the child a British citizen or have they lived in the UK for a
      continuous period of at least 7 years?
      (iv) would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?

31. Caselaw tells me that it is in a child's best interests  to  live  in  a
family with both of their parents.  It  cannot  be  reasonable  to  cause  a
school age child distress. It cannot be reasonable to separate a child  from
one of its parents. On the facts as I find them to be, family  life  exists.
The respondent's decision is an interference  with  that  family  life.  The
burden therefore shifts to the respondent to show that the interference  was
justified. The respondent relies solely on the public interest in  effective
immigration control.

32. The  respondent's  own  IDIs  say  that  it  is  not  reasonable  for  a
qualifying child to leave  the  UK.  There  is  no  evidence  of  strong  or
powerful reasons to remove the appellant's oldest daughter. On the facts  as
I find them to be s.117B(6) weighs in the appellant's favour.

33. In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
confirmed that if section 117B(6) applies then "there can be no  doubt  that
section 117B(6) must be read as a  self-contained  provision  in  the  sense
that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions  specified  in  the
sub-section are satisfied, the public interest will not justify removal."

34. Because section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act  weighs  in  the  appellant's
favour, I find that the public  interest  does  not  justify  removal.  That
finding leads me to the conclusion  that  the  respondent's  decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with  the  right  to  respect  for  article  8
family life.


35. The guidance in MT & ET and in R(on the application MA  (Pakistan)  and
Others) v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  and  Another
[2016] EWCA Civ 705,  tells me that there must be a powerful reason  why  a
qualifying child should be removed.

36. In the case of MT and ET (child's  best  interests;  ex  tempore  pilot)
Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 it was held that a very young child, who  had  not
started school or who has only recently done so,  will  have  difficulty  in
establishing that her Article 8 private  and  family  life  has  a  material
element, which lies outside her need to live with  her  parent  or  parents,
wherever that may be.  This position, however, changes over time,  with  the
result that an assessment of best interests  must  adopt  a  correspondingly
wider focus, examining the child's position in the  wider  world,  of  which
school will usually be an important part.  On  the  particular  facts  of  a
child who had been in the UK for ten years from  the  age  of  4,  that  her
mother had abused the immigration laws by overstaying on a  visit  visa  and
then making a false asylum claim and at some stage using  a  false  document
to  obtain  employment  was  not  such  a  bad  immigration  history  as  to
constitute the kind of "powerful"  reason  that  would  render  the  child's
removal to Nigeria reasonable.

37. The circumstances of the appellants  oldest  child  are  almost  on  all
fours with the circumstances of the child appellant in MT & ET.  Relying  on
R(on  the  application  MA  (Pakistan)  and   Others)   v   Upper   Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  there
must be a powerful reason why a qualifying child should  be  removed.  There
is a dearth of evidence of such a powerful reason which could  outweigh  the
length of residence.

38. As there are no  powerful  reasons  to  remove  the  appellant's  oldest
daughter, it cannot be reasonable for her (a qualifying child  at  the  date
of application) to leave the UK, so that in the  article  8  proportionality
assessment the appellant benefits from s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  26  June  2018
does not contain errors of law in the relation to the  Asylum,  Humanitarian
Protection and article 2 & 3 Grounds  of  appeal.  Insofar  as  this  appeal
relates to those parts of the Judge's decision the appeal is dismissed.

40. The decision on the article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal of  the  First-tier
Tribunal promulgated on 26 June 2018 contains a material error  of  law  and
is set aside.

41. I substitute my own decision

42. The appeal is refused on asylum, humanitarian protection and  article  2
and 3 ECHR grounds of appeal.

43. The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Signed
             Date 20 September 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




