
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04917/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                |On 2nd May 2019                 |
|Prepared on 29 April 2019       |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. K.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, for Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, entered the  UK  illegally
         in the  company  of  his  wife  and  younger  brother.  He  made  a
         protection claim on  14  November  2016,  with  them  both  as  his
         dependents on that claim.
      2. The protection claim was refused on 12 May  2017,  and  the  appeal
         against this  decision  was  heard  and  dismissed  by  First  Tier
         Tribunal Judge Moran in a decision promulgated  on  19  July  2017.
         Although it was accepted that the Appellant  was  an  Afghan  Hindu
         from Kabul, his account  of  his  experiences  in  Afghanistan  was
         rejected, in particular, as  being  materially  different  to  that
         which had initially been advanced as the basis for  his  protection
         claim. His younger brother had not been kidnapped.  There  were  no
         additional risk factors beyond the family's Hindu religion. He  had
         not been separated from his parents en  route,  and  they  remained
         living in Afghanistan and able to provide support upon return.
      3. Permission to appeal that decision was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Bruce on 10 January 2018.  She  identified  as  arguable  the
         failure of Judge Moran to consider separately the position  of  the
         Appellant's wife as a Hindu woman. Although she granted  permission
         on all grounds, the other grounds were an unparticularised  failure
         to give adequate reasons, and, a generalised assertion of a failure
         to properly consider the ability of the Appellant to relocate.
      4. The appeal then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly on
         23  May  2018.  Although  there  was  obviously  no  merit  in  the
         unparticularised reasons challenge to the adverse findings of  fact
         (which were in reality fully and adequately reasoned), his decision
         records that the parties agreed that the appeal should be  remitted
         for rehearing to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing, the
         complaint that Judge Moran had failed to consider the  position  of
         the Appellant's wife upon return to Kabul having been made out.
      5. In the circumstances, when the remitted appeal came  before  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Cary he, correctly, treated it  as  a  de  novo
         hearing. He too rejected as untrue the evidence of  the  Appellant,
         his wife, and his brother concerning the events that were  said  to
         have led them to leave Afghanistan [50]. He rejected the suggestion
         that the Appellant's wife had ever been  threatened  or  assaulted,
         and rejected the claim that either she, or her young daughter faced
         a real risk of abduction and forced conversion to Islam [51-3].  He
         rejected the claim that the Appellant's parents had sold their shop
         in Kabul and concluded that the Appellant and his dependents  could
         be supported by that business, and the local Gurdwara  upon  return
         [56].
      6. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal on four  grounds  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 15 January 2019 on the basis it was
         arguable that although the Judge had correctly directed himself  to
         follow the guidance to be found in  TG  and  others  (Afghan  Sikhs
         persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595, he might have failed to
         apply it correctly, since it was not clear where and how the  Judge
         had concluded the Appellant and his dependents  would  be  able  to
         live both in terms of generating income or accommodation.
      7. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.


    The challenges
      8. Ms Cleghorn, although the author  of  the  grounds,  accepted  that
         there was no merit in Ground 1; a  complaint  that  the  Judge  had
         refused to depart from the country guidance to be found in  TG  and
         Others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG  [2015]  UKUT  595.
         She accepted that given the evidence that was before the  Judge  it
         was open to him to do so. The assertions made within the ground  as
         to arbitrary outcomes in protection claims by  Afghan  Sikhs/Hindus
         are not supported by evidence, and as such must  be  discounted.  I
         need say no more.
      9. Ms Cleghorn accepted that Ground 2 and 3 should be taken  together,
         as raising the  same  complaint,  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
         properly apply the guidance to be found in TG.
     10. Ms Cleghorn abandoned Ground 4, which had  been  a  complaint  that
         Judge Cary had failed to treat the appeal as a de novo hearing.  He
         was entitled to look at the decisions  of  Judge  Moran  and  Judge
         Farrelly, as he did. Given the basis for the remittal, he was  also
         entitled to consider the evidence that was given  to  Judge  Moran.
         There is no  basis  for  the  assertion  in  this  ground  that  he
         improperly asked any question of any witness.
     11. In the circumstances the surviving ground makes no challenge to the
         adverse findings of fact made by Judge  Cary,  or,  his  conclusion
         that the Appellant's parents remain living in Kabul and continue to
         trade the family business.


    The application of TG
     12. It is plain, as Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  noted  when  granting
         permission to appeal that Judge Cary appropriately directed himself
         to consider the guidance to  be  found  in  TG.  He  made  specific
         reference to that guidance throughout his decision [22, 35-7,  and,
         50-2]. He also considered the guidance to be found in  AK  (Article
         15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 and  HN  &  SA  (Afghanistan)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 123 which confirmed that on the evidence  available
         in March 2015 there was no basis for  departing  from  the  Article
         15(c) guidance in AK [54-5].
     13. Although Ms Cleghorn argued that the Judge had erred in failing  to
         make any reference to AS (safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]
         UKUT 118, she was unable to identify any part of that guidance that
         was relevant, in that its consideration ought  to  have  led  to  a
         different overall conclusion, or would have been likely to  do  so.
         Whilst it is  correct  that  AS  is  not  referred  to  within  the
         decision, that is not of itself  enough  to  establish  a  material
         error of law. I note that the Upper  Tribunal  in  AS  specifically
         stated that the guidance to be found in AK in relation  to  Article
         15(c) risk, and, the ability of  certain  categories  of  women  to
         relocate to Kabul, were unaffected by their decision.
     14. I also note that the Appellant's wife and  two  year  old  daughter
         (born in the  UK)  would  not  return  to  Kabul  as  unaccompanied
         females. The Judge's decision identifies three adult  male  members
         of the immediate family available to provide  protection  for  them
         upon return; the  Appellant,  his  brother,  and,  his  father.  In
         addition the Judge noted the Appellant's reference to a  person  at
         interview who he had described  as  a  "friend  or  uncle"  of  his
         father, and,  an  "important  person"  [Q99-103]  [52].  The  clear
         inference from that evidence is that a wider family support network
         remains in Afghanistan, and accessible to  the  Appellant  and  his
         dependents.
     15. I also note that the  complaint  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
         adequate consideration to the ability  of  the  Appellant  and  his
         dependents to support themselves upon return  to  Kabul,  fails  to
         properly engage with the finding that they have  his  parents,  the
         family home, and, the family business to return to  [56].  Moreover
         neither the Appellant's evidence, nor the grounds, engaged with the
         financial support packages available to those  prepared  to  return
         voluntarily. Absent the argument that discrimination would make  it
         impossible to do so it is therefore far from clear in  the  context
         of the adverse findings of fact why  the  Appellant  could  not  be
         expected to successfully return to pursuing  with  his  father  the
         business in Kabul that would allow all of the members of the family
         to support themselves once again from its trading profits.
     16. I also note that the Judge did consider the question of  education.
         He noted that the Appellant's wife was said to have received  none,
         but that there was no suggestion she had been denied  an  education
         by factors outside the family. The guidance in TG #94-5, concerning
         access to education, notes that in Kabul schools have been  set  up
         with Sikh teachers,  and  that  education  is  available  with  the
         Gurdwara. Thus suitable education is currently  available  to  both
         Sikh and Hindu children in Kabul, and there is no  suggestion  that
         it is denied, or unavailable, to female children. At  the  date  of
         the hearing the Appellant's daughter was too young  to  enter  full
         time education, and that point was some way off,  but  the  country
         guidance did not offer a sound evidential  basis  for  any  finding
         that education for her would be unavailable should her parents wish
         her to be educated.
     17. In my judgement it is quite clear when the decision is  read  as  a
         whole that the Judge quite properly concluded  that  the  Appellant
         had failed to establish that he and his family  had  no  access  to
         family support networks,  housing,  and  employment  sufficient  to
         allow them to support themselves adequately upon return  to  Kabul.
         The burden of proof lay upon the Appellant to establish that he and
         his family was entitled to international protection. It  is  in  my
         judgement quite clear from the Judge's decision that he  failed  to
         discharge it, and why he failed to do so. To  put  it  bluntly  the
         Judge was not satisfied that he had been told the truth.


    Conclusion
     18. Accordingly, notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which  permission  to
         appeal was granted, I confirm the Judge's decision to  dismiss  the
         asylum, Article 3, and humanitarian protection appeals. There is no
         material error of law in the approach taken by  the  Judge  to  the
         appeals that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.



    DECISION


    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  8
    October 2018 contained no material error of  law  in  the  decision  to
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set
    aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him, or  the  members
    of his family. This direction applies both to the Appellant and to  the
    Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    proceedings being brought for contempt of court.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 29 April 2019
