
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04095/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 10 December 2019                  |On 7 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    M Y C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons of Counsel instructed by AB James
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     AMENDED[1] DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1.   The appellant, a national of China, has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge McClure of the  First-tier  Tribunal  sent  on  1
    October 2019 dismissing her appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 4 April 2019 refusing her protection claim.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2006  and  claimed
    asylum the same day.  Her application was refused by the respondent  in
    December 2006.  She  did  not  appeal  and  thereafter  was  placed  on
    reporting conditions when encountered for working illegally.  In  March
    2015 and again in June 2016 she lodged further submissions.  These were
    linked with a referral made on her  behalf  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism (NRM) in order for a competent authority to make  a  decision
    as  to  whether  she  fell  within  the  definition  of  a  victim   of
    trafficking.  An NRM decision was made on 15  October  2018  concluding
    that she was a victim of human trafficking.

3.   There were several strands to the appellant's asylum  claim,  including
    that she would be at risk on return  because  her  parents  had  become
    involved in a village dispute about compensation for property where the
    government wished to build a railway, risk from local villagers who had
    targeted her and her family because of their Christian beliefs and risk
    from the snakeheads who had arranged for  her  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  A further dimension to the appellant's claim arose out of the
    accepted fact that she had been forced into prostitution in the  UK  by
    snakeheads in the Scotland area.

4.   The judge did not find the appellant's account of her and her  family's
    adverse experiences in China to be credible.  However, in light of  the
    Conclusive Grounds decision of the NRM and the respondent's  acceptance
    in  light  of  that  decision  that  the  appellant  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking, the judge stated that he was willing to accept  that  once
    the appellant and her aunt contacted snakeheads, the appellant had then
    been trafficked by  the  snakeheads  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    purposes of being forced into prostitution.  At paragraph 77 the  judge
    said "I accept from what the appellant has said  that  she  was  for  a
    period of approximately a year forced into prostitution  by  snakeheads
    in the Scotland area".  The judge considered whether there would  be  a
    risk on return to the appellant from the snakeheads and concluded  that
    there would not.  The judge further gave consideration to whether there
    would be a risk of re-trafficking more generally and concluded that  in
    the light of the extant country guidance decisions  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection in China.  The judge also concluded that  the
    appellant's  Article  8  circumstances  did  not  make   the   decision
    disproportionate.

5.   There were three grounds of appeal.  It  was  contended  first  of  all
    that the judge had failed to have  regard  to  material  considerations
    when assessing the risk on return of re-trafficking, in particular  the
    appellant's vulnerable status in the light of medical  and  psychiatric
    evidence.  Secondly, it was submitted that the judge had failed to have
    regard to updating  background  evidence  contained  in  the  US  State
    Department Report.  Thirdly, it was submitted that the judge had failed
    to have regard to material factors in  the  Article  8  proportionality
    analysis.

6.   I heard clear and concise submissions from  both  the  representatives.



7.   I am persuaded that the judge did materially err in law.

8.   In relation to the first ground, whilst the  judge  did  refer  to  the
    appellant's  claims  to  have  psychological  difficulties   (including
    nightmares and finding it difficult to sleep, dreaming that  she  would
    be killed and dumped in a river by  the  sex  traffickers)  he  nowhere
    considers whether this meant she was a vulnerable witness and  whether,
    pursuant to the Joint President Guidance Note of 2010,  allowances  had
    therefore to  be  made  when  assessing  the  appellant's  credibility.
    Compounding this error was the judge's  treatment  of  her  mental  and
    psychological  health.  More  than  once  the  judge  referred  to  the
    appellant being "not ill as no evidence  of  such  has  been  produced"
    (paragraph  70)  and  as  having  suffered  "no  problems  since  2008"
    (paragraph 77).  Produced before the judge were a number  of  documents
    including a Rule 35 report from Dr Rebecca Ward who had  described  the
    appellant as having poor sleep and nightmares, and waking up  screaming
    and dreaming of being buried.  Dr Ward clearly considered the appellant
    to be significantly traumatised.  There was also a letter provided by a
    Doctor Fletcher dated May 2019 confirming that the appellant  had  been
    attending regular interviews since December 2018 for  "severe  anxiety,
    insomnia and low  mood,  depression".   There  was  a  letter  from  Ms
    Westergren of the City  Hearts  Salvation  Army  Support  Services  who
    described the appellant as actively working with the  Rape  and  Sexual
    Abuse  Support  Centre  in  respect  of  the  psychological  trauma  of
    trafficking.   Even  separately  from  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's mental health, the judge was still  obliged  to  treat  the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness under the Joint Presidential Guidance
    Note of 2010 by virtue of his acceptance  that  she  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  In short, there is nothing to  indicate  that  the  judge
    took any account of  the  appellant's  psychological  difficulties  and
    trafficking history when  assessing  credibility.   This  disregard  of
    relevant evidence was not only relevant to the issue of the credibility
    of her account of her past experiences in China, but was also  relevant
    to the separate dimension of whether the appellant would be at risk  on
    return by virtue of being re-trafficked.  It is clear from the  judge's
    assessment of this issue that he considered that  not  only  would  she
    have family support (from an aunt) but that she was resilient and would
    be able to support herself.  At paragraph  85  the  judge  stated  that
    "given all of the circumstances I see no reason why the appellant would
    not be able to work and fend for herself as she has done in the  United
    Kingdom without apparent assistance for the period from 2008 through to
    2010 ..."

9.   The judge's reference to country guidance highlights a second error  in
    his approach.  The  judge  placed  specific  reliance  on  the  country
    guidance given by the Tribunal in the case of     HC &  RC  (Trafficked
    women) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027.  The judge relies on this case at a
    number of points in his assessment, for example  at  paragraph  81  and
    paragraph 85.  The difficulty with such reliance is that the case of HC
    was ten years old and at that time China was classified  as  a  Tier  2
    watch list  country  for  the  purposes  of  the  US  State  Department
    Trafficking Report.  Before the judge there was the US State Department
    Trafficking in Persons  Report  for  2018.   This  specified  that  the
    Chinese state  did  not  fully  meet  the  minimum  standards  for  the
    elimination of trafficking and was not making significant efforts to do
    so and therefore remained a Tier 3 country - the worst possible rating.
     Mr Tan submits that this was not a material error on the part  of  the
    judge because although he did not refer to this  report,  he  noted  at
    paragraph 82 that  there  are  organisations  which  provide  help  and
    assistance to women that had been trafficked.  However,  leaving  aside
    that this reference by the judge  was  to  the  state  of  affairs  "as
    indicated in the case law" (which was significantly out  of  date)  but
    the recent US State Department Report evidence was far from categorical
    regarding the sufficiency of the Chinese state in providing  protection
    to victims of trafficking. Early on in the report it is stated that the
    authorities  detained  women  arrested  on  suspicion  of  prostitution
    sometimes for months and often forcibly  returned  foreign  victims  to
    their trafficking circumstances after they escaped and  reported  their
    abuses.  The report's recommendations mentioned in particular the  need
    for more  positive  action  to  assist  inter  alia,  "Chinese  victims
    returning from abroad".   Under the subheading 'Protection' this report
    stated that the government had decreased efforts to protect victims.

         "Unlike last year the government did not report how many victims it
         identified during the reporting period nor did  it  provide  agency
         specific  data,  although  media  reports   indicated   authorities
         continued  to  remove  some   victims   from   their   exploitative
         situations. ... Access to  specialised  care  depended  heavily  on
         victims' location and gender,  and  the  extent  to  which  victims
         benefitted from these services was unknown".

    At the very least, the judge was required to engage with this  material
    and explain why it was  that,  despite  the  marked  worsening  of  the
    trafficking status of China since the relevant country guidance  cases,
    the appellant could nevertheless  be  expected  to  receive  sufficient
    protection.

10.  In light of my findings on the appellant's first two grounds I  do  not
    consider it necessary to rule on ground 3.  This relies  in  particular
    on the Court of Appeal decision in PK (Ghana) [2018]  EWCA  Civ  98  in
    which it was stated that whether an applicant's personal  circumstances
    were such as to make it necessary for her to stay in  the  UK  must  be
    assessed by reference to the aim of Article 14(1)(a) EC 18 which is the
    "protection and assistance" of victims of trafficking  (paragraph  50).
    For the respondent and for the judge  it  was  considered  as  counting
    against the appellant that her  Conclusive  Grounds  decision  did  not
    include any recommendation for a grant of leave to remain  in  the  UK.
    Whether that is a feature of such a decision that could  or  should  be
    relevant must be regarded as extremely moot in light  of  the  analysis
    contained in the recent High Court judgment in R(JP) v SSHD [2019] EWHC
    3346 (Admin).  However, given the error of law  found  in  the  judge's
    assessment of  the  appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    Article 3 grounds, it is clear that the judge's  Article  8  assessment
    cannot stand either.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the decision of the judge  should
    be set aside for material error of law.

11.  Both parties were in agreement with me that if I did  find  a  material
    error of law the case should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I
    consider that to be the appropriate course because there will  need  to
    be a fresh assessment of the credibility of  the  appellant's  account.
    That will not be a straightforward task as the  appellant  has  plainly
    offered contradictory narratives, but the  assessment  this  time  must
    keep to the fore the fact that the appellant is a vulnerable witness.

12.  An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 27 December 2019
                [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




                           -----------------------
[1] Amended under rule 42 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 in order to correct particulars of Counsel and instructing solicitors.


