
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/04975/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                      |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 21 November 2017                   |          On 4 December 2017          |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    s h a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Grubb instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity direction imposed in my decision
    sent on 3 October 2017 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
    matter likely  to  lead  to  members  of  the  public  identifying  the
    appellant or her child.  A failure to comply with the  direction  could
    lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  She  is  Kurdish  and  comes  from
    Suleymanih in the IKR.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 November
    2015 and claimed asylum the next day.  The basis of her claim  was,  at
    that time, that she had divorced her husband in 2014 and was at risk of
    an 'honour killing' by her husband and his family on return.

 3. On 3 May 2016, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum and humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  By this  time,  the
    appellant was pregnant as a result of  a  relationship  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  In addition to claiming that she will be at risk from her ex-
    husband and his family and as a lone  returning  woman,  the  appellant
    also claimed that  she  will  be  at  risk  from  her  own  family  (in
    particular her brother) because of the shame that she had brought  upon
    her family by becoming pregnant outside of marriage.

 5.  Judge  Fowell,  who  heard  the  appellant's  appeal,  dismissed   the
    appellant's claims.  Whilst he accepted that, if she were at risk of an
    honour killing, she would not  be  able  to  obtain  a  sufficiency  of
    protection  in  the  IKR  and  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to
    internally relocate, he found that she was not at  risk  from  her  ex-
    husband (on account of her divorce) or from her own family as a  result
    of becoming pregnant out of wedlock or as a returning lone woman.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission granted by
    the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Coker) on 17 May 2017.

 7. The appeal was initially listed before me on 19 September 2017.

 8. In my decision sent on 3 October 2017, I concluded that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law principally by failing to properly take  into
    account the expert evidence of Dr Fatah whose evidence was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 9. Consequently, I  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and
    adjourned the hearing to be relisted for a resumed  hearing  to  remake
    the decision in the Upper Tribunal.

10. The resumed hearing was listed before me on 21 November 2017.

11. The appellant was represented by Ms C Grubb and the respondent by Mr  I
    Richards.

The Issues

12. At the outset, Mr Richards acknowledged that Judge Fowell's findings in
    the appellant's favour in respect of there not being a  sufficiency  of
    protection against an honour crime and that  the  appellant  could  not
    internally relocate stood.

13. That is undoubtedly correct and follows from my direction in para 28 of
    my decision sent on 3 October 2017.  None of those positive findings in
    the appellant's favour were challenged by the respondent in  the  Upper
    Tribunal proceedings.

14.  Mr  Richards  acknowledged  that,  given  the  accepted   facts,   the
    appellant's claim was supported by the objective evidence and the  Home
    Office's "Country Policy and Information Note, Iraq:  Kurdish  'Honour'
    Crimes" document (August 2017) ("CPI Note") which  Mr  Richards  placed
    before me.  He candidly accepted that the only  basis  upon  which  the
    appellant would not succeed was if I found that the appellant's brother
    was not  someone  who  would  behave  in  the  way  recognised  in  the
    background material in respect of the  appellant  given  that  she  had
    become pregnant outside marriage.

15. Ms Grubb relied upon her skeleton argument  and,  set  out  therein,  a
    number of passages from the CPI Note placed before me.  She also relied
    upon Dr Fatah's report at paras 55-58.  She submitted that even if  the
    appellant's brother was more  liberal,  the  societal  pressure  would,
    nevertheless, pressurise  the  family  to  act  against  the  appellant
    because of her 'honour' crime.

Discussion

16. The underlying fact which creates the risk  of  an  'honour'  crime  is
    accepted in this appeal, namely that the appellant has since  she  came
    to the UK become pregnant, and given  birth  to  a  child,  outside  of
    wedlock.  As Dr Fatah points out at para 54 of his report, one  of  the
    sources of "offences against the family's honour" includes "sex outside
    of marriage".  That is also recognised in the Home Office's CPI Note at
    para 7.1.1.

17. At paras 94-96,  Dr  Fatah  deals  explicitly  with  the  risk  to  the
    appellant as a result of a relationship with a man outside marriage  as
    follows:

         "5.6 Risks from [the appellant's] family

             94.  I understand that [the appellant] is currently  pregnant.
                  [The appellant] was in a relationship with a man  who  she
                  met in the UK.  [The appellant]  is  not  married  to  the
                  father of her unborn child.  [The appellant]  states  that
                  she cannot return to Iraq because having a  child  outside
                  of wedlock is considered to be shameful  and  damaging  of
                  her family's honour.

             95.  As mentioned above, sex outside of marriage in  Iraq  and
                  the IKR is forbidden.   Having  sex  outside  of  marriage
                  would constitute as an honour offence and the tainting  of
                  the family's honour which is attached to a female  of  the
                  family.  The most common cause of an honour crime in  Iraq
                  and Kurdistan is  having  sexual  intercourse  outside  of
                  wedlock.

             96.  [The appellant] is having a child  out  of  wedlock,  she
                  will be considered by her family and wider society to have
                  committed an honour  offence.   This  may  result  in  her
                  family, namely the male members  carrying  out  an  honour
                  crime to 'cleanse' the family's honour."

18. The evidence clearly indicates that  the  shame  is  brought  upon  the
    family as a whole and the risk of  'honour'  crimes  arises  from  male
    members of the family, including a father and brother.

19. I accept what is said by Dr Fatah concerning the societal pressure on a
    family where a female member of  that  family  is  considered  to  have
    brought shame upon the family set out at paras 55-61 of his  report  as
    follows:

         "55. The killing  of  women  is  mostly  due  to  social  pressure.
             Sometimes it is the case that her immediate family will  think
             that physical  abuse  or  confinement  is  punishment  enough.
             However, they can be  pressured  into  killing  her  by  other
             relatives who will sympathize less and pressurise  the  family
             by discussing relentlessly the  effects  it  has  had  on  the
             honour of the family or tribe.

         56.  Depending on the family or tribe's social  background  or  the
             tradition of the region, the extended family may get involved.
              It is customary for male members of the immediate family  and
             first  and  second  cousins  to  take  part  in  planning  and
             executing the killing of those deemed as 'dishonourable'.

         57.  Another reason relatives will do so is  because  they  believe
             that not killing the woman in question will  make  the  family
             appear as one who tolerates such behaviour.   The  consequence
             of this can be dire to the image of the family and the  number
             or kind of suitors other girls in the family will have or even
             the family businesses.

         58.  On 01 November 2012, the family of a woman were sentenced to a
             collective 80  years  of  imprisonment  after  she  was  found
             beheaded in a village.  Indicating that external pressures had
             influenced  the  killing,  the  director  of  the   department
             responsible for following up  on  cases  of  violence  against
             women in Erbil stated:

                  There  are  fathers  who  are  willing  to  receive  their
                  daughters back into the family, but  they  cannot  due  to
                  family and tribal traditions.

         59.  Many men,  who  are  fathers  and  brothers,  in  conservative
             communities of Kurdistan believe that the women (maharem)  are
             their honour (namus or sharaf) and that Islam gives them power
             over them: what they do is right in the society's eyes.

         60.  A man who in the past worked for a women's empowerment centre,
             but now wishes  to  remain  anonymous,  said  that  women  are
             treated more or less as objects for men to use for  their  own
             needs, which is why it's acceptable to  kill  them  when  they
             step out of line from their role as subordinates; for example,
             if they have a sexual relationship with a man to whom they are
             not married.

         61.  Women who have been accused of a dishonourable act  are  often
             subjected to many types of violence before the killing occurs.
              These can  vary  from  psychological  harm  and  insults,  to
             separation from the rest of family and society.  They are also
             forced to leave their place of work and not return to  school,
             college or university.  This  period  preceding  the  killing,
             gives the male members time  to  make  a  decision  about  the
             woman's life and how to cleanse the perceived  stain  she  has
             brought on the family's honour."

20. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish a real  risk  of
    persecution for a Convention reason, namely as a member of a particular
    social group in Iraq.

21. Whilst the evidence before the judge, which he accepted, was  that  the
    appellant's brother was supportive of her divorce that does not lead me
    to conclude that  he  would  adopt  a  liberal  or  similar  supportive
    approach as a result of the  appellant  becoming  pregnant  outside  of
    marriage.  Nothing in  Dr  Fatah's  report  is  supportive  of  such  a
    conclusion.  In my judgment, the background evidence well  demonstrates
    the approach to "honour" crimes committed by male members  of  families
    where a female member has, like the appellant, brought shame upon  that
    family by becoming pregnant and having a child out of wedlock.  I  also
    bear in mind that, as Dr Fatah points out in his report and I  set  out
    above, societal pressure is  likely  to  affect  the  attitude  of  the
    appellant's family to her.

22. I find as a fact that there is a real risk that the appellant's  family
    will, as a result of her becoming pregnant in the UK  outside  wedlock,
    consider that she has brought dishonour upon her family and there is  a
    real risk that they will commit an honour crime against  her.   As  the
    Home Office CPI Note states at para 2.3.5:

         "A woman at real risk of having an 'honour' crime  being  committed
         against her will be at risk of serious harm".

23. I agree.  The appellant  has  established  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm as a result of an honour crime being committed against her
    by her family.

24. As I have already pointed out, Judge Fowell's findings at para  60  and
    61 that, if at risk, the appellant would not obtain  a  sufficiency  of
    protection from an honour crime in the IKR and could not reasonably  be
    expected to internally relocate within the IKR or Iraq  generally  were
    not challenged in the Upper Tribunal and, therefore, stand.

25. For these reasons, therefore,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    return to Iraq would breach the Refugee  Convention  and  that  she  is
    entitled to refugee status.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds was set aside by my decision sent on 3 October
    2017 as it involved the making of an error of law.


27. I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            1, December 2017



