
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04683/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22 March 2019                                |On 27 March 2019               |
|                                                |                               |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AMD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lams
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 11 March 1994 and is a male  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka. He arrived in the United Kingdom in  January  2017  and  claimed
    asylum. His claim was refused by decision  dated  22  March  2018.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 October 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal. First, the appellant challenges  the
    judge's decision for failing to make proper findings in respect of  the
    report of a consultant psychiatrist, Dr Hajioff. The  psychiatrist  had
    examined the appellant in August 2018 and had diagnosed depression  and
    chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The judge recorded  [34]
    that the psychiatrist found that there was a risk of suicide  and  that
    there was evidence that the appellant was admitted to  hospital  on  29
    June 2018 having taken an overdose of amitriptyline and paracetamol. It
    is unclear whether the judge  accepted  the  diagnoses  or  whether  he
    accepted claimed causation of PTSD. Secondly, the judge failed to  give
    proper consideration to the appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  (see
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 (2010)). Thirdly, the  appellant
    asserts that the judge failed to take account of relevant evidence. The
    appellant claims to be a member of the TGTE and produced  a  membership
    card for the period 2018 to 2023. The judge failed to give reasons  for
    rejecting the appellant's claim that his sur place activities including
    attendance at demonstrations would expose him to risk on return to  Sri
    Lanka. Judge and failed also to take proper account of the significance
    of the TGTE as a banned diaspora organisation and to apply the relevant
    country  guidance  for  Sri  Lanka  (GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

 3. At the initial hearing at Birmingham on 22 March 2019,  Mr  Mills,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State, told me that the respondent agreed
    that the judge had erred  in  law  in  his  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence and that the appeal should be  heard  de  novo.   I  agree.  I
    direct that none of the findings of fact should stand. In  consequence,
    there will need to be a fresh fact-finding  exercise  which  is  better
    conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to which the  appeal  is  returned
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  8
    October 2019 is set aside. None of the findings of  fact  shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal
    (not Judge Broe; Tamil interpreter) to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 22 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 22 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane








