
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/04063/2017

                                           PA/04065/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2nd August 2018                      |On 27th August 2018                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                            J G (First appellant)
                           I G (second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The first appellant, JG, is a female citizen of Albania born  in  1986.
    The second appellant is JG's daughter who was born in  2016.   I  shall
    refer to  the  first  appellant  as  "the  appellant"  throughout  this
    decision.  By a decision promulgated on 9 February 2018, I  found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that his decision fell to
    be set aside.  My reasons for reaching that finding were as follows:

         1.   The first appellant, JG, is a female citizen  of  Albania  who
         was born in 1986.  The second appellant (her daughter  and  who  is
         dependent on her mother's claim) was born in 2016.  I  shall  refer
         to the first appellant as 'the appellant' throughout this decision.
          The appellant claims that she left  Albania  in  August  2015  and
         travelled via Italy to France and then to the United Kingdom.   She
         entered the United Kingdom clandestinely by lorry in November 2015.
          She did not claim asylum until October 2016.  She claimed that she
         was in danger of abuse at the hands of her father in Albania.   She
         had given birth to  the  second  appellant  whilst  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  She had claimed that  she  had  been  trafficked  to  the
         United Kingdom but withdrew that claim as the judge recorded  [67].
         Her application for asylum was rejected by the Secretary  of  State
         by a decision dated 4 April 2017.  She appealed to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Young) which, in a decision promulgated on 20  June
         2017, dismissed the appeal.  She now appeals, with  permission,  to
         the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The judge rejected the appellant's claim that she was at  risk
         from her father.  That finding is not the subject of a cross-appeal
         by the appellant and I see no reason to interfere with it.  At  the
         Upper Tribunal hearing, Ms  Reville  concentrated  her  submissions
         upon the fact that the appellant would be returning to Albania as a
         single mother with a young child.  That element of  the  claim  and
         appeal was considered by Judge Young but he rejected it.  At  [81],
         he referred to the case of MK (Lesbians) Albania  CG  [2009]  UKIAT
         0036.  Ms Reville submitted  that  that  case  is  no  longer  good
         country guidance and that the judge erred in law  by  referring  to
         it.  Mr Nath submitted that there was  no  material  error  in  the
         judge's reliance upon MK given that he had only concluded from  his
         consideration of  the  case  [81]  that  each  case  needed  to  be
         determined  on  its  own  facts,  a  conclusion  which  is   hardly
         controversial.  Whilst that is true as regards [81], I am concerned
         that the judge refers again to the case of MK at [83].   The  judge
         wrote:

         Insofar as humanitarian protection and the protection of Article  3
         ECHR are concerned again  it  would  be  necessary  to  accept  the
         appellant's claim that she is at risk of her father and that is not
         a claim that I  can  consider  can  be  accepted  for  the  reasons
         outlined.  Neither could it be said  according  to  MK  that  there
         would be a real risk that a woman without family support in Albania
         would  suffer  destitution  amounting  to  inhuman   or   degrading
         treatment resulting in a breach of Article 3 of  ECHR.   That  case
         does say that each case should be determined on its own facts but I
         do not find that the facts here would support the proposition  that
         there is a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment.

         3.   I find that paragraph to be problematic.  First, the judge has
         relied upon the now withdrawn country guidance  of  MK.   Secondly,
         the last sentence of the paragraph amounts to nothing more than the
         observation that every case should be determined on its  own  facts
         followed by the assertion that  the  facts  in  this  case  do  not
         indicate that there would be  a  risk.   What  is  missing  in  the
         analysis are proper reasons for reaching that conclusion.  Thirdly,
         it is  also  unclear  from  the  paragraph  whether  the  judge  is
         proceeding on the premise that, having rejected the claim  of  risk
         from the appellant's father, this appellant would  with  her  young
         child have access to family support in Albania.  That may  be  what
         the judge is saying in the first sentence of the paragraph  but  it
         is not clear.

         4.   The judge refers also to the case of  TD  and  AD  (Trafficked
         women) CG [2016] UKUT 0092  (IAC).   He  discounts  any  assistance
         which TD and AD might provide on the basis that the case was  "very
         specific to the victims of trafficking".  That statement  is  to  a
         large extent true but, as Ms Reville pointed out, TD  and  AD  does
         have rather more generalised observations to  make  in  respect  of
         single women in Albania.  For example, at [51-52] of TD and  AD  we
         read:

          A further problem lies in the isolation of the VOT once she leaves
         the shelter. The family remains of central importance  in  Albanian
         society and women such as VOTs or victims of domestic violence  who
         live alone stand out. Being a single woman is always a factor  that
         attracts  unwanted  attention.  For  instance  harassment  in   the
         workplace is something which occurs, but is less likely  to  happen
         to women who have the protection of a family around them.  Although
         there is no data or recent research on  the  situation  for  single
         women  who  return  to  Albania  and  live  alone,   in   Professor
         Haxhiymeri's experience they  are  "in  most  cases  considered  as
         abandoned from their families because they are '  kurva'  (whores).
         This label carries a  lot  of  hate,  discrimination  and  risk  of
         exclusion. They are  not  welcomed  in  social  groups.  Even  when
         employed, people try to stay  away  from  them.  Employers  try  to
         exploit them by making them work long hours, harder  and  pay  them
         less." Professor Haxhyimeri observes that such individuals  do  not
         make a lot of money but sometimes "it is enough to survive".

         Whilst these problems are faced by all single  women  the  position
         for  women  from  Northern  Albania  is  exacerbated  by  the  very
         traditional culture there. In her  view  young  women  in  Northern
         Albania face a high risk of being trafficked because of their  lack
         of proper  education,  social  isolation,  arranged  marriages  and
         limited living resources.  Girls  in  Northern  Albania  experience
         higher  levels  of  abuse  within  their  family  which   sometimes
         influences their decision to run away with the first man they meet.
         This does not mean that those from the southern part of the country
         do not face a risk of trafficking; risks arise  in  isolated  areas
         because of a lack of resources or the vulnerability of the  family,
         for example the presence of no men or an unmarried mother.

         5.   Having rejected the appellant's claim that she would  be  ill-
         treated by her father in Albania, the  judge  has  failed  to  make
         conclusive findings as to whether  the  appellant  would  have  the
         support of her family in Albania.  In the light of the position  of
         single mothers in Albania, such findings were  very  important.   I
         can understand the judge taking a dim  view  of  an  appellant  who
         delayed  claiming  asylum,  entered  the   country   clandestinely,
         withdrew a claim that she had been trafficked  and  who  had  given
         untruthful evidence to the Tribunal regarding ill-treatment at  the
         hands of her father.  However, there still remained the question of
         the risk to the appellant as a single mother in  Albania  and  that
         part  of  the  judge's  analysis  remains   incomplete.    In   the
         circumstances, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's  decision.   I
         preserve the findings as regards the  appellant's  claim  regarding
         her father.  Some fact-finding will remain to be  carried  out  but
         that may be undertaken by the Upper Tribunal.  It will be necessary
         for the Upper Tribunal at the resumed hearing to make  findings  on
         the evidence regarding the appellant's relationship with her family
         in Albania.  Following the making of those findings,  the  risk  to
         the appellant upon return as  a  single  mother  will  need  to  be
         determined.   Any  documentary  evidence  (including  any   further
         witness statement) upon which either party may intend to rely  must
         be sent to the Tribunal and exchanged with the other party no later
         than ten days before the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 20 June 2017 is set aside.  The findings of  fact  as  indicated
         above are preserved.  The Upper Tribunal will re-make the  decision
         (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) at a resumed hearing on a  date  to  be
         fixed at Field House with  a  time  estimate  of  1.5  hours.   The
         parties' attention is drawn to  the  directions  for  that  resumed
         hearing set out at paragraph 5 above.

         7.   An anonymity direction is made.

 2. At the resumed hearing at Field House on 2 August 2018,  Mr  Tarlow,  a
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  appeared  for  the  respondent.
    The appellant, who no longer has a professional representative, did not
    attend the Tribunal hearing.  I am satisfied that she was served with a
    notice of the hearing by second class post on 4 July 2018 at  her  last
    known address.  There has  been  no  communication  received  from  the
    appellant to explain or excuse her absence at the resumed hearing.   In
    the circumstances, I proceeded with the hearing in the absence  of  the
    appellant.

 3. The issue before the Upper Tribunal was set out  in  my  error  of  law
    decision at [5].  The burden of proof rests on the  appellant  and  the
    standard of proof is whether there is a reasonable likelihood that  the
    appellant faces the real risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  upon
    return to her home area of Albania.  There is  no  additional  evidence
    from the appellant herself and, in  particular,  the  Tribunal  is  not
    assisted by the failure  of  the  appellant  to  provide  any  evidence
    regarding the question of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  family
    members in Albania.  As I noted in  my  error  of  law  decision,  this
    appellant  had  claimed  asylum  having  entered  the  United   Kingdom
    clandestinely and then withdrew a claim that she had been trafficked on
    the basis that the claim was untrue and then gave  untruthful  evidence
    to the Tribunal regarding her claimed ill-treatment at the hands of her
    father.  Those are the established characteristics of the appellant  as
    a witness in the light of which the Upper Tribunal  needs  to  consider
    evidence.

 4. A risk to the appellant upon return to Albania would only arise if  she
    has no family members (in particular, male family members) who might be
    able to offer her support.  I am aware  that  the  appellant  is  prima
    facie, a single mother who is returning to Albania with a young  child.
    The appellant claims that she has no  family  members  in  Albania  who
    would be able to assist her but, equally, she claimed that she had been
    ill-treated at the hands of her father, a  claim  which  proved  to  be
    untrue.  Having considered  all  the  evidence  as  I  have  before  me
    (including  the  written  evidence  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) and having in mind the failure of the appellant in  the  past
    to give reliable evidence before a court and before the Upper  Tribunal
    to submit her evidence for cross examination, I  find  that  I  am  not
    satisfied that the appellant has discharged the burden of proving  that
    she does not have family members in Albania who would assist  her  upon
    her return.  It follows that I should find that  there  are  living  in
    Albania  family  members  who  can  assist  her  and  that  the   risks
    highlighted in the case of TD and AD (see above) which may be faced  by
    single women and unmarried mothers, will not threaten this appellant.

 5. In the circumstances, I find that the appeal should be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 4 AUGUST 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 4 AUGUST 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

