
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/04024/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On December 11, 2017                  |             On December 15, 2015    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Howard (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  The appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom on August 18, 2015 and claimed asylum on August 20,  2015.  The
    respondent refused his protection claim  on  December  10,  2015  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  December  22,  2015  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Ransley
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on April 4, 2017  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on April 13, 2017 the  Judge  refused  his  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on April 24,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted on one  ground  only  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kelly on August 22, 2017. The  respondent  lodged  a  Rule  24
    response dated September 4, 2017 in which she argues there was no error
    in law.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Howard submitted the  Judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  apply  the
    guidance set out in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC)
    and failed to properly consider whether internal relocation to  Baghdad
    or the IKR was unduly harsh or unreasonable or both. As  the  appellant
    had not been pre-cleared he would be unable to fly direct  to  the  IKR
    and the Judge had failed to address how the appellant would be expected
    to travel from Baghdad to the IKR. There  was  evidence  the  appellant
    suffered post traumatic stress  disorder  and  this  should  have  been
    considered as part of the deliberations.

 7. Mr McVeety relied on the Rule 24 statement and  submitted  the  problem
    for the appellant was two-fold namely (a) the  Judge  had  refused  his
    protection claim and found his claim  lacked  credibility  and  (b)  he
    found he had family to whom he could turn to in the IKR.  He  would  be
    returned to Baghdad airport but would, in the circumstances, be able to
    have arranged a connecting flight to Erbil. As he would never leave the
    airport it could not be said it would be unduly harsh or unreasonable.

 8.  Mr  Howard  responded  to  these  submissions  and  argued  that  when
    considering the case it  should  be  noted  that  each  case  was  fact
    sensitive and as he suffered with PTSD this would affect his situation.
     The court should also consider AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 924 as
    this post-dated the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 9. Having heard submissions I reserved my decision but indicated  that  if
    there was an  error  in  law  then  I  would  remake  the  decision  by
    considering the relevant information including an updated  report  from
    the hospital.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

10. The Judge heard in detail  the  appellant's  appeal  and  her  findings
    remain unchallenged in the sense permission to appeal those reasons had
    been refused. The issue facing me was a narrow issue namely whether the
    appellant could be returned and if so where would he be returned to. If
    the Judge had found a permanent return to Baghdad was possible  then  I
    would have had to consider the Court of Appeal's decision in AA  [2017]
    as well as the country guidance decision of AA [2015] and  BA  (Returns
    to Baghdad) CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC).

11. Two issues were raised in oral submissions. It was firstly  argued  the
    fact the appellant suffered from PTSD was something  the  Judge  should
    have had regard to and the second issue was the Judge's whole  approach
    to internal relocation.

12. At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety agreed that  the  appellant  would
    not be pre-screened  but  he  argued  that  the  considerations  in  AA
    [2015]/AA [2017] would have little relevance because the appellant  was
    not expected to relocate to Baghdad but simply to fly into that airport
    and then onto Erbil.

13. There were a number of letters within the appellant's original  bundle.
    These included:

      a) A letter dated January 11, 2016  from  Dr  Farrington  employed  by
         Greater Manchester West Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust referred
         to the appellant suffering from severe anxiety and  a  longstanding
         mental illness which meant the  appellant  found  it  difficult  to
         concentrate and engage with the Trust.

      b) A medical report dated October 12, 2016 was from  a  mental  health
         nurse  employed  by  Greater  Manchester  West  Mental  Health  NHS
         Foundation Trust. She was the manager of the Asylum  Seeker  Mental
         Health Consultation Service and  only  met  the  appellant  on  one
         occasion. There was little information in that  letter  that  would
         have assisted the Judge because the author of the  letter  did  not
         make any findings about the appellant.

      c) A letter dated November 16, 2016 from Dr Farrington referred to the
         appellant's account of his symptoms and based on these symptoms  Dr
         Farrington diagnosed PTSD.

14. The Judge clearly engaged with the medical evidence  as  she  discussed
    the medical evidence between [65] and [70] of her decision albeit under
    the heading "Article 8". The grounds of appeal did not  raise  PTSD  as
    part of any defective assessment and it may well be that Mr Howard  has
    sought to bolster his submissions by linking  the  appellant's  current
    situation with the issue of internal relocation. The  Judge's  findings
    on the appellant's medical problems was addressed by the Judge who made
    the point that the report was dated and there was no recent evidence to
    support the appellant's claim. In the circumstances I do not  find  the
    appellant's medical situation would have added anything to the  Judge's
    assessment under article 15(c).

15. The remaining issue was whether it was unduly harsh or unreasonable  or
    both to require the appellant to relocate to either Baghdad or the IKR.
    Paragraphs [58] to [62] address this very issue. The Judge had rejected
    the appellant's claim that he had problems with his family and  made  a
    finding at [61] that he had both his step-mother and  her  brothers  in
    the IKR.

16. The Judge was therefore considering a situation whereby  the  appellant
    would be able to return to Iraq and stay with family in the IKR. He had
    family to turn to provide support and family with whom he could  liaise
    with prior to returning. Whilst he would be returned via Baghdad it  is
    clear the Judge did not believe he would  be  staying  in  Baghdad  and
    consequently the problems considered by both the Upper Tribunal and the
    Court of Appeal in AA would not affect him  because  he  would  not  be
    leaving the airport.

17. In the circumstances, whilst I note what  the  case  law  states  I  am
    satisfied the Judge's approach to  the  appellant's  return  cannot  be
    criticised.

    DECISION

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     11.12.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date     11.12.2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





