
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/04862/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 August 2020                   |On 12 August 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     BB

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



For the appellant:     Ms U Dirie

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. The order made is described at the
end of these reasons.

Although she could hear and see the other participants, Ms Dirie was  unable
to  get  her  camera  to  work  but  was  content  to  continue  making  her
submissions by audio feed.

 1. The appellant, who is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity,  born  on
    1.7.93,  and  previously  resident  in  the  IKR,  has  appealed   with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated 20.4.20, dismissing  on  all  grounds  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 8.5.19, to refuse
    her claim for international protection based on non-Convention reasons,
    namely that rogue government officials [BF and HI] used violent tactics
    against her to thwart an  official  investigation  into  their  corrupt
    activities.

 2. The First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the  appellant's  core  account  on
    credibility grounds and concluded that the protection claim was falsely
    made in order to obtain immigration status for herself and  her  family
    in the UK. It followed on those findings that  there  was  no  risk  on
    return to Iraq.

 3. The grounds assert that the judge failed to consider that  specifically
    aspects of the appellant's factual account were confirmed by the expert
    and the failure to take account of  that  part  of  the  expert  report
    undermines the conclusions of fact. In particular, it is submitted that
    the expert confirmed that the appellant had provided details not in the
    public domain. It is also argued that the judge failed to identify what
    further evidence was appropriate when finding  the  account  vague  and
    lacking in detail.

 4. In granting permission to appeal, Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    McClure stated, "Whilst other aspects of  the  grounds  may  merely  be
    disagreements with the findings of  fact  made  by  the  judge,  it  is
    arguable that the judge has failed to take  account  of  parts  of  the
    expert evidence. That failure arguably constitutes an error undermining
    the conclusions by the judge such that it is arguably an error of  law.
    The grounds may be argued."

 5. I heard detailed and cogent submissions by both representatives,  which
    I took into account before reaching the conclusion that  there  was  no
    error of law in the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    reserving my reasons, which I now give.

 6. I am satisfied that there is no merit in the argument advanced  at  [5]
    of the grounds that despite the judge asserting at [56] of the decision
    that the appellant's evidence was vague  and  lacking  in  detail,  the
    judge "does not highlight what further evidence the Appellant would  be
    expected to provide." It was argued in the  grounds  and  in  the  oral
    submissions made to me that there was  good  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's case. In particular, it was submitted in  the  grounds  the
    appellant's account had remained consistent, giving details of her role
    and "detailed insight about the investigation she claims to  have  been
    involved with, and that some of the detail she has provided  about  the
    investigation, arrest and detention of Bakhtiar Faraj and Hakim  Ismail
    were not in the public domain or public knowledge."

 7. In reality, this ground  is  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision and an attempt to reargue the appeal. Provided the  judge  has
    demonstrated adequate  reasoning  to  support  the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's evidence as vague and lacking  in  detail,  it  is  neither
    necessary nor incumbent on the judge to set out what  further  evidence
    the appellant  might  have  provided.  It  was  for  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate to the  lower  standard  of  proof  that  her  account  was
    credible and reliable. At [13] the judge noted the  respondent's  view,
    putting the appellant on notice that it considered her  account  to  be
    "confused and muddled".

 8. The judge was entitled to consider the appellant's evidence  vague  and
    lacking in detail, providing clear reasons at  [56]  of  the  decision,
    including that the account given at interview  was  "a  vague  rambling
    account of what she claimed to have been doing as an investigator. When
    asked to give detailed evidence about the procedures that she followed,
    her evidence was painfully lacking detail and she  gave  me  the  clear
    impression that she did not believe a word of what she  was  saying.  I
    got the same impression from her husband." At [33] the judge noted that
    when asked to give  the  detail  of  procedures  she  followed  in  the
    investigation, her evidence became "a confusing muddle."  At  [35]  her
    account of what happened in the "hot room" was "confusing".

 9. At [57] of the decision  the  judge  provided  further  detail  of  the
    appellant's "rambling confusing" account,  which  gave  the  impression
    that "she was inventing her evidence and that she had given no  thought
    to the substance of her story."

10. Ultimately, the judge was not persuaded even to  the  low  standard  of
    proof that the appellant had ever been employed  in  an  investigations
    department but "was doing her best to explain what  she  thought  might
    happen in an investigations department.."

11. I am satisfied the judge has provided  more  than  ample  reasoning  to
    justify the appellant's account as vague and lacking  in  detail.  This
    ground discloses no error of law.

12. The more significant ground upon which  basis  permission  was  granted
    relates to the Tribunal's treatment of the  country  expert,  Dr  Kaveh
    Ghobadi, and his report of 31.1.20, which found the appellant's account
    plausible and that there are examples of it happening, concluding  that
    it was supported by information not in the public domain.

13. Ms Dirie submitted to me that what was said by the judge at [57] of the
    decision, where it was concluded that the  appellant  had  taken  "true
    objective facts" about these two men and made a  false  claim  to  have
    been responsible for the investigation and thereby at risk  on  return,
    was inconsistent with and contrary to the expert evidence  at  [20]  to
    [22] of the report. Having considered the matter very carefully,  I  do
    not accept that the finding at [57] is inconsistent with what the judge
    accepted about the report as stated at  [53]  of  the  decision  and  I
    consider that Ms Dirie may have misunderstood the judge's statements at
    [53] and [57].

14. At [22] the judge had stated that  the  starting  point  for  assessing
    credibility was the medical  evidence  and  the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Ghobadi.

15. In relation to the expert  report,  as  pointed  out  at  [52]  of  the
    decision, the issue was not whether it was plausible that  such  things
    as described by the appellant  happened  (threats  from  persons  under
    official investigation for corruption) but whether the  events  claimed
    by the appellant and her  husband  had  happened.  That  there  was  an
    investigation of these two men was also accepted by the judge  at  [53]
    of the decision, where the judge noted  the  expert  opinion  that  the
    claim of an investigation of the two men was confirmed by a  source  in
    government. At [53] the  judge  summarised  this  part  of  the  expert
    evidence, which was that a source  (MO)  working  in  the  Ministry  of
    Martyrs and Anfal Affairs had confirmed to the expert that the  persons
    identified as BF and HI worked for the government, the first  as  chief
    of staff of the IKR's Ministry of Martyrs and Anfal  Affairs,  and  the
    second works in the legal department of the same ministry. It  is  said
    that MO confirmed that they are respectively members of the PUK and the
    KDP, and that the Commission of Integrity  lodged  with  the  courts  a
    corruption case against these two men in December 2017.  As  a  result,
    they were detained for one night and then released on bail.  The  judge
    accepted at [53] that "this disclosure assists the appellant's case and
    proves that it has an objectively true background." At [54]  the  judge
    also accepted that the medical evidence also supported the  claim  that
    the appellant's husband had been assaulted by these men.

16. The judge correctly observed at [54]  that  this  evidence  had  to  be
    considered in  the  round  with  all  the  documents  provided  by  the
    appellant.  However,  after  considering   the   appellant's   evidence
    alongside the  expert  evidence,  the  judge  stated  at  [57]  of  the
    decision, "the only conclusion  I  have  been  able  to  reach  on  the
    totality of the evidence before me is that the appellant has taken true
    objective facts about these tow men who  were  investigated  apparently
    for corruption and has made a false claim." The  judge  relied  on  the
    appellant's vague, confusing and rambling account, as described  above,
    but went on to give further detailed reasons for rejecting the account,
    including the difficulties with the account  the  judge  identified  at
    [59] of the decision. The judge found that the  appellant  had  changed
    her story from one of working covertly using surveillance techniques to
    openly approaching the departments of the people she was investigating,
    in  order  to  explain  how  it  was  these  two  men  learnt  of   the
    investigation  and  her  role  in  it.  In  effect,  there  were   many
    difficulties of the appellant's own making in the giving of her account
    and thereby undermining her credibility, which had to  be  set  against
    the expert's opinion that there was an objectively true  background  to
    the investigation of these two men, as well as the  supportive  medical
    evidence of an assault on her husband.

17. At [60] of the decision the judge considered the other evidence in  the
    form of letters and other documents purporting to corroborate her  role
    in the Commission of Integrity but found they did not demonstrate  that
    she worked as an investigator.  Of  concern,  but  not  raised  in  the
    grounds or the submissions made to me, is a remark I noticed the  judge
    made at [60] in the assessment of the documentary evidence, including a
    letter of support from the Kurdistan Times, for which organisation  the
    appellant claimed to have worked as a volunteer. The judge there stated
    about that documentary evidence, "I can give this little weight as I am
    in no doubt the appellant's  claim  is  a  false  one  and  that  these
    documents have been obtained to support it." At first sight,  that  may
    suggest that the judge has rejected this evidence  without  considering
    it in the round, in the context of the evidence as a whole. However, at
    [51] of the decision the judge made clear that the findings  were  made
    after considering the totality of the evidence, including the  evidence
    not specifically referred to but within the bundle of documents and the
    respondent's papers.  This was effectively repeated at [54]  and  again
    at [55] of the decision. At [23] the judge had prefaced the summary  of
    the evidence by stating that, "I will only be referring to the parts of
    the evidence that are important to explain the reasons for the decision
    I have reached in the appellant's appeal." Further, in respect  of  the
    Kurdistan Times letter of support specifically, the judge  observed  at
    [60] that whilst it was signed, it did not state the name of the person
    who provided verification of the  appellant's  time  volunteering  with
    them, justifying the accordance of limited weight to that document. The
    judge also referred to the self-serving nature of the documents and  in
    particular the threatening letter which was claimed to have been thrown
    into the appellant's garden, which "was worded in such a way that it is
    obvious that this letter was written for use in this appeal rather than
    to cause the appellant to give up her investigating role."

18. It is clear, considering the decision as a whole, that the  judge  gave
    careful  consideration  to  all  the  evidence  said  to  support   the
    appellant's account and provided cogent reasons open  to  the  Tribunal
    for rejecting it. However, there was nothing inconsistent  between  the
    objective verification by the expert, through the  source,  that  there
    was an investigation into the two men named by the appellant,  and  the
    judge conclusion that the appellant had  taken  these  "true  objective
    facts" and fabricated a false claim. Although this information was said
    not to be in the public domain, MO certainly knew about it  and  others
    working for or familiar with the IKR government. It is not inconsistent
    for the judge to conclude that  the  account  of  the  appellant  being
    responsible for the investigation had been fabricated from  information
    she had gleaned. Put another way, that the  information  may  not  have
    been in the public domain lends some support but does  not  prove  that
    the appellant's claim of being responsible  for  the  investigation  is
    unanswerable. The  judge  gave  weight  to  the  expert's  opinion  and
    accepted that there was objective support for the background  facts  of
    the investigation. However, as stated above, that had to be set against
    what were a considerable number of factors, set out  in  the  decision,
    undermining the appellant's credibility to the point  the  judge  could
    not accept it, even to the lower standard of proof.

19. In summary, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal has taken  full
    account of all the relevant evidence put before the Tribunal, including
    the opinion of the expert  that  that  appellant  knew  detail  of  the
    investigation that was not in the public domain. As  stated  above,  at
    [53] the judge accepted that this part of the  expert  evidence  proved
    that there was an objectively true background of an investigation  into
    these two men. However, after having taken that aspect into account  in
    the context of the evidence as a whole, including the  appellant's  own
    vague, rambling, confusing and changing account, the judge was entitled
    to reach the conclusion expressed at [55] and again at  [61]  that  the
    appellant had failed to demonstrate to the lower standard of proof that
    she was truthfully involved in any investigation as  claimed.  At  [57]
    the judge was not satisfied that she  had  ever  been  employed  in  an
    investigations department. The judge explained why, as stated at  [56],
    the impression was formed that the appellant did not believe a word  of
    what she was saying in evidence and why, as stated at [57] she gave the
    impression of inventing her evidence and had given no  thought  to  the
    substance of her story. In the light of that reasoning, the  judge  was
    entitled to and did not err in concluding at [57]  that  the  appellant
    had taken "true objective facts" about the two men and constructed from
    them a false claim to have been involved in  and  responsible  for  the
    investigation, and to be at risk as a result.  Whilst  the  information
    about the investigation was, according to the expert, not in the public
    domain, it must nevertheless be possible for  such  information  to  be
    obtained, as the expert obtained it from MO who did not claim  to  have
    been involved in the investigation. To contend otherwise is to  make  a
    rather startling assertion that because the information was not in  the
    public domain the appellant must, therefore, be  truthful  irrespective
    of the Tribunal's assessment of all other evidence in  context  of  the
    whole.

20. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.



Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  stand  and  the  appeal
    remains dismissed on all grounds.

    I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       6 August 2020





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify her or any member of  her  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       6 August 2020

