
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04146/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2019                            |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sadiq, Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Alis promulgated on 14 June  2019,  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim.

 2. The appellant is a Kurd from Iran whose case is that he has been active
    in the KDPI; that this was known to the Iranian authorities; and,  that
    he has been attending one demonstration in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    arriving here and has been active both on Facebook and Instagram  since
    his arrival here, again in  opposition  to  the  Iranian  regime.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept the  appellant's  case  and  did  not
    accept the account of what had happened to him in Iran.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had before him an  email  dated  3  April
    2019 enclosing a letter dated 31 March 2019 which had been provided  to
    the London KDP by the main organisation department in  Kurdistan.  This
    letter certified that the appellant was a supporter of the party.   The
    judge observed [29] that he the appellant had  provided  scant  support
    for his claim although [29]  accepting  the  letter  was  sent  to  the
    appellant's lawyers via the UK branch of the KDP stating that he was  a
    supporter.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    activities in Iran were not credible and he did not accept that he  had
    been identified there.  The judge did not accept  the  authorities  had
    attended his family home as a result of demonstrations or otherwise and
    whilst accepting that he had a Facebook account did not  conclude  that
    he would  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities.   He
    concluded that requiring the appellant to  close  down  or  delete  his
    Facebook account would not contravene HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC  31.
    He did not accept that he was an activist nor that the fact of being  a
    returnee of Kurdish ethnicity would create a  risk  of  persecution  or
    treatment contrary to Article 3 [45] nor were any of the factors listed
    in the headnote of HB (Kurds) CG [2018] UKUT 430.

 4. The appellant sought permission on the grounds that the judge had erred
    in rejecting the appellant's claim in that he had

      i) Relied on only one adverse credibility point at [31] which  was  an
         unsustainble finding based purely on plausibility;

     ii) failed to take note that, having not rejected the  authenticity  or
         integrity of the letter from the KDPI  referred to at paragraph 29,
         this confirmed  his anti-government  activism  and  support  for  a
         banned political organisation which would in itself put him at risk
         of persecution on return;

    iii) failed to take into account  the  appellant's  clear  awareness  of
         Kurdish political affairs and the party to which he was affiliated;

     iv) that he could not be expected, as a genuine activist, to delete his
         Facebook and Instagram posts;

 5. I heard submissions from both representatives.

 6. It is notable from the CPIN on Iran Kurdish political groups (a copy of
    which was before the judge and to which he referred) that the KDP is an
    active organisation.  At section 7.4.1  of  the  CPIN  verification  of
    membership is dealt with as follows:

       The same source from 2013 reported: '...Mustafa  Moloudi,  (KDP-Iran)
       informed the  delegation  that  the  headquarters  of  the  party  in
       Khoysanjac, KRI issues letters of  recommendation  to  members  going
       abroad to seek asylum. Since all members have their names  listed  in
       the headquarters, it is possible to identify each one  of  them.  The
       party issues letters of recommendation,  but  the  source  emphasized
       that letters of recommendation are not delivered  to  asylum  seekers
       and they will only be issued directly to the  asylum  authorities  or
       the asylum seekers' lawyers in Europe. Every  member  has  a  written
       file within the headquarters which forms the basis of the description
       of  the  situation  of  the  asylum   seeker   in   the   letter   of
       recommendation. If a party member for instance  goes  to  Denmark  to
       seek asylum, he or she must address the local  party  committee  that
       will then ask the headquarters to issue a letter  of  recommendation.
       The party's sympathizers can also get a letter of  recommendation  if
       the KDP-Iran is certain that the person asking for the letter had  to
       flee due to political activism. In such case it will be stated in the
       letter that he or she is a party sympathizer and not a member.'

 7. It is evident that the letter referred to by  the  judge  at  [29]  was
    obtained in the manner as identified in this passage.  As the appellant
    submitted, the judge did not take issue with the letter's  authenticity
    but found that it did not confirm his account of his  activities.  What
    judge failed to do was to take  into  account  the  bare  fact  of  the
    appellant's support for a banned organisation when analysing what would
    happen to the appellant on return to Iran.

 8. It follows from this, that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the finding of an error of law and must be set aside.

 9. Having announced that at the hearing, Mr McVeety  did  not  dispute  my
    observation that on the basis of the finding  that  the  appellant  was
    involved with the KDP, as a documented supporter, that there was a real
    risk of him being persecuted on return to Iran.

10. It follows from what is said in SSH and HR (Illegal exit: failed asylum
    seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 and HB that the appellant is at  risk
    of questioning on  return  to  Iran.   He  would  be  returned  without
    documents as a Kurd.  The Upper Tribunal accepted in SSH and HR at  [9]
    that a person returning  to  Iran  on  a  temporary  document  will  be
    questioned.  It is almost inevitable that he would be asked whether  he
    had been involved with any Kurdish organisations and he  could  not  be
    expected to do anything other than tell the truth. The mere  acceptance
    of documented support for the KDP would, I consider, be  sufficient  to
    result in the appellant being detained and ill-treated with  sufficient
    severity to amount to persecution and/or breach of Article 3.  Further,
    this would be on account of his perceived political opinion.

11. In the circumstances, I remake the appeal by allowing it in asylum  and
    on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

12. I remake the appeal by allowing it on asylum and on human rights
    grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 19 November 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




