
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/04349/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 November 2017                       |On 17 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     e h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 13 June 2017 of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Widdup which refused the appellant's  asylum  and  human
    rights claim. The asylum claim was not found credible and the Article 8
    ECHR claim not found to be made out where the applicant had  no  family
    life here and only a limited private life.

 2. The grounds of appeal concerned the appellant's asylum claim. The basis
    of his claim can be summarised as follows. The appellant maintains that
    he is from Shiraz. In 2014 he opened a shop with  a  business  partner,
    his aunt's husband. At around the same time he began to become isolated
    from his family and started drinking heavily.

 3. In December 2015 an old friend, R, came to the  shop  and  offered  the
    appellant support and friendship.  In March 2016, with R's support, the
    appellant gave up  alcohol.   At  around  the  same  time  R  told  the
    appellant that he was a Christian. The appellant became interested  and
    began to attend a house church with R.  He would  attend  approximately
    once  a  week.   The  appellant  maintained  that   he   converted   to
    Christianity on 18 June 2016.

 4. On 19 October 2016, the appellant did not go to the house church in R's
    car as usual as on that day he had to wait at the shop as his  business
    partner was late. He went to the house church later on and  as  he  was
    approaching, he saw that it was being raided by  the  authorities.   He
    contacted his brother and told him what had happened. His brother  took
    him to a friend's house where the appellant was able to remain until an
    agent smuggled him out of the country.

 5. The appellant arrived in the UK on 2 November 2016 and  claimed  asylum
    the same day. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim on 25
    April 2017.  He appealed and the appeal hearing took place in front  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup on 6 June 2017.

 6. In paragraphs [45]-[47]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  explained  why  the
    respondent's view that the appellant had not shown a  good  reason  for
    converting  to  Christianity  or  that  the  appellant  did  not   have
    sufficient knowledge of Christianity was not accepted.

 7. At [49] the judge found that there was  nothing  incredible  about  the
    appellant's account of his alcoholism having been something that led  R
    to introduce him to Christianity.

 8. At [51]-[54] the judge identified why he found it  less  credible  that
    the appellant maintained that he had become isolated and begun drinking
    heavily. Judge Widdup also found that it was unlikely that the business
    partner would have been unaware  of  the  appellant's  alcohol  problem
    given the amount that the appellant claimed to drink and that R saw him
    drinking.  Judge Widdup also indicated that it was less  credible  that
    the appellant was able to give up alcohol entirely  in  the  manner  he
    described.

 9. At [54] the decision goes on to state:

         "These details by themselves are not inherently incredible but they
         are sufficient to give rise to concerns about the accuracy  of  the
         Appellant's account.  I will assess  these  details  together  with
         other features of the Appellant's evidence."

10. The First-tier Tribunal indicated at [55] that the account of  a  house
    church in Shiraz was consistent with the country  evidence.  The  judge
    did not find credible, however, the coincidence  of  the  raid  on  the
    house church being on the same day that the business partner was  late,
    leading both to the appellant being late and to his leaving  his  Bible
    behind.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  records  at  [55]  the  appellant's
    evidence being that he did not take his Bible  with  him  on  that  day
    because he was "working".

11. At [56] the judge did not find the appellant's explanation  as  to  how
    the authorities knew he had been  attending  the  house  church  to  be
    credible. He did not accept that the house church would keep a list  of
    the names of those attending where it was illegal to attend  and  would
    have been dangerous to keep such a record.

12. At [57] the judge found  it  "difficult  to  reconcile"  the  appellant
    leaving his Bible behind on the day of the raid when he usually took it
    with him. The judge again refers to the reason for this being that  the
    appellant was "working". Further, it was also found at [57] that  after
    seeing the raid on the house church the appellant would  have  had  the
    opportunity to return to his shop and  get  rid  of  any  incriminating
    materials, including his Bible but did not do so.

13. At [59] the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant's  claim  to
    practice Christianity  genuinely  in  the  UK  was  undermined  by  his
    attending two very different churches, one of the  witnesses  accepting
    that to be unusual.

14. The  judge  also  found  at  [60]  that  the  appellant's  account  was
    inconsistent as he indicated in his asylum  interview  at  question  72
    that he had never told anyone in his family about his conversion but it
    was also part of his account that he had  told  his  brother  after  he
    witnessed the raid on the house church.

15. At [61] the First-tier Tribunal concluded:

         "61.     I have considered all  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  the
             round.  I have discounted some of  the  Respondent's  concerns
             and I accept that the Appellant does have  some  knowledge  of
             Christianity.  However, my concerns about the details  of  his
             account are such that even on the lower standard of proof I do
             not find that his account of his introduction to  Christianity
             and the house church by [R] and his conversion  or  attendance
             at the house church is credible.

         62.  It follows that the Appellant has  not  proved  to  the  lower
             standard that he is at risk on return  and  the  asylum  claim
             together with the claim for humanitarian protection  therefore
             fail."

16. The grounds of appeal maintain, firstly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    applied too high a standard of proof.   The  judge  did  not  accept  a
    number of the  respondent's  reasons.  He  found  other  parts  of  the
    applicant's claim  "not  inherently  incredible".  He  found  that  the
    account of attending a house church in Shiraz was consistent  with  the
    background evidence. Where that was  so,  if  the  lower  standard  was
    applied, it was not rational to  conclude  that  the  account  was  not
    credible. The grounds at paragraph 4 state (verbatim):

         "The reasons for rejecting the  account  are  few  and  minor,  and
         further issue is taken with them on the in the  subsequent  grounds
         set out below."

17. On analysis this  appeared  to  me  to  be  either  disagreement  or  a
    rationality challenge rather than a question of legal misdirection.

18. It is unarguable that Judge Widdup was aware of the lower  standard  of
    proof. He refers to it at [6] and at [61] when reaching his  conclusion
    after analysing different parts of the account.

19. As well as references to the need to assess the evidence in the  round,
    the decision also shows at [54] and [61] that the  approach  taken  was
    entirely in line with that set out in R  (Karanakaran)  v  SSHD  [2000]
    EWCA Civ 11. The Court of Appeal sets out the correct approach at  [55]
    of Karanakaran as follows:
         "What they decided was that when assessing future risk decision-
         makers may have to take into account a whole bundle of disparate
         pieces of evidence:
         (1)  evidence they are certain about;
         (2)  evidence they think is probably true;
         (3)  evidence to which they are willing to attach some credence,
             even if they could not go so far as to say it is probably
             true;
         (4)  evidence to which they are not willing to attach any credence
             at all."

20. Having identified at [54] that some aspects of the  evidence  were  not
    "inherently incredible", the First-tier Tribunal judge defers  a  final
    conclusion until the other aspects of the evidence had  been  assessed.
    As indicated in the summary of the decision above, in other  paragraphs
    he sets out other parts of the evidence on which he had a clearer view,
    indicating what was and was not accepted.

21. Those parts of the decision show that it is not arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal judge took an incorrect legal approach to the  assessment
    of the evidence and that he applied in form and substance  the  correct
    standard of proof.

22. Where that is so, the first ground really seeks only to argue  that  it
    was not open to the First-tier Tribunal to find against the  appellant,
    the parts not accepted being "few and minor". However, it was  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to decided what weight to place  on  the  different
    parts of the evidence in a holistic assessment. It is  not  correct  to
    characterise his concerns about the core parts of the account, such  as
    the coincidence of the appellant being late on the day of the raid  and
    his leaving his Bible in the shop, the discrepancy as to whom  he  told
    and his attendance at two very different churches in the UK  as  either
    "few" or "minor". The first ground of appeal does not have merit.

23. The grounds at paragraph 5 object to the finding at [59] concerning the
    appellant's attendance at two different churches in the UK.   The  fact
    that the judge sets out that there might  be  a  plausible  reason  for
    this, did not oblige him to accept that reason and it remained open  to
    him to find in the context of the evidence as a whole that this feature
    of the appellant's church attendance this undermined the claim to be  a
    genuine Christian convert.

24. The grounds then maintain at paragraph 6 that the judge proceeded on an
    incorrect factual basis when stating that the appellant's evidence  had
    been that his business partner was not aware of his drinking.  This had
    been put to the appellant directly in evidence and  he  confirmed  that
    his partner did know of his problems with alcohol. However, the grounds
    concede that the  judge  does  not  appear  to  make  a  clear  adverse
    inference from this point so it is difficult to see how this aspect  of
    the challenge is material.

25. Paragraph 7 of the grounds maintains that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was mistaken at [55] and [57] in recording the appellant's evidence  to
    be that he did get to the house church until later on the  day  of  the
    raid and did not take his Bible with him because he was "working".  The
    grounds maintain that the appellant's oral evidence  was  that  he  was
    "walking" and so did not take his Bible.

26. I accept that the record of proceedings from counsel before the  First-
    tier Tribunal records the appellant stating that he was  "walking"  and
    not "working". The First-tier Tribunal judge's record is not legible.

27.  The  difficulty  with  this  ground,  however,  is  that  the  adverse
    credibility finding does not  arise  directly  from  the  fact  of  the
    appellant "working" rather than  "walking".   The  adverse  credibility
    finding at [55] concerns the coincidence of  the  appellant's  business
    partner being late on the day of the raid and the  appellant  going  on
    his own later in the day and not with R.  The  appellant  "working"  or
    "walking" is not relevant to that finding and any mistake  as  to  what
    the appellant said does not undermine it.

28. At [57] the judge found that where the appellant usually took his Bible
    with him, it was not credible that he did not do so on the day  of  the
    raid so that it was at the shop when the authorities went  there.  That
    is another "coincidence" point. The judge notes the "only"  explanation
    for leaving the Bible behind was that the appellant was "working".  The
    appellant maintains that he gave a different explanation, that  he  was
    "walking" and so not in a private car with R as usual.  Accepting  that
    this was his evidence, in my judgment, however, given the concern  that
    the judge sets out at [55] and [57] on the coincidence of the appellant
    going late  and  without  his  Bible  on  the  day  of  the  raid,  the
    explanation that the appellant was "walking" and not going in  R's  car
    was  not  something  that  could  oblige  the  judge  to   accept   the
    coincidence. Further, in  the  context  of  the  other  cogent  adverse
    credibility findings in this decision,  even  had  the  explanation  of
    leaving the Bible behind being that the appellant  was  "walking"  been
    accepted as credible, it could not have amounted to evidence capable of
    leading to a different outcome.  Indeed, the judge goes on in  [57]  to
    consider the account as  if  the  appellant  had  chosen  on  that  one
    occasion to leave his Bible behind,  whatever  the  reason,  but  still
    finds that this leads to further credibility problems as the  appellant
    could be expected to have attempted to go back to remove it.

29. The grounds in paragraph 8 object to the  finding  that  the  appellant
    could have removed the incriminating materials from  his  shop  because
    the appellant should have been given an opportunity at the  hearing  to
    address the point. It is well-rehearsed that a judge at a hearing  does
    not have to give an indication of every credibility concern in order to
    afford an opportunity for them to be addressed,  the  burden  of  proof
    being on the applicant, here assisted by legal representatives.

30. For these reasons, the grounds of appeal do not show a  material  error
    of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup.

Notice of Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 16 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
