
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04308/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 November 2017             |On 13 February 2018             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     S S
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock of Counsel instructed by J D Spicer
                    Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is an Afghan national born on [ ] 2003.  He  claimed  to
have arrived here on 21 October 2016 in the back  of  a  lorry  and  claimed
asylum three days  later.  This  was  refused  on  21  April  2017  although
discretionary leave was granted until 21 October 2019 due to the  inadequacy
of reception facilities in Afghanistan.

2.    The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
by First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall on 5 June 2017 (not determined  on  the
papers as the determination records). The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
appellant's uncle.  The  appellant  himself  did  not  give  oral  evidence;
presumably because he was 14 at the date of the hearing. In a  determination
promulgated on 27 June 2017, the judge dismissed the appeal. Whilst he  made
several favourable findings, he concluded that  the  witness  had  not  been
credible, that the appellant  had  not  lost  contact  with  his  family  in
Afghanistan, that he had not attended a madrassa which is where most  forced
recruitment of children by the Taliban was focused, that  the  evidence  did
not suggest there was a particular practice to recruit children  to  replace
fathers who had ceased fighting  and  that  there  was  no  risk  of  forced
recruitment to the appellant.

3.    Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brunnen
on 24 July 2017 but granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  on
20 September 2017. Although she focused on the complaint that the judge  had
applied the wrong standard of proof when  he  referred  to  the  account  as
being "not convincing", "unlikely" and "not fanciful", she  gave  permission
for all grounds to be argued. The appeal then came before me on 23  November
2017.

The hearing

4.    The  appellant  and  his  uncle  attended  the  hearing  and  I  heard
submissions from Mr Briddock, who had also represented the appellant at  the
First-tier Tribunal, and Ms Isherwood for the respondent.

5.    Mr Briddock accepted that the  determination  was  very  detailed  and
carefully drafted but submitted that did not mean it was without errors.  He
submitted that the very detail of the determination may have led  the  judge
into error as he had begun to speculate. The first complaint  was  that  the
judge  failed  to  give  proper  reasons  for  his  negative  findings.  The
appellant had been under 14 at the date of  the  hearing  and  even  younger
when he left Afghanistan. The  respondent  had  raised  several  credibility
issues arising from the account but the judge found that the  vast  majority
of those had not been made out. The only  point  of  the  respondent's  case
which he considered to have merit was the omission of the  Taliban  to  look
for the appellant at places other than his family home (at 12.9).   However,
he then went on to  rely  on  matters  that  had  not  formed  part  of  the
respondent's case.

6.    The  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's  uncle's  evidence  was
contained  at  paragraph  12.16.  He  found  the  uncle  to  be  lacking  in
credibility because there had been  no  prior  reference  to  the  appellant
having been at a madrassa but he gave no reasons why he thought this  was  a
matter that should have been mentioned.  He  also  considered  that  as  the
uncle's sisters had met him in Kabul, the appellant would also be found  and
that his mother would then be told of his return. The  judge  speculated  at
12.17 when he concluded that the  uncle  would  not  have  known  about  the
appellant's journey before he arrived in Calais; he gave no reason for  this
expectation. Mr Briddock submitted that once the respondent's case had  been
largely rejected, the judge  gave  peripheral  and  inadequate  reasons  for
dismissing the appeal.

7.    The second criticism of the determination was that although the  judge
had directed himself  as  to  the  correct  standard  of  proof  at  regular
intervals in the determination, he had in  fact  failed  to  apply  it.  His
reference to the account not being "convincing" (at 12.16)  was  undoubtedly
wrong as were his references to "very  unlikely"  and  "relatively  unlikely
but not fanciful".  One  could  therefore  not  be  sure  that  the  correct
standard had been applied.

8.    The third criticism, which fell away  if  the  previous  grounds  were
rejected, was that the judge's  conclusion  as  to  forced  recruitment  was
flawed. The judge rejected the claim that the appellant would be at risk  of
forced recruitment but the EASO  report  suggested  that  there  was  forced
child recruitment and the judge had applied too narrow a yardstick  when  he
found there was no evidence to show a practice of  recruitment  of  children
to replace fathers. The judge had also rejected the claim because  he  found
that the appellant's two brothers had not been recruited but one had  a  bad
leg as a result of polio and the other was just 9 years old. The  judge  had
made errors in his determination and the decision should be re-made.

9.    In response, Ms Isherwood submitted that there were no errors of  law.
She argued that the grounds  had  disregarded  the  substantive  finding  at
12,17 that the appellant had been on his way to the UK when his  mother  had
met up with the uncle in November 2015 yet nothing  had  been  mentioned  of
his journey. Furthermore, the appellant's father had been  missing  at  that
time and that had not been  mentioned  either.  The  judge  found  that  the
appellant had been sent to the UK  for  a  better  life  and  had  not  been
satisfied that he had lost contact with his family.  There  was  nothing  to
suggest that the judge relied on new issues and he was  well  aware  of  the
appellant's youth as this was referred to several times. It  had  been  open
for the judge to find that the uncle's evidence lacked credibility and  that
the appellant had not been at a madrassa.

10.   With respect to the second ground, Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the
judge had reminded himself of the lower standard  and  the  appellant's  age
throughout the determination. Although he used the word  "convincing",  this
did not mean that a higher standard had been  applied.  He  had  also  shown
that he was aware of the EASO report which he  had  referred  to.  When  the
determination was read as a whole, no error of law was apparent.

11.   Mr Briddock replied. He submitted that when  the  uncle  had  met  the
appellant's mother, the appellant had still been at home. It was his  cousin
who was on his way to Europe. The judge had gone  into  incredible  forensic
detail about the journey of a  13  year  old.  He  also  made  contradictory
findings when he said there was no evidence of when the  appellant's  cousin
left Afghanistan, despite finding at 12.17 that  he  had  left  in  November
2015. He rejected the claim on the basis that it was  not  credible  but  he
had made  adverse  credibility  findings  on  the  uncle's  evidence  before
considering all the evidence  before  him.  With  respect  to  the  madrassa
point, the respondent had given no reasons for why she  maintained  that  it
had been open to the judge to make that finding. There was no  reason  given
for why this  fact  should  have  been  previously  mentioned.  Mr  Briddock
submitted that just because the judge had got the law right in  some  areas,
it did not follow that he did so on all issues.  There  were  at  least  two
examples of having used the wrong standard. On  the  third  point,  although
the judge had considered the report, he made assumptions about the  evidence
contained therein. Mr Briddock sought a de novo hearing on all issues.

12.   That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
reserved my decision.

Discussion and Findings

13.   I have taken account of all the evidence before  me  as  a  whole  and
have given careful consideration to the grounds and the submissions made  by
the parties.

14.   With respect to the argument about the standard  of  proof,  I  accept
that although the judge properly self-directs himself several  times  during
the course of the determination, the terminology he uses does  not  reassure
me that he has consistently applied the lower standard.  It may be that  the
use of the words highlighted in  the  grounds  were  not  given  their  true
meaning but I cannot be sure and the appellant, a vulnerable  child,  should
be able to rest assured that the lower standard has been applied  throughout
the assessment of his case. This error is a material one as the outcome  may
have been different had the lower  standard  been  applied.  On  that  basis
alone  the  determination  cannot  stand.  There  is  no   need   in   these
circumstances to consider the other two grounds but I do so for the sake  of
completeness.

15.   The judge is criticized for narrowing down the issue of  forced  child
recruitment into a category of those recruited to replace fathers. I  accept
he did so and that focusing on such a narrow category meant that he did  not
properly assess the evidence on the forced recruitment of children  per  se.
Nor did he have regard to the reasons why the appellant's brothers  may  not
have been a target (although the  appellant's  evidence  and  Mr  Briddock's
submissions only dealt with two out of three brothers). His approach to  the
evidence was, therefore, flawed.

16.   The remaining criticism of the determination pertains to  the  judge's
credibility assessment of the appellant's uncle.  It  is  unclear  from  the
determination whether the uncle is a paternal or maternal uncle as  although
he is described as a paternal uncle (at 9.1), the judge appears  to  suggest
elsewhere that he is the appellant's mother brother.  I note that the  judge
gave three main reasons for rejecting  his  evidence.  The  first  was  that
there had not been previous reference to the appellant being in a  madrassa.
I assume this point was significant because recruitment of children  appears
to take place from madrassas. Mr Briddock argued there was no  reason  given
as to why this should have been previously mentioned and he  submitted  that
a madrassa was a school. At interview, the appellant gave evidence  that  he
attended school. Whilst he may have meant a madrassa, this point would  have
been immaterial had it not been for the  uncle's  evidence  at  the  hearing
that the appellant had attended school and  a  madrassa  (9.6).  It  was  no
doubt in this context that the judge  found  that  there  should  have  been
previous reference to it and that is a fair point.

17.   The second point centred round the claimed inability of the  appellant
to make contact with family on return. On this too, I  find  the  criticisms
are unjustified. The judge noted that there were regular comings and  goings
of people between the appellant's village and Kabul and  that  in  the  same
way as the uncle  had  made  contact  with  family  members,  so  could  the
appellant. That is a reasoned assumption.  Ms  Isherwood's  submission  that
there was no mention to the uncle of his missing brother-in-law at the  time
of his meeting with the appellant's mother  is  another  point  against  the
evidence of the appellant's  uncle  and,  indeed,  of  the  appellant's  own
claim.

18.   The third point raised was the uncle's lack  of  knowledge  about  the
present whereabouts of the appellant's cousin.  No  reasons  are  given  for
why the judge held this against the witness and, in any event,  this  was  a
finding on which the lower standard of proof does not appear  to  have  been
applied.

19.   The contents  of  paragraph  12.17  upon  which  Ms  Isherwood  placed
reliance are rather confusing.  Different cousins are referred to and it  is
difficult to be clear about who these are. Here again,  however,  the  lower
standard of proof was not applied.

20.   So, whilst I accept that some of the criticisms against  the  evidence
of the uncle are justified, others are not.  However,  given  the  incorrect
application of the standard of proof when the assessment  of  this  evidence
was undertaken, none of the findings can stand.

21.   It follows that  the  determination,  having  been  found  to  contain
errors of law, is set aside, Mr Briddock sought a de  novo  hearing  on  all
issues and Ms Isherwood did not raise objections to that  course  of  action
were errors of law to be found.

Decision

22.   The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law
and is set aside. The decision shall be re-made afresh by another  judge  of
that Tribunal at a date to be notified.

Anonymity

23.   I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge
    Date: 28 November 2017


