
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/04189/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent|       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4th April 2017                     |       On 9th May 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    B H P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Graham, promulgated in Birmingham on 29th November 2016.  In  the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was  born  on  9th
    December 1952.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    refusing his claim to asylum status and humanitarian  protection  dated
    8th April 2016.  His wife and his daughter are both dependent upon  his
    claim.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that if returned to Sri Lanka  he  would  face
    mistreatment due to his involvement with the Board of  Cricket  Control
    and because he is wanted by the National Intelligence Bureau.   He  has
    also converted  from  Buddhism  to  Christianity  in  June  2015.   The
    relevant facts and documentary material are set  out  in  the  judgment
    under appeal and I need not repeat them here.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge concluded that it was not in dispute that the  Appellant  had
    converted to Christianity.  However,  it  was  not  credible  that  his
    conversion to Christianity which took place in the UK would be known in
    Sri Lanka.  He also provided no evidence as to how or when he  received
    documentation which he said had been left with his mother in Sri Lanka.
     In any event, Article 10 of the Sri  Lankan  Constitution  allows  for
    freedom  of  religion.   The  Appellant  also  had  not  submitted  any
    objective material to counter the objective evidence about  freedom  of
    religion in Sri Lanka save to say that his conversion will  "be  talked
    about"  and  that  this  would  cause  him  embarrassment.   The  judge
    concluded that the Appellant does not claim to be at  risk  of  serious
    harm or persecution on this basis (paragraph 32).

 5. With respect to the other parts of his claim, the  judge  rejected  the
    claim that the Appellant would be at risk in Sri Lanka because he was a
    whistleblower in respect of corruption by the Sri Lankan Cricket  Board
    (see paragraphs 35 to 37).  He  claimed  to  have  suffered  a  serious
    assault but there was no documentation in relation to this and he  also
    did not mention the assault at all during his interview (paragraph 39).
     He produced articles about corruption in Sri Lanka and that he  talked
    about this corruption from  2006  onwards  but  the  articles  make  no
    reference to him by name.  The judge was firm in his  conclusion  that,
    "I have not found it credible that the Appellant is unable  to  provide
    evidence of his involvement in uncovering  corruption  in  the  cricket
    committee" (paragraph 43).

 6. A feature of this appeal, however, was the reliance  upon  a  statement
    from the Appellant's lawyer.  Although the Appellant maintained that it
    was difficult to get legal documents posted from Sri Lanka,  the  judge
    concluded that the Appellant had a lawyer in Sri  Lanka  and  also  has
    contact with the Superintendant of Police there and he had been legally
    represented  in  the  UK.   In  all  these  circumstances,   therefore,
    "arrangements could have been made for these documents from the NIB and
    the police be sent to the UK to support his claim and it is  reasonable
    to expect these arrangements to have been made" (paragraph 49).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the  judge  gave  as  reason  for
    rejecting the Appellant's claim that the Appellant had not been able to
    obtain a police summons issued against him.  The reason that the  judge
    gave was that the Appellant had a lawyer in Sri Lanka.  This conclusion
    caused the judge to reject the evidence that a summons had been  issued
    against the Appellant because a copy  of  the  document  had  not  been
    obtained.   It  was  suggested  that  the  judge  had  overlooked   the
    background objective evidence which confirms that  it  is  not  usually
    possible to obtain either copies or originals of court summons  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Second, it was argued that the judge had required the Appellant
    to corroborate his claim when corroboration in a protection  claim  was
    not required.

 9. On 6th February 2017, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  first
    Tribunal.

10. On 16th February 2017, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect
    that the judge had not found the Appellant to be credible and had given
    adequate reasons for these findings (at paragraphs 32 to 56) such  that
    the appeal could not succeed in any event.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 4th April 2017, Mr  Coleman,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the following  submissions.   First,  the
    judge had recognised, in relation to the Appellant's  claim  of  having
    been  a  whistleblower  against  the  Sri  Lankan  Cricket  Club   that
    "credibility is at the heart  of  this  appeal"  (paragraph  33).   One
    reason that the judge gives for taking against the Appellant is that he
    did not claim asylum immediately after arrival but did so only on  13th
    November 2014.  However, the Appellant did not at that time  know  that
    he was of adverse interest to the authorities until much later on.  The
    judge indeed recognises this at  paragraph  24  and  at  paragraph  54.
    Therefore, this could not have been taken against the Appellant.

12. Second, the Appellant had  talked  about  his  being  subjected  to  an
    assault (referred to at paragraph 39  of  the  determination)  but  the
    judge concludes that the Appellant does not mention this in any of  his
    accounts or his  interview.   Nevertheless,  at  paragraph  39  of  the
    determination, the judge curiously  observes  that,  "it  appears  that
    either before or after this incident he was seriously  assaulted  by  a
    member of the Cricket Board Interim Committee".  This  plainly  was  an
    express  recognition  of  exactly  that  of  which  the  Appellant  had
    complained.

13. Third, there was the issue of the  court  summons  and  the  judge  had
    observed  (at  paragraph  49)  that,  given  that  the  Appellant   was
    represented by lawyers both in Sri Lanka and the  UK,  he  should  have
    been able to get an arrest warrant.  This flies in the face of the COIR
    report (at paragraph  10.17)  which  confirms  that  it  is  ordinarily
    difficult for a person to receive  his  or  her  arrest  warrant.   The
    accused cannot  normally  apply  for  copies  of  his  arrest  warrant.
    Therefore, it was wrong to have taken this against the Appellant.

14. Fourth, the judge applied the country guidance case of GJ  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2013] UKUT 00319.  However, he then states that, "at its  highest  the
    Appellant's own involvement with a Tamil deemed to be an LTTE member is
    to attempt to sell his house after his death", which was wrong  because
    there was an arrest warrant in existence that showed  a  risk  of  ill-
    treatment from another source.

15. Finally, the judge concluded that,

         "I note the Appellant  has  travelled  in  and  out  of  Sri  Lanka
         regularly using his own documents without incident.  He has visited
         the UK on fifteen occasions since  1996.   In  interview  (question
         11(b)) he says he visited the UK once a year every year since 2009.
          Therefore I do not accept the Appellant  is  on  a  computer  stop
         list" (paragraph 53).

    This ignored the fact that at paragraph 28 of his witness statement the
    Appellant states that, "on 25th September 2014 two people called me and
    asked me more information about the property, who are the  owners  etc.
    ..."  He stated that the men were interested in knowing his connections
    to LTTE activists rather than in  the  property.   The  judge  in  fact
    accepts this at paragraph 55.   Therefore,  the  judge  had  failed  to
    evaluate the facts correctly with a view to determining the Appellant's
    claim adequately.

16. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that he would rely upon  the  Rule  24
    response.  He relied  upon  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  TK  (Burundi).   If  a
    document could  have  been  produced  earlier,  but  was  not  produced
    earlier, then this may be considered to be  fatal  to  the  Appellant's
    case.  The fact was that the Appellant here had delayed a month  before
    claiming asylum.  He had said that he was visited by two  men  on  25th
    September 2014.  He therefore knew he was at risk.  He had clearly  not
    claimed asylum.  Second, the judge nevertheless stated  that,  "I  have
    not determined the Appellant's credibility on this point alone.  I have
    also taken account of the following which I have found to  be  relevant
    ..." (paragraph 35).  In that regard, the judge was not persuaded  that
    the Appellant was a whistleblower against the Sri Lankan Cricket  Board
    with respect to corruption from 2006 onwards, and the articles did  not
    refer to his name, and his explanation was rejected when he  said  that
    "the articles were difficult to get at and his brother was a busy  man"
    (paragraph 42).  Naturally, therefore, the  judge  concluded  that,  "I
    have not found it credible that the  Appellant  is  unable  to  provide
    evidence of his involvement in uncovering  corruption  in  the  cricket
    committee" (paragraph 43).

17. Second, the judge rejected wholesale the  Appellant's  account  of  any
    harassment from any source.  The Appellant claimed that those harassing
    him "sent a white van", after he had terminated his contract  with  the
    cricket committee, but the judge held that if this was true then,

         "There will be other attempts to abduct him.  I am  satisfied  that
         the fact that the Appellant continued to  live  in  his  house  for
         another four years until he left Sri  Lanka  in  2014  without  any
         further attempts to arrest or  abduct  him  undermines  his  claim"
         (paragraph 44).

    Finally, there was no statement from Alponso, his lawyer could not  get
    the documents, and  most  importantly  he  made  no  reference  to  the
    existence of any arrest warrant (see paragraph 49).

18. In reply, Mr Coleman  states  that  the  judge  did  not  refer  to  TK
    (Burundi) or to Tanveer Ahmed and so it  was  wrong  for  Mr  Bates  to
    assert that the judge had regard to these authorities.  The Appellant's
    case was set out at paragraph 24 of the determination which stated,

         "The Appellant states that shortly after his arrival in the  UK  he
         was told the NIB in Sri Lanka deemed him to be a supporter  of  the
         LTTE.  The Secretary of State did not  consider  it  credible  that
         being involved in the sale of a property owned  by  a  Tamil  would
         warrant the attention of the NIB" (paragraph 24).

    The Appellant had made  it  clear  (see  paragraph  3  of  his  witness
    statement) that this was not just an enquiry upon him.  He  really  was
    in fear of being ill-treated.  The police are on the lookout for him to
    arrest him.  He did not claim asylum for a month, but this  is  because
    at the time of his arrival here he did not know he was  at  risk.   The
    judge had set the bar too high.  This appeal should be allowed.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  First, there is the history of  this  Appellant.   By  all
    accounts, he is a well connected member of Sri Lankan society, and  may
    well be deemed to be a  pillar  of  that  society.   He  has  been  the
    recipient of several multientry visit  visas  to  the  UK  issued  from
    almost ten years ago in 2000, and as the judge recognised, he had  been
    to the UK on fifteen occasions since 1996, coming to this country every
    year since 2009.  He was employed since 2000 in the  Board  of  Control
    for Cricket in Sri Lanka.  All  that  is  uncontentious.   What  is  in
    dispute is whether he is a  whistleblower  as  he  claims.   The  judge
    rejected this claim comprehensively, doing so not just on the basis  of
    the Appellant's credibility, that he failed  to  claim  asylum  at  the
    airport before being granted entry to the UK (see  paragraph  34),  but
    that he was not referred to in any of the articles that he himself drew
    attention to, and was unable  to  point  to  any  documentary  evidence
    confirming his role as a whistleblower.  He claimed to have  instructed
    a lawyer in Sri Lanka  to  pursue  a  complaint  to  the  Human  Rights
    Commission, but even here the judge was of the view that, "I have found
    it relevant that the Appellant failed to ask his legal advisor  in  Sri
    Lanka to obtain this evidence from him" (paragraph 43).

20. Second, there is the issue about when the Appellant knew that he was in
    fear of persecution and ill-treatment.  Mr  Coleman  asserts  that  the
    Appellant only discovered the true extent of the risk to him after  his
    arrival in the UK.  This cannot be true.  The judge did not hold it  to
    be true.  The Appellant claimed that after his contract ceased with the
    cricket committee, "they were harassing me little  by  little  as  they
    sacked me" and that they then "sent a  white  van".   However,  as  the
    judge found, the Appellant continued to live for another four years  in
    Sri Lanka before he left in 2014,  "without  any  further  attempts  to
    arrest or abduct him" by the authorities being  put  in  evidence  (see
    paragraph 44).

21. Third, and in any event, the judge did give  express  consideration  to
    when the Appellant's fear materialised, observing that  "the  Appellant
    says he learnt of the NIB's interest in him after he entered the UK  in
    October 2014" but the judge rejected this because "in his oral evidence
    he said that prior to him leaving Sri Lanka he  received  a  visit  and
    telephone call from men asking  questions  about  him  which  made  him
    suspicious" (paragraph 54).   The  judge  was  entitled  to  make  this
    finding of fact.  Even more damaging to the Appellant, he had said that
    he was visited by men on 25th September 2014  and  that  "it  was  this
    visit which prompted his departure from Sri Lanka".  Yet, as the  judge
    observed, if this is accepted then it would suggest that the  Appellant
    was of interest to the authorities a month before  he  left  Sri  Lanka
    (paragraph 55).

22. Finally, there is the issue of the Appellant's conversion to  Buddhism,
    but the judge has given this proper consideration (at paragraph 17)  in
    noting  that  the  Appellant  claimed  that  this  would   create   "an
    embarrassing situation" for him.  The judge's findings in this  respect
    can also not be faulted for the same reasons as the ones I  have  given
    above.

Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

24. An anonymity direction is made.

25. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8 May 2017



