
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04945/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On April 16, 2018                            |On April 24, 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  MR R N S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter   Mr Ali


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend the anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and direct that unless and until a Tribunal
    or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  her
    or any member of  her  family.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national. On November 20, 2016 he applied for
    asylum but his application was refused on May 11, 2017.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  May  24,  2017.   His
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Durance
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on June 22, 2017  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on July 6,  2017  the  Judge  refused  his  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on July  11,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Nightingale  on
    September 28, 2017. Permission to appeal was renewed and Upper Tribunal
    Judge Grubb granted permission on November 20, 2017 on the sole  ground
    the Judge had arguably failed to address the issues in AA (Iraq) v SSHD
    and SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944  (amending  AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

 6. I asked the  appellant  whether  he  was  legally  represented  and  he
    confirmed that he had spoken to  his  former  solicitors,  since  being
    granted permission to appeal, but they were unable to assist  him.  The
    appellant understood that today's hearing was limited to whether he was
    returnable to Iraq based on the previous findings made  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. I was satisfied it would be appropriate to continue with
    the hearing.

 7. The respondent accepted there was an error in law  in  respect  of  the
    Judge's consideration of internal relocation. Mr  Bates  confirmed  his
    position remained unaltered.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Bates relied on the previous findings of fact. He also reminded  the
    Tribunal that the Judge had specifically rejected the appellant's whole
    claim and invited me to find that the appellant did have family in Iraq
    to whom he could turn to and that his claim, that he was at  risk  from
    his family, lacked any credibility.

 9. The appellant had produced to the respondent pictures of both  his  own
    and other family members' CSID documents.

10. The starting point for the respondent was that he could be returned  to
    Baghdad and from there he would be able  to  fly  to  either  Erbil  or
    Sulaymaniyah. He would be able to replace his CSID document because  he
    had all the necessary information. He could either settle in the IKR as
    a Kurd with documentation and access to  family  support  or  he  could
    return to  Kirkuk  which  was  no  longer  a  contested  area  and  was
    controlled by the Iraqi authorities. It was  neither  unreasonable  nor
    unduly harsh to return the appellant.

11. The appellant reiterated that he came from Kirkuk and stated that if he
    returned he would face problems with family both in his home  area  and
    in other parts of Iraq. He did  not  dispute  that  he  had  copies  of
    documents  that  would  enable  him  to  obtain  a  CSID  document  but
    reiterated his claim that he could not return.

    FINDINGS

12. The appellant had brought a claim for  protection  and  this  had  been
    rejected by the First-tier Judge. His claim had been based on the  fact
    that he had been discovered with his gay lover and  that  he  would  be
    unsafe where he returned.

13. The  Judge  found  the  appellant  gave  inconsistent,  discrepant  and
    incredible evidence. The Judge specifically rejected his claim to  have
    been involved in a relationship with another male as well as  rejecting
    his account of how he escaped. He attached no weight to the photographs
    and at paragraph 31 of his decision the Judge found there was  no  risk
    to the appellant from  either  his  own  family  or  his  "boyfriend's"
    family.

14. The error in law concerned the Judge's approach to the issue of  return
    and the failure to consider the guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).

15. In considering whether the appellant could be returned  to  Iraq  I  am
    invited to consider either a return to his  hometown  of  Kirkuk  or  a
    return to the IKR.

16. Kirkuk was a contested area and the Tribunal held in AA that  it  would
    not be possible for a person to be returned to that area. That decision
    remains a binding authority.

17. The recent September 2017 Country and Information Report indicates that
    a return to Kirkuk was now possible unless it was to the  area  in  and
    around Hawija. There is no suggestion that  the  appellant  comes  from
    this part of Kirkuk. Subject to the appellant being able to  travel  to
    Kirkuk this would clearly be an option as  his  family  remain  in  the
    area.

18. Mr Bates confirmed that the appellant would be returned to  Baghdad.  I
    raised with Mr Bates what would happen when he arrived in  Baghdad  and
    in particular would he be able to financially support  himself  in  the
    short term and arrange travel to either Kirkuk or the IKR. He confirmed
    that the appellant had demonstrated he had been in possession not  only
    of his own CSID card but also those belonging to other family  members.
    He also relied on the  fact  the  Judge  had  rejected  his  claim  and
    therefore he could turn to his family for support.

19. In AA the Tribunal gave guidance on return to Baghdad. At section D(15)
    of  the  head  note  the  Tribunal  provided  guidance  to  assist   in
    determining whether a person could be returned to Baghdad.

20. Mr Bates did not argue that the appellant would be required to live  in
    Baghdad although he argues he is an Iraqi national, with documents, and
    therefore able to travel wherever he wanted in Iraq

21. In AA (Iraq) v SSHD and SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the  Court  of  Appeal
    held (amending AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC)  by
    consent) that a CSID was not simply a return document.  It was feasible
    that someone could acquire  a  passport  or  a  laissez-passer  without
    possessing or being able to obtain a CSID.   The country  guidance  was
    revised as follows:

      a) Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region  (IKR)  will
         be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi
         authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United  Kingdom
         to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a  current  or  expired
         Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer;

      b) No  Iraqi  national  will  be  returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents;

      c) In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)  and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
         1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of  a
         current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez  passer,  if  the
         Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
         of a lack of any of those documents;

      d) Where P is  returned  to  Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.

      e) Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will  be  necessary
         to decide whether P has a CSID, or will  be  able  to  obtain  one,
         reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required
         in order for an Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance  from  the
         authorities; employment; education; housing; and medical treatment.
         If P shows there are no family or other members likely to  be  able
         to provide means of support, P is in general likely to face a  real
         risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any
         funds provided to P by the Secretary of  State  or  her  agents  to
         assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that
         P will still have no CSID.

22. The appellant's CSID  document  will  allow  him  access  to  financial
    assistance from the authorities; employment;  education;  housing;  and
    medical treatment. He also has family he can turn to.

23. Taking into account the guidance in AA  it  seems  that  the  appellant
    would either be able to enter the IKR and stay there  or  alternatively
    he would be able to return to his own family in Kirkuk.

24. Whilst I have taken into account the  appellant's  oral  submissions  I
    cannot go behind the previous findings made by  the  First-tier  Judge.
    The appellant is a Kurd who has documents and family  to  whom  he  can
    turn to and in these  circumstances  it  is  neither  unreasonable  nor
    unduly harsh to require him to return to Iraq.   If  he  is  unable  to
    reside immediately with his family then he is able to reside in the IKR
    because of the factors I have mentioned above.

    DECISION

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

26. I have remade the decision and dismiss the protection and human  rights
    claims.


Signed                              Date     11/04/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the claim.


Signed                              Date     11/04/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
