
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/04315/2017
      PA/04806/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport |       Decision and Reasons         |
|                                 |Promulgated                         |
|On 16th March 2018               |On 27th April 2018                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Mr Et A S and Mr Eh A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr G Hodgettts, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the parties as they were described  before  the  First
    Tier Tribunal that is Messrs S as the appellants and the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

 2. In a determination dated 6th October 2017 the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    dismissed the appeals on  asylum  ground  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds but allowed the appeals under Article 3 only.  He  thought  the
    appellants might be destitute in Afghanistan.

 3. The appeal involved a 'cross appeal' by Messrs S  (two  brothers).   An
    application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary of State
    on 16th October 2017 and granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell
    on 22nd November 2017 who stated that it  was  arguable  that  'on  the
    facts found the high threshold for meeting Article 3 was not met'.

 4. The appellants  however  on  20th  October  2017,  had  also  submitted
    applications for permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Unfortunately these  applications  were  not  addressed  prior  to  the
    Secretary  of  State's  application  being  granted,  and  were   still
    outstanding by the date of the hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal,
    which was only on the error of law point raised  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

Applications for Permission to Appeal

 5. The grounds set out by the Secretary of State in  her  application  for
    permission were essentially as follows

          i) inadequate reasoning by the judge to support  the  finding  in
             relation to Article 3

         ii) the correct threshold in relation to Article 3  had  not  been
             applied.  This was a high threshold  as  exemplified  by  N  v
             Secretary of State [2005] UKHL 31.

 6. The 'cross' application for permission to appeal by the  appellant  and
    which had not been addressed by the First-tier Tribunal set out grounds
    as follows

          i) Having allowed the appeal under Article 3 the judge  erred  in
             failing to allow the claim under Article  15(b)  (humanitarian
             protection)

         ii) In assessing the risk from  Mohammad  Atta  Noor,  (which  was
             central to the appeal) the judge  failed  completely  to  take
             account of the expert evidence of Dr Guistozzi or the relevant
             material evidence identified in the skeleton  argument.   This
             identified that he was indeed a man of influence  who  was  at
             odds with the family in Afghanistan

        iii) The  conclusions  regarding  lack  of  convention  reason  was
             inadequately reasoned

         iv) The findings in relation to credibility  were  unclear  -  the
             judge implicitly  accepted  the  appellants'  credibility  but
             failed to make sufficient findings in relation to Atta Noor.

          v) Paragraph 276ADE did not attract any findings  by  the  judge.
             That was an error

 7. At the hearing, Mr Hodgetts and Mr Richardson both concurred that there
    was an error of law and that  the  matter  should  be  returned  for  a
    hearing de  novo.  Mr  Hodgetts  conceded  that  there  was  inadequate
    reasoning when allowing the appeal on Article 3 grounds.  I agree.   Mr
    Richardson, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  conceded  that  there
    was no reference in the judge's findings on the risk from Atta Noor  to
    the appellants, to the expert evidence.  That too was a material  error
    of law.

 8. I was referred to EG and NG (UT Rule 17: withdrawal:  Rule  24:  scope)
    Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143  which  confirms  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    cannot entertain an application purporting to be made under rule 24 for
    permission to appeal until the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Tribunal  has
    been asked in writing for permission to appeal and has  either  refused
    it or declined.  In this instance, no decision had  been  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the appellants' application for permission.

 9. Further to Section 4(1) (c) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
    2007 I am also a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  may  'reconstitute'
    myself as a First-tier Tribunal Judge although also sitting in an Upper
    Tribunal capacity.   ZEI and others (Decision withdrawn - FtT Rule 17 -
    considerations) Palestine [2017] UKUT  00292  (IAC)  paragraph  8  'the
    application to the FtT has not been decided and as a judge of the FtT I
    can decide it'.  Therefore, as an initial stage, acting in a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge capacity,  I  considered  with  the  agreement  of  both
    parties whether permission should be granted to the appellants  on  the
    grounds identified above.

10. I find that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in
    his failure to make clear credibility findings and erred in failing  to
    address the crucial expert and further material evidence in relation to
    the risk from Atta Noor (grounds  (ii)  and  (iv)).   The  findings  on
    credibility and the influence of Noor would  also  affect  findings  in
    relation to grounds (i) and (iii). As  such  I  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the appellants on all grounds.

11. As a second stage and as part of the Upper  Tribunal  hearing  I  found
    that there were indeed material  errors  of  law  in  relation  to  the
    findings on credibility.  The  reasoning  was  simply  not  clear.   At
    paragraph 32 the judge opined that the case for asylum  was  'elegantly
    phrased but lacking in any substance or  merit'.  Overall  it  was  the
    appellants' claim that they were at risk but the judge merely found  it
    'incredibly tenuous'.  He failed, however,  with  reference  to  ground
    (ii) to address the expert evidence when assessing the risk  from  Noor
    and made no mention of the video  evidence  which  was  played  to  the
    Tribunal.   I understood that the question  of  the  'forced  marriage'
    issue to which the judge devoted paragraphs 23 to 30 muddied the waters
    with regards credibility and was at best a 'red herring' as it  related
    to the grandfather's approach to support in Dubai rather than  risk  in
    Afghanistan.  In addition, the father of the two appellants is  in  the
    process of claiming asylum in the UK and it was unclear,  according  to
    Mr Hodgetts, as to what the judge made of his oral  evidence  given  at
    his sons' hearing.

12. I find that both parties have demonstrated a  material  error  of  law.
    The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 16th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

