
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04917/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st February 2018                   |On 16th March 2018                  |
|                                        |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [S M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  22nd  August  1999.   The
    Appellant claims to have left Iraq illegally  crossing  into  Syria  by
    foot and arriving in the UK illegally on 21st October 2015.  He claimed
    asylum on 3rd November 2015.  The Appellant's application for asylum is
    based on race and a non-Convention reason namely  that  he  is  from  a
    contested  area  and  that  he  received  threats  from  his   mother's
    relatives.  The Appellant's  application  for  asylum  was  refused  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 1st May 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Gurung-Thapa sitting at Stoke on 25th April 2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  18th  May  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 1st June 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Those grounds contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge finding that
    the Appellant would be able to relocate to the KRI "with relative ease"
    effectively "skipped a step" by failing to consider what risk was faced
    by the Appellant in Baghdad itself.   Secondly  whilst  the  Judge  had
    correctly identified at paragraph 58 of her decision  the  test  to  be
    considered when examining the risk involved in travel from  Baghdad  to
    the IKR the judge had failed to make an assessment of  practicality  of
    travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Erbil by air) and the  judge
    had failed to apply correct country guidance.

 4. On 13th September 2017 Designated Judge Shaerf  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Shaerf noted that the Grounds for Appeal considered  the
    risk to the Appellant would be likely to face on return to Baghdad  and
    in travelling to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) and that the judge  had
    arguably erred in failing to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant would be returning as a minor  and  his  claim  that  he  has
    limited Arabic.  At the time of the hearing Mosul, which is  where  the
    Appellant's home village was close to, was under  heavy  siege  and  no
    account was taken  of  the  proximity  of  Erbil  to  where  the  judge
    considered the Appellant could relocate and how he  would  be  able  to
    negotiate passage from Baghdad to Erbil.  Additionally,  subsequent  to
    the promulgation of the decision of the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq)  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 revised country guidance had been given by the
    Upper Tribunal.

 5. On 21st September 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  Therein the Secretary of State contended that
    the judge had considered return to Baghdad as set out at paragraphs  55
    to 61 of her decision and that the Judge had found that  the  Appellant
    was not credible in not knowing the  whereabouts  of  his  parents  and
    siblings.

 6. It was on that basis that  the  appeal  initially  came  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The issue  was  whether  or
    not it was practical to return the Appellant, who was a Kurd,  to  Iraq
    bearing in mind that such return would be through Baghdad  and  whether
    an Appellant could reasonably be expected to avoid any potential  undue
    harshness in that city by travelling to the IKR.  It  was  accepted  at
    that hearing that each case is fact-sensitive and was likely to involve
    an assessment of:

      a) the practicality of travel from Baghdad to  the  IKR  (such  as  to
         Erbil by air);

      b) the likelihood of the Appellant securing employment in the IKR;

      c) the availability of assistance from family and friends in the IKR.

 1. On hearing submissions from the legal representatives I concluded  that
    the judge had erred in law in that she had missed out consideration  of
    the relevant vital stages before reaching her findings and that it  was
    necessary for a judge to adopt a step by step approach.

 2. On that basis I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    gave directions but retained the matter before myself to be reheard  on
    the first available date 42 days hence.

 3. It is that rehearing that comes back before me.  The Appellant  appears
    by his instructed Counsel, Mr Holt.  Mr Holt is extremely familiar with
    this matter.  He has appeared on all previous hearings  involving  this
    Appellant and is the author of Grounds of  Appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

The Issue

 4. In my directions I recorded that the outstanding issues related to:

      i) the risk faced by the Appellant in Baghdad;

     ii) as to whether the Appellant was able to travel from Baghdad to  the
         IKR.

    Mr Bates considerably assists me by indicating that  the  Secretary  of
    State does not wish to pursue the issue as  to  whether  the  Appellant
    would face risks in Baghdad, it being accepted that being a Kurd,  save
    in the most exceptional of circumstances which are not present here, it
    would not be appropriate  for  the  Appellant  to  remain  in  Baghdad.
    Consequently, the only outstanding issue before me is whether or not it
    is practical for the Appellant to travel from Baghdad to the IKR.

Evidence

 5. In my directions I granted leave to either party to file  and  serve  a
    bundle of such objective evidence  upon  which  they  wished  to  rely.
    There was no further evidence produced by the Secretary  of  State  but
    the Appellant produces a short objective bundle of news  articles,  and
    literature regarding the obtaining of visas to Iraq.  Not all of  these
    articles are ones that  would  not  have  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge but I have given due  consideration  to  this  objective
    evidence.  In addition, although I gave no direction that  this  should
    be obtained, the  Appellant's  solicitors  have  obtained  an  expert's
    report from Sheri Laizer.  This report is dated 14th February 2018.   I
    have given it read through consideration,  Ms  Laizer  not  being  here
    before the court for the purpose of cross-examination.

 6. I had previously given directions that the matter would proceed by  way
    of submissions only.  [SM] was excused attendance  before  me  but  has
    chosen to appear.  That of course is his prerogative.

The Expert's Report

 7. Within his submissions Mr Bates makes reference to Ms  Laizer's  report
    and to criticism  that  higher  courts  have  previously  made  against
    reports provided by this expert.  It is,  however,  pertinent  to  have
    read the report and to note its conclusions.  These are set out at page
    11 of the report.  Some of them however stray from the  discrete  issue
    that is before me.  The conclusions that are relevant to the issue  are
    as follows:

      a) [SM] cannot safely return to Mosul to have a new CSID card  issued.
         He needs valid ID to travel anywhere within Iraq including Baghdad.



      b) [SM] has no CSID and no Sponsor to allow him to  enter  Baghdad  or
         Erbil, whether to stay or work there.

      c) [SM] cannot travel safely by road.  He  cannot  board  an  aircraft
         without adequate identity documentation.  Once arrived in  the  KRG
         he could not find accommodation or work to remain there.  He  would
         almost certainly become an IDP, destitute, alone and homeless.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Holt submits that  there  are  effectively  two  ways  in  which  an
    Appellant can return to the IKR, either by being pre-cleared and flying
    direct to Erbil or via Baghdad and then making your own way to the IKR.
     He acknowledges that it  is  accepted  that  returns  to  Baghdad  are
    feasible and given the need for a Kurd to get out of  Baghdad  promptly
    it is reasonable that he would then relocate.  He  further  points  out
    that it is generally accepted that travel  by  road  through  the  area
    known as the Baghdad Belts  to  the  northern  region  of  the  IKR  is
    extremely dangerous and not  practical.   Consequently,  the  issue  is
    whether or not the Appellant when he arrives in Baghdad can  get  on  a
    plane to Erbil or any other part of the IKR.

 9. Mr Bates points out that the Appellant is from Mosul which is  actually
    outside the IKR and that whilst the Secretary of State accepts that the
    Appellant cannot live in Baghdad as a  Kurd,  there  are  flights  from
    Baghdad to Sulaimaniya and to Erbil.  He consequently points  out  that
    the issue is effectively why the Appellant cannot get  on  an  internal
    flight to the  IKR.   He  submits  that  based  on  previous  preserved
    findings of Immigration Judge Gurung-Thapa credibility was rejected  at
    paragraph 46, honour based risks were rejected and at paragraph 52  the
    family feud was rejected.  He then reminds me that at paragraph 61  the
    core of the Appellant's claim was rejected by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and based on such adverse credibility findings that the Appellant
    has contact with his family regarding documentation.   The  implication
    from this is that the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  relevant
    documentation via family members if he is returned to Baghdad  Airport.



10. Mr Bates is critical  of  Dr  Laizer's  report,  reiterating  her  past
    reports  having  received  criticism  from  the   upper   courts.    He
    particularly asked me to  consider  page  10  of  her  report  entitled
    "Travel by air to Erbil (or Sulaimaniya)" and her reference therein  as
    to the procedure at the airport.  He cannot understand (and I have some
    sympathy with this approach) as to why Ms Laizer makes reference to her
    own personal experience.  He points out this is  not  her  appeal.   He
    further criticises where she states:

         "A travel document or laissez passer will not likely suffice as  ID
         to board domestic flights and  may  raise  suspicion  about  [SM]'s
         motives and reasons for return to Iraq from the UK".

    Mr Bates comments that there is no background  evidence  or  supportive
    evidence produced by Ms Laizer for this contention and in any event, in
    order to have entered Iraq to be accepted back into  the  country,  the
    Appellant's  nationality  would  have  had  to  be  accepted   by   the
    authorities.  He consequently poses the question of why  the  Appellant
    would not in such circumstances be able to travel.

11. Mr Holt responds by stating that it is common  sense  rather  than  any
    comments made in an expert's  report  that  in  order  to  get  on  any
    aeroplane ID must be available and  that  travelling  anywhere  in  the
    world is difficult in the present climate.   He  submits  it  would  be
    impossible to find objective evidence that would challenge the question
    "Can you get on a domestic plane in Baghdad without  ID?"   He  further
    submits it is not open to the Secretary of  State  to  put  forward  an
    argument that you can travel onward  from  Baghdad  through  a  laissez
    passer as no such evidence has been put before me and  the  documentary
    evidence produced does not go so far as  to  say  that.   There  is  no
    evidence that the Appellant has other  documentation,  i.e.  a  laissez
    passer or documents for internal travel.

12. Whilst accepting that Ms  Laizer's  report  says  a  lot  that  is  not
    pertinent to this appeal it is not in his view damaging to the  appeal,
    it is merely irrelevant, but  she  does  emphasise  a  point  which  he
    contends is  important,  namely  that  this  Appellant  has  no  family
    connection in the IKR despite  the  submissions  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

13. He submits it  is  not  a  typical  fact-finding  exercise  and  it  is
    necessary to decide if there is a  risk  of  his  getting  out  of  the
    airport at Baghdad.  He asks me in all the circumstances to  allow  the
    appeal.

Findings

14. This is one of an ever increasing seemingly number of cases that  comes
    before the Tribunal relating  to  return  of  Iraqis  to  the  IKR  via
    Baghdad.  Each case has to be looked at on its own facts  and  firstly,
    whilst Mr Holt and Ms Laizer refer to a lack of family members, it  has
    to be remembered that there were adverse credibility findings  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Those findings were preserved which  is
    why this matter remains in the Upper Tribunal.  Having said that, I  do
    acknowledge that as a general principle merely to  say  that  a  family
    member from the IKR exists and that that family member will  merely  go
    and obtain the appropriate documentation and bring  it  to  Baghdad  to
    enable the Appellant to travel is, in the absence of evidence that that
    is likely to occur, hardly sustainable.  It is accepted that it is  not
    practical to return a Kurd to Baghdad but it is acceptable to return  a
    Kurd through Baghdad, i.e.  that  there  will  have  to  be  an  onward
    transfer to the Kurdish Region and most Kurds would not wish  to  leave
    the relative safety of  the  airport,  i.e.  go  into  Baghdad,  before
    boarding an onward flight.

15. Mr Bates advises me that the provision of a ticket to Iraq will only be
    provided to Baghdad by the Secretary  of  State,  i.e.  they  will  not
    provide an onward ticket to Erbil or Sulaimaniya.  Consequently, it  is
    necessary for an Appellant to obtain his own ticket.  The question then
    becomes a very narrow one, namely  "Will  such  ticket  be  available?"
    Unless there is certainty that it is, bearing in  mind  the  conclusion
    that it is not appropriate to return a Kurd to Baghdad due to the  risk
    that they would be exposed to, then it cannot be appropriate to  return
    such a person unless there is certainty that they will be in a position
    to move on.

16. It seems absolutely certain that all  airlines  will  require  security
    checks and whilst I note what Mr Bates  states,  namely  that  for  the
    Iraqis to admit the Appellant or any other person back into the country
    in the first place they would have to be  satisfied  he  is  Iraqi,  he
    would still have to be in a position to produce documentation, albeit a
    passport or a laissez passer, which would  enable  the  authorities  to
    check the document against the database containing security details  of
    dangerous and wanted persons, and for the CSID number on ID cards to be
    checked against a register and security database.  In  the  absence  of
    such document the Appellant cannot travel.

17. In such circumstances I have not been satisfied that there is  evidence
    that this is  an  Appellant  who  would  have  the  appropriate  travel
    documents.  In such circumstances I conclude that there is a real  risk
    that the Appellant would find himself stuck in Baghdad.   Consequently,
    it is in this instant case that I find it is  not  practical  for  this
    Appellant to travel onwards to the IKR and in  such  circumstances  the
    Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

Based solely on the fact that it is not practical for the Appellant to  make
onward travel from Baghdad Airport to the IKR,  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
