
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA043642016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 May 2017                        |On 07 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            ahmed hassan kaka ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Smith, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ahmed Hassan Kaka Ali, was born on 1 January 1988 and is
    a male citizen of Iraq.   By  a  decision  dated  21  April  2016,  the
    respondent refused the appellant's application for asylum  and  made  a
    decision  to  remove  him  as  an  illegal  entrant/person  subject  to
    administrative removal.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Fox) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  10  October
    2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a single male Kurdish Sunni Muslim.  His home area  of
    Iraq is Diyala.  The respondent, although she refused  the  appellant's
    application,  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  fear  of
    returning to  Diyala  which  was  objectively  founded.   However,  the
    respondent considered that the appellant could  avail  himself  of  the
    internal flight alternative within Iraq and seek safety  in  particular
    in the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR).  Judge Fox agreed.  At [22-24]
    of his decision he wrote:

         22.    [The   appellant]   would   have   to   source   appropriate
             identification documentation once  again  AA  (Article  15(c))
             Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) confirms that it would not  be
             impossible  or  too  difficult  for  him  to  source  such   a
             replacement document if he returned to the IKR.  I  note  that
             he previously held a Civil Status ID card (CSID).   He  claims
             that this was destroyed when  his  house  was  attacked.   The
             objective information in Iraq notes that there is in existence
             an archival system which can be accessed to obtain replacement
             identity documents.   He  concedes  that  he  has  family  who
             continue to remain in Iraq.  He suggests he  is  not  on  good
             terms with his uncle.  This contradicts his evidence  that  he
             fled originally to his uncle's house with his mother when  his
             uncle supported his mother, after  his  departure  from  Iraq,
             until her death.  I consider on the evidence before  me  today
             that he would be free to use family connections to assist  him
             in replacing his identity documents,  even  if  necessary  via
             proxy.

         23.   Although  a  Kurd  who  does  not  originate  from  the   IKR
             nonetheless he is able to obtain employment as  an  apprentice
             in the construction arena.  He is clearly resourceful managing
             to make his way across Europe to come to the UK and working in
             Turkey for one year before electing to move  on.   His  skills
             would be easily transferable to  the  IKR  to  assist  him  in
             obtaining  employment.    These   skills   will   be   equally
             transferable to  the  Safe  Belts  in  Baghdad.   AA  and  the
             background material suggested he could also relocate safely to
             the south of Iraq.

         24.  On the evidence before me today I do not accept the  appellant
             has a genuine claim to be in need of international  protection
             and that such fear he may claim to have  I  considered  to  be
             unfounded.  The  option  to  relocate  is  open  to  him.   He
             demonstrates little in the way of positive evidence that would
             suggest that such relocation would be either  unreasonable  or
             unduly harsh.

 3. I consider that Judge Fox has erred in law such that his decision falls
    to be set aside.  I  have  reached  that  decision  for  the  following
    reasons.  First, I find that Judge Fox failed to apply AA  in  that  he
    has failed to make findings as to  the  particular  characteristics  of
    this appellant  and  how  those  characteristics  might  influence  his
    ability to relocate to the IKR.  The judge has found that the appellant
    has  employment  skills  [23]  and  that  he  has  family  members  (in
    particular, an uncle) who may be able to  assist  him  in  obtaining  a
    replacement CSID.  However, the judge has not carried out assessment of
    the appellant's Arab language skills (the appellant said  that  he  has
    had only five years of education and speaks only  limited  Arabic)  nor
    has he assessed the fact  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  family
    members living in the IKR itself (the Tribunal in AA acknowledged that,
    in order to remain in the IKR long term, an individual  would  need  to
    have such sponsors living there).

 4. Secondly, that whilst the judge found that the appellant's uncle  would
    be able to assist him in obtaining replacement documents (in particular
    CSID), he appears to have ignored the fact that the uncle would need to
    travel to the disputed area of Diyala and thereby place himself at risk
    of ill-treatment in order to assist the appellant to obtain  documents.
    The judge's decision is silent as to whether it is reasonable to expect
    the uncle or any other family member to undertake such a journey on the
    appellant's behalf.  Thirdly, in Judge Fox's  analysis,  the  appellant
    would return to Baghdad (the parties are agreed that that would be  his
    point of entry  to  Iraq)  but  has  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk living in Baghdad either short term  (before
    he was able to afford and/or arrange travel  to  the  IKR)  or  in  the
    medium term.  The judge found that the  appellant's  employment  skills
    would be transferable "to the Safe Belts in Baghdad" but he  has  taken
    no account of other aspects of the  appellant's  profile  (his  Kurdish
    ethnicity, his lack of Arab language skills, for example)  which  might
    yet expose him to risk.  The judge appears to  have  ignored  also  the
    fact the appellant has no family connections with  Baghdad  or  friends
    living there.  The appellant would be in Baghdad  without  a  CSID;  it
    does not seem likely that he would be able to obtain such  a  document,
    even through the agency of his uncle if that were reasonable, before he
    entered the city.  As I have noted, the judge has  not  considered  the
    practicality of the appellant's journey into the IKR from  Baghdad.   I
    also accept Miss Smith's submission that it  is  not  likely  that  the
    appellant would be able to obtain work within a very  short  period  of
    time within Baghdad in order  to  provide  for  himself  whilst  living
    there.  In the circumstances, and in  light  of  the  errors  of  trial
    identified, I find that the decision cannot stand and I set it aside.

 5. I was invited to remake the decision by Miss Smith and I have proceeded
    to do so.  I heard submissions from both Miss Smith and Mrs  Pettersen,
    for the respondent, as regards remaking the decision.   In  considering
    the error of law, I have sought to characterise the appellant's profile
    upon return to Iraq but I shall now summarise it.  The appellant  is  a
    relatively poorly educated Kurdish Sunni Muslim from a disputed area of
    Iraq.  He has no family members who would assist him within the IKR  as
    sponsor.  Having regard to the background material, I find that  he  is
    unlikely to find short-term work within Iraq  and,  without  a  sponsor
    living in the IKR, he is unlikely to obtain permanent  status  in  that
    region although I acknowledge that he may be admitted on  a  short-term
    basis.  Whether or not the appellant has an uncle who would be able  to
    assist him, it is not practical to expect the uncle to travel to Diyala
    in order to obtain a  replacement  CSID  for  the  appellant.   I  have
    assessed risk, therefore, on the basis that  the  appellant  would  not
    have a current CSID either before he returned to Iraq or whilst he  was
    living in Baghdad prior to his  attempted  removal  to  the  IKR.   Mrs
    Pettersen referred me to a passage in AA where  the  Tribunal  recorded
    that, although an entrant to the IKR  may  only  be  granted  ten  days
    additional leave  to  live  there,  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    authorities in the  IKR  actively  sought  to  remove  individuals  who
    overstayed such permission.  That may indeed be the case, but,  without
    family support or employment, it would nonetheless be difficult for the
    appellant to maintain himself in the  IKR  without  any  formal  status
    there which I find he is unlikely to achieve without sponsors living in
    the IKR or without any of the necessary documentation.  In  any  event,
    the appellant is still faced with the following  problems,  namely  (a)
    that he would have to remain  in  Iraq  without  means  of  support  or
    documentation albeit even for a short period,  where  I  find  that  he
    would be exposed to risk and; (b) before the appellant's status  within
    the IKR may be considered, it is necessary to consider the  possibility
    that he would be unable to make the journey safely from Baghdad to  the
    IKR in any event.  Having regard to all of  the  evidence  and  to  the
    relevant passage of the country guidance, I am not satisfied that  this
    appellant, in the absence of support or the necessary documents,  would
    be able to support himself safely  within  Baghdad  even  for  a  short
    period of time or that he would be able to facilitate  his  own  travel
    from Baghdad to the IKR.  I accept, however, that if he were  to  reach
    the IKR, he may be able to reside there at least  in  the  medium  term
    without formal permission.  The  fact  remains,  however,  that  he  is
    unlikely to reach  the  IKR  safely  and  I  therefore  find  that  the
    appellant is entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  10
    October  2016  is  set  aside.   I  have  remade  the  decision.    The
    appellant's appeal is allowed.  The appellant is entitled to a grant of
    humanitarian protection.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 6 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 6 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
