
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04211/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 March 2018                        |On 19 April 2018                 |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     S R

                         (Anonymity DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal")  which  it  sent  to  the  parties  on
26 June 2017.  The tribunal, in  fact,  dismissed  the  claimant's  appeal
against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,  which  she  had  made  on
20 April 2017, to refuse to grant the claimant  international  protection.
Since the tribunal granted the claimant  anonymity  and  since  nothing  was
said at the hearing before me to suggest that I  should  do  anything  other
than continue that grant,  I  have  decided  to  do  so.   Accordingly,  the
claimant remains entitled to anonymity.

2.    By way of brief background, the claimant was born on [ ] 1948  and  is
a national of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.  She says that she lived  with  her
husband and her son  and  that  her  son  was  a  member  of  the  Kurdistan
Democratic Party of Iran ("KDPI") and had been a member for  some  eight  or
nine years.  She  also  says  that  she  would  help  him  by  hiding  party
literature in the family home and providing food  for  other  KDPI  members.
Further, some members would hold secret meetings with her son at the  family
home and whilst such meetings  were  taking  place,  she  would  keep  watch
outside in case the Iranian authorities approached.

3.    The claimant asserts that there came a time when her son was  informed
by the KDPI that two of the Party's fighters had  escaped  the  clutches  of
the authorities and were in hiding locally.  He was instructed to take  food
and water to them which he did.  However, she says that he  was  apprehended
in doing so and the family home was  subsequently  raided.   Family  members
were arrested although the claimant herself was  not  arrested  because  she
was outside taking some farm animals owned by  the  family  to  graze.   She
asserts that  a  warrant  for  her  arrest  was  issued  but  that  she  was
nevertheless able to flee Iran with the assistance of her  brother  who  had
managed to secure the assistance of a people smuggler.

4.    In pursuing her asylum claim the claimant set out  the  above  history
and said that if she were to  return  the  authorities  in  Iran  and  those
associated with the authorities would seek to arrest  her  and/or  persecute
her.

5.    Put simply, the Secretary of State did not believe her.  So her  claim
for international protection was refused.  She appealed.  There was an  oral
hearing  at  which  she  gave  evidence  and  at  which  both  parties  were
represented.  But the tribunal did not believe her  either.   In  explaining
why it did not do so it said this:

         "35.     This appeal rests on the credibility of the Appellant.   I
         observed the demeanour of the Appellant whilst  she  gave  evidence
         and noted she did so with what I considered to be a certain distain
         (sic) for the position she found herself in and  in  answering  the
         questions put to her by Miss Brown.


         36.           At the time the Appellant left Iran, she was 68 years
         old.  She suffers from various medical  ailments,  including  heart
         disease and  hypertension.   Despite  this,  she  recounts  in  her
         witness statement dated 30 March 2017 at paragraph 3 (B2 in  the
         Respondent's bundle) that during Peshmerga visits to her  home  for
         secret meetings with her son, 'I was guarding for them in order  to
         ensure nobody would bind out about that.   Because  it  was  really
         dangerous and if the authorities would have found out about that we
         all would have been  in  danger'.   I  do  not  find  credible  the
         Appellant's account that at her age and with her medical conditions
         she would have stood guard over her house to protect  her  son  and
         his Peshmerga colleagues from arrest by the authorities.


         37.           I further note that  throughout  the  course  of  her
         interview, the Appellant was unable to provide specific details  of
         her son's activities for the KDPI other than  that  he  transferred
         goods and literature.  If she had been aware of his membership  for
         almost 10 years and had assisted him for the majority of that time,
         it is  quite  reasonable  to  conclude  that  she  would  have  had
         knowledge of his activities within the Party.


         38.           I note that on the day of the  alleged  raid  on  her
         home, the Appellant was somewhat conveniently out of the  house  at
         the time.   By  her  own  admission,  the  Appellant  suffers  from
         obesity, heart disease, hypertension and problems with her eyes.  I
         do not accept, therefore, that she would  be  taking  the  cows  to
         graze nearly every day.  Further, at paragraph 14 of  her  witness
         statement of 19 May 2017, the Appellant claimed to have been half
         way to Mir Safa when found by her granddaughter.  This would  have
         been a 15 minute walk according to objective evidence which  means
         that almost every day she walked for almost 90 minutes to take the
         cows for grazing.  I do not find this credible for someone  of  her
         age and with her medical conditions.


         39.           The Appellant  also  stated  that  her  granddaughter
         found her after her house had been raided.  She gives an account of
         this at paragraph 5 in her last witness statement where  she  says
         her granddaughter brought a message from her daughter not to return
         home as the situation was too dangerous.  'As my family members (my
         daughter, son  and  close  relatives)  had  been  interrogated  and
         arrested  but  later  released  based  on  undertaking   with   the
         authorities'.  If the Appellant's daughter had  been  arrested  and
         interrogated, it is not credible that she would have  had  time  to
         send her own daughter on a 45 minute walk to  find  the  Appellant
         without alerting those who had arrested her.


         40.           In relation to the arrest warrant the Appellant  says
         was issued against her, it has not been produced.   She  states  at
         paragraph 19 of her witness statement that her  brother  told  her
         about the arrest warrant which suggests he had seen it  or  was  in
         possession  of  it.   Objective   information   provided   by   the
         Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada states that  court  summons
         are delivered to the person in question to their home or  workplace
         and if they are not present, a family member can receive it in  his
         or her place.  If no person or family member is present to  receive
         the summons it can be put in their mailbox  or  a  neighbour  might
         accept it on behalf of the  suspect.   Accordingly,  one  of  these
         methods of serving the arrest warrant must have been  used  by  the
         authorities.  As to how the Appellant's brother got to  know  about
         it is not known but, if it exists, it  could  have  been  produced.
         The Appellant's choice to confirm its existence  adversely  affects
         her credibility when she cannot produce it.


         41.           I further note from paragraph 21 of the  Appellant's
         statement that she states that Etelaat members  are  still  looking
         for her.  She does not elaborate on this comment by explaining  how
         she knows this.  There is no statement  from  anyone  in  Iran  and
         particularly not her brother.  The same applies to  the  arrest  of
         her  daughter  and  son-in-law  who  were  required  to   sign   an
         undertaking  to  inform  the   authorities   of   the   Appellant's
         whereabouts if they knew.  This in itself is not credible given the
         objective information referred  to  in  the  Refusal  Letter  which
         confirms the potentially hostile treatment  to  family  members  of
         those involved with the KDPI."

6.    So, the appeal failed.  But  that  was  not  the  end  of  the  matter
because the claimant, through her representatives, applied for and  obtained
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds,  it  is  fair  to
say, represented a full frontal attack upon the credibility  assessment  and
the judge granting permission to appeal thought there  was  merit  in  those
arguments.  Permission having been granted  the  matter  was  listed  for  a
hearing  before  the  Upper Tribunal  (before  me)  so  that  it  could  be
considered whether the tribunal had erred in law or  not  and,  if  it  had,
what should flow from that. Representation at that  hearing  was  as  stated
above and I am grateful to each representative.

7.    I have decided, albeit not without hesitation, that the  tribunal  did
err in law with respect to its credibility assessment.  I shall now  explain
why I have reached that conclusion.

8.    Mr Fraczyk in his oral submissions maintained what had been contented
in the written grounds to the effect that the tribunal had erred  in  taking
into account the claimant's demeanour when giving evidence.  He had in  mind
what the tribunal had had to say at paragraph 35 of  its  written  reasons.
Pausing there, the tribunal did make a typographical error but it  is  clear
that what it was saying was that the claimant  had  shown  "disdain"  during
the hearing.  One of the points made  was  that  it  was  unclear  what  the
tribunal actually meant.  It was further said that there was no  explanation
as to why  any  such  perceived  disdain  was  relevant  to  the  tribunal's
credibility assessment.  Mr Fraczyk reminded me of case law suggesting that
making credibility findings upon demeanour is something  which  is  "fraught
with danger".

9.    I did wonder whether, in fact, what was said at paragraph 35 might be
regarded as no more than passing comment rather than  an  integral  part  of
the  credibility  assessment  which,  on  that  view,  would   commence   at
paragraph 36.  However, I have concluded that that is not clearly the case.
 Further, whilst it might have been that the  tribunal  was  suggesting  the
claimant had treated the tribunal, the hearing  and  questions  put  to  her
with contempt, which might be thought to be inconsistent with someone  whose
safety is genuinely at risk and who would therefore want to properly  engage
with the fact-finding process, that is not what it actually  said.   Indeed,
it  is  unclear  why  the  tribunal  thought  the  claimant  did  treat  the
proceedings with disdain and even if she did it is unclear  why  it  thought
that did  justify  its  taking  an  adverse  credibility  point.   So,  this
represents an error through a failure to properly set out  and  explain  its
reasoning and its thought processes.

10.   As to paragraph 36 of the written reasons, it seems to  me  that  all
that was really being said by the claimant was that she had  acted  as  what
might be referred to as a "lookout"  when  political  meetings  were  taking
place at the family home.  It was not, so far as I can see,  being  asserted
that she somehow "stood guard over her house to  protect  her  son  and  his
Peshmerga colleagues  from  arrest  by  the  authorities"  as  the  tribunal
described it.  I agree that had that been the assertion her health  problems
would have suggested that it was an untenable one.  But since that does  not
appear to have been her case it cannot be said,  as  the  tribunal  thought,
that her health problems would prevent her from carrying out  the  function.
So I find, with respect  to  that  particular  matter,  the  tribunal  erred
through misunderstanding her account.

11.   At paragraphs 40 and 41 of the  written  reasons  the  tribunal  said
since the claimant had asserted that an arrest warrant had  been  issued  in
respect of her, it  was  damaging  to  her  credibility  that  she  had  not
produced evidence of it.  The  tribunal  may  well  have  had  in  mind  the
possibility that a family member could have sent the original to her or,  at
least, a copy and that the document could then have  been  translated.   The
complaint about that, made on behalf of the claimant, is in effect that  the
tribunal erred through failing to  consider  the  possibility  that  no  one
would want to send the warrant or a copy to her because the act of doing  so
might, if detected, place the sender at risk. I am not sure to what  extent,
if at all, the absence of evidence of  the  warrant  was  addressed  by  the
representatives before the tribunal.  Further, it might be thought  that  if
the claimant's safety was truly at risk her family in Iran would have  found
a way of sending the document even if there was  some  element  of  risk  to
themselves.  But I am narrowly persuaded that the tribunal  was  obliged  to
at least consider the possibility  that  sending  such  documentation  might
have been a risky undertaking for her family  prior  to  taking  an  adverse
point against her.

12.   I have not found myself to be persuaded by other arguments which  have
been brought with respect  to  other  elements  of  the  tribunal's  adverse
credibility finding.  But I am not sure  that  what  is  left  intact  would
necessarily, of itself, have persuaded the tribunal  to  reach  the  adverse
credibility conclusion that it did.  So I cannot conclude that the errors  I
have decided the tribunal did make are immaterial ones.

13.   In the above circumstances I must set aside the  tribunal's  decision.
Since I have done so on the basis of what I have ultimately concluded to  be
an unsafe credibility assessment, I have also  concluded  that  remittal  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing is the appropriate  course
of action.  I have, therefore, issued brief directions which will  hopefully
afford some assistance with respect to the remaking process.

Directions for the rehearing

      A     The decision of the tribunal which was sent to  the  parties  on
           26 June 2017 having been set aside, the case is remitted to the
           First-tier Tribunal for a  complete  rehearing.   None  of  the
           findings and conclusions are to be preserved.

      B.    The appeal will be heard  by  the  First-tier Tribunal  at  the
           Birmingham Hearing Centre with a time estimate of  three  hours.
           The hearing should not  take  place  before  Judge Butler.  The
           claimant should  be  provided  with  a  Kurdish-Sorani  speaking
           interpreter.

      C.    These directions may be replaced,  amended  or  supplemented  by
           further directions which may be issued by any salaried judge  of
           the First-tier Tribunal in the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.

Decision

Since the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
error of law, that decision is set aside.

The  case  is  remitted  for  a  complete  rehearing  before  a  differently
constituted First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The claimant was previously granted anonymity by  the  First-tier Tribunal.
That status is continued  by  the  Upper Tribunal  under  rule 14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  So, unless  and  until  a
court or tribunal directs otherwise, the claimant is granted anonymity.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  her  or
any member of her family.  This direction applies to  all  parties  to  this
appeal.  Failure to comply might lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                      Dated: 17 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway

