
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04803/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 May 2019                         |On 10 May 2019                     |
|                                      |                                   |


                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                     MM
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Jafar, instructed by UK Imm Lawyers & Advocates
For the respondent:    Mr J Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            NOTICE UNDER RULE 39

 1. The appellant appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese promulgated 4.7.18, dismissing his appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State, dated 153.18, to refuse his protection claim
    raised on the basis of ethnicity as a non-Arab Darfuri  and  sur  place
    anti-regime political activity.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal on 13.8.18.

 3. The appeal was listed as an error of law hearing  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Ryan on 22.11.18.

 4. Although Judge O'Ryan does not appear to have promulgated any  decision
    or issued any directions arising from the  hearing  on  22.11.18,  both
    parties agree and we have verified from the Record of Proceedings  that
    at that hearing the Secretary of State conceded that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contained such error of law as to require it to
    be set aside and remade.

 5. Judge O'Ryan noted the errors of  law  as  being  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal:

      a) Failed to make sufficiently  clear  findings  of  fact  as  to  the
         appellant's sur place activity and, therefore, the  nature  of  his
         profile; and

      b) Failed to give reasons adequate in law at [45] of the decision  for
         finding, notwithstanding the evidence that the Sudanese authorities
         monitor political activity in the diaspora, that the appellant  was
         not at risk of harm.

 6. We are satisfied and the parties concur that Judge O'Ryan intended that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal be set aside to be remade  with
    no findings preserved. However, it  was  not  practically  possible  to
    proceed to immediately remake the decision given the lack of court time
    and that the respondent's presenting officer was not in a  position  to
    make submissions in the rehearing of the appeal. In the  circumstances,
    Judge O'Ryan adjourned the remaking of the decision with the  intention
    that it should be listed before him at a future date.

 7. The Record of Proceedings indicates that Judge O'Ryan intended to issue
    an order setting the decision aside by consent, pursuant to Rule 39  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. For reasons unclear
    to us that does not appear to have been done.

 8. The appeal then came before us on 8.4.19, sitting as  a  panel  in  the
    Upper Tribunal with the matter listed as a resumed hearing.

 9. In preliminary discussions with  the  two  representatives,  it  became
    clear that neither understood that the  matter  was  to  be  a  resumed
    hearing and both were confused by the  absence  of  any  error  of  law
    decision or Rule 39 Notice. Mr Jafar had  forgotten  his  role  in  the
    proceedings before Judge O'Ryan and in any event had advised his client
    not to bring his key witness  to  court,  expecting  an  error  of  law
    hearing. For his part, Mr Whitwell was also unprepared  for  a  resumed
    hearing on a de novo  basis.  We  also  note  that  the  time  estimate
    provided  appears  woefully  inadequate  for   the   issues   requiring
    resolution. Further, no interpreter had been booked by the tribunal.

10. In the circumstances, it was clear that this matter could not  proceed.
    We drew to the representatives' attention that the Upper Tribunal is in
    the course of issuing new Country Guidance in respect of Sudan and  the
    issue of risk on return for a non-Arab Darfuri. If the  appeal  remains
    in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  it  would  not  be  heard  until  after  the
    promulgation of the pending Country Guidance,  which  is  not  expected
    until July 2019.  In light of that, Mr Jafar requested the matter to be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Whitwell did not oppose that.

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.

12. In  all  the  circumstances,  at  the  invitation  of  the  appellant's
    representative and with the agreement of both parties,  we  direct  the
    appeal to be relisted for a fresh hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within the Senior
    President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The nature and  extent
    of the judicial fact finding necessary for the decision in  the  appeal
    to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2 to deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  including  with  the
    avoidance of delay, we find that it is appropriate to remit this appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Decision

By consent pursuant to Rule 39 the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
set aside and remitted to the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be  remade  afresh.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Consequential Directions

13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House;

14. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

15. The ELH is 3 hours;

16. An interpreter in Arabic will be required

17. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judges Grimes, Abebrese, or Hollingworth;



Direction Regarding Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of  the
Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014. There was no request for anonymity.  However,
given the circumstances, we make an anonymity direction.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated






















