
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04568/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2018                            |On 15 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    G. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Weatherall, Counsel, instructed by Halliday
                    Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Iran who entered the UK unlawfully, and made
a protection claim on 10 October 2017 upon being apprehended having done
so. That application was refused on 24 March 2018, and his appeal against
that refusal came before the First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 9 May
2018, when it was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson. The
appeal was dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds, in a decision
promulgated on 10 May 2018.

The Respondent's application for permission to appeal the decision was
granted by First tier Tribunal Judge Froom on 4 June 2018 on the ground
that it was arguable the Judge had failed to engage with the numerous
credibility points raised and relied upon by the Respondent.

There has been no application to adduce further evidence pursuant to Rule
15(2A) and there has been no response to the grant of permission by way of
Rule 24 Notice by the Respondent. Thus the matter comes before me.

The grounds identify nine different credibility points raised by the
Respondent in the reasons given for the refusal of the protection claim,
which it is said the Judge has failed to engage with. Before me it was
agreed by the parties that there was simply no reference at all to seven of
them. Although Mr McVeety accepted that there was what he described as an
oblique reference to two of them, he put the Respondent's case on these two
as being that the Judge's language failed to make any clear finding of fact
upon them.

Thus, whether there were seven, or nine, credibility points that the Judge
had failed to engage with, it was argued on behalf of the Respondent that
it was clear the Judge had failed to properly engage with the Respondent's
case, so that he had been denied a fair hearing. Alternatively, adequate
reasons for the overall decision to allow the appeal had not been given,
because the Respondent was unable to see why that overall decision had been
reached in the face of these credibility points; MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA
Civ 1958.

Ms Weatherall's counter was that a proper analysis of the Appellant's
answers at interview provided an answer to each of the credibility points
that the Respondent had relied upon in the reasons given for the refusal of
the protection claim. That submission was not tested, because there was no
need to do so. It is a submission that misses the point at the heart of the
Respondent's complaint; that there was not a fair hearing case because the
Judge failed to engage adequately with his case. That complaint is clearly
made out in my judgement, and it amounts to a material error of law; R
(Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982. The decision is not saved by the opening
sentences of the concluding paragraph [39] in which the Judge observed that
"The Appellant's evidence was consistent, unembellished and the Appellant
gave a credible account. The information the Appellant has provided is
coherent and credible." Such observations must be properly rooted in what
has gone before, and follow sustainable reasons, otherwise that would be
all that the Tribunal ever needed to say.

In circumstances such as this, where it would appear that the relevant
evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the
effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties of the
opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First Tier
Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.
Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise required is such
that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of
the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other than
Judge Head-Rapson at the North Shields Hearing Centre. A Kurdish Sorani
interpreter is required. The Appellant wishes to lodge further evidence,
namely the document that the Judge had refused to admit in evidence at the
hearing, and he may do so provided it is filed and served within the next 7
days. Otherwise there is no need to file further evidence since there has
been no material change to the Appellant's circumstances. As a result the
appeal may be listed as a short notice filler, so long as that is after 19
November 2018.

Notice of decision


 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 9 November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

[pic]



