

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 August 2017                     |On 06 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                             DLOVAN AZIZ MAHMUD
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fraczyk of Counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The Appellant, a national of Iraq,  appeals  with  permission  against
      the decision of Judge of the First tier Tribunal P  J  M  Hollingworth
      dated 31 January 2017 dismissing his appeal against  the  Respondent's
      decision of 29 November 2015 refusing his claim for protection.

2     The Appellant's claim was that he  was  a  Sunni  Muslim,  of  Kurdish
      ethnicity, and spoke Kurdish Sorani and Arabic. Those matters are  not
      in dispute.

3     The Appellant claimed to  have  been  born  in  Jalawla  (Central  and
      Southern Iraq) (Screen, q 1.15; SEF q  11)  and  had  moved  with  his
      family when young to Batnaya town, north of Mosul (both of  which  are
      in Ninevah province, Central and Southern Iraq). He  claimed  to  fear
      harm in Batnaya due to ISIS having taken over that area in  or  around
      2014, and he set out various experiences at the hands of  ISIS  there,
      and at the hands of Shia militia after the Iraqi army had forced  ISIS
      out of Batnaya in or around 2015. The Appellant also claimed that  his
      father had worked for the former Ba'ath government before 2003.

4     The Judge held at [66]:

           "I do not accept that Appellant's account of the events which he
           claims transpired in Iraq. I find that his credibility has  been
           damaged by the inconsistencies to which I have  referred   above
           and for the reasons which I have given to the point whereby  his
           account of events fall to be rejected."

      The Judge specifically rejected that the Appellant was at risk because
      of  any  imputed  political  opinion  from  ISIS,  and  rejected   the
      Appellant's account that his father had worked for  the  Ba'ath  party
      [67] and that the Appellant had had problems with Shia  militia  [68].
      The Appellant would not suffer serious harm in Baghdad because of  his
      Kurdish ethnicity or Sunni faith [70]. There is no  challenge  against
      any of those findings.

5     The Judge had been referred to  AA  (Article  15(c))  (Rev  2)  [2015]
      UKUT 544 (IAC) (30 October 2015) during the  hearing  and  submissions
      (paras 29, 35). On the issue of what documentation the Appellant might
      have to enable him to return, and to assist him after his return,  the
      Judge observed that the Appellant had accepted that he had at one time
      been issued with an Iraqi passport [69/70]. The Judge was  also  aware
      that a person named Hussain, a business colleague of  the  Appellant's
      father had, since the Appellant had been in the UK, been able to  post
      to  the  Appellant  the  Appellant's  father's   identity   card   and
      nationality card (or copies thereof) (para 13, 18). The Judge held  at
      [71]:

           "71. I find the Appellant would be able to live in Baghdad  City
           or be able to relocate to other parts of Iraq. I find  that  the
           Appellant would be able to obtain a CSID reasonably  soon  after
           arrival in Iraq, given the  fact  that  an  Iraqi  passport  was
           issued  to  the  Appellant.  I  have  rejected  the  Appellant's
           account. I do not accept that he has no family members  whom  he
           could contact in Iraq. I have set out above the constitution  of
           the Appellant's family. I do not find that is  a  real  risk  or
           serious possibility or likelihood  of  the  Appellant  suffering
           destitution or facing a real risk of  destitution  amounting  to
           serious harm. I find that there are those in Iraq who  would  be
           able to vouch for the Appellant. The Appellant has  referred  to
           Hussain. The Appellant has referred to his family members.

           72. An alternative CSA office for Mosul his been established  in
           Baghdad. There is a National Status Court in  Baghdad  to  which
           application could be made for formal  recognition  of  identity.
           The Appellant has confirmed that he can  speak  Arabic.  It  has
           been pointed out that those who cannot are less likely  to  find
           employment. I do not find  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  or
           unduly harsh in the  light  of  the  matters  to  which  I  have
           referred for the Appellant to relocate to Baghdad. I have  taken
           into account that the Appellant is Kurdish,  in  weighing  other
           factors which re relevant to this and to which I have  referred.
           The Appellant described the scope of the business  interests  of
           his father with his  partner  Hussain  and  I  find  that  there
           business interests would embrace their  ability  to  assist  the
           Appellant in Baghdad."

6     The Judge dismissed the appeal at paragraph 77.

7     In grounds of appeal dated 12 February  2017,  the  Appellant  averred
      that the Judge had erred in law, in summary, in:

      (i)   conflating the availability of ID documents with prior existence
           of documents:  the fact that the Appellant had  previously  held
           an Iraqi passport did not mean that he currently had any of  the
           necessary documentation to obtain a CSID;  past possession of  a
           passport does not mean that it is  reasonably  likely  that  the
           Appellant will be able to obtain a CSID;

      (ii)  taking into account immaterial  considerations/failing  to  take
           into account material considerations: erring in finding  that  a
           CSID could be obtained via the alternative CSA office for  Mosul
           in Baghdad or National Status Court in Baghdad, given  that  the
           Central Archive that exists in Baghdad is unable to issue CSID's
           and the operation of the National Status  Court  in  Baghdad  is
           unclear;

      (iii) failing to take into account the material consideration that the
           Appellant's CSA office was in Mosul; he could not travel  there,
           and nor could any family members;

      (iv)  arriving at a conclusion (that the Appellant would  be  able  to
           obtain a CSID card and would not be at risk of destitution) that
           was irrational.

8     Permission to appeal on those grounds was granted on 22 May 2017.

9     On 11 July 2017, the Court of Appeal gave  judgment  in  AA  (Iraq)  v
      SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944, amending the Country Guidance given  by  the
      Upper Tribunal in AA Iraq. In light of that, I caused directions to be
      issued to the parties in the following terms:

           1     The Appellant shall by 4.00  pm  Friday  4.8.17  file  and
                 serve a skeleton argument  setting  out  his   case  as  to
                 whether or not there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
                 decision  of  the  Fist  tier   Tribunal;   in   particular
                 addressing the effect that the decision in AA (Iraq) v SSHD
                 [2017] EWCA Civ 944 (11 July 2017) has on the appeal.

           2     The Respondent shall by 4.00pm on Tuesday 8.8.17 file  and
                 serve a skeleton argument by way of reply."

 10   I am obliged to Mr  Fraczyk  for  providing  a  skeleton  argument  as
      requested, given the short notice, and make no criticism of Mr McVeety
      that he had not been able to do so. Before me, both  parties  appeared
      to be in agreement that the amendments made by the Court of Appeal  to
      the Country Guidance in AA Iraq made no  material  difference  in  the
      present case.

11    Mr Fraczyk  addressed  me  by  adopting  his  grounds  of  appeal  and
      skeleton argument. In relation to the second ground in particular,  he
      referred me to paragraphs 183 and 187 of the Upper Tribunal's decision
      in AA. For ease of reference, I set out the whole of  that  particular
      passage of AA:

           "183.       This is confirmed to some extent by  the  fact  that
                 the Iraqi government  has  set  up  two  Alternative  Civil
                 Status  Affairs  Offices  to  issue  CSIDs  to  IDPs   from
                 governorates which have been captured by ISIL.  One  office
                 has been set up in Najaf to issue copies of CSIDs  archived
                 from Mosul, and another office has been set up  in  Baghdad
                 to issue copies of CSIDs  to  individuals  from  Anbar  and
                 Salahaddin. These offices  are  only  authorised  to  issue
                 CSIDs to IDPs from these governorates.

           184.        Dr Fatah was further informed by  a  source  at  the
                 Norwegian Refugee Council that the Ministry of the Interior
                 had refused  to  open  up  more  Alternative  Civil  Status
                 Affairs offices so as to protect civil records from  fraud,
                 to protect confidentiality and  to  avoid  duplication,  as
                 there was no database or electronic system.

           185.        UNHCR-Iraq provides some support to those without  a
                 CSID through its Protection, Assistance and  Re-integration
                 Centres ("PARC"), but such support is limited to  providing
                 guidance  and  legal  advice  on  required  procedures  and
                 documents needed to obtain a CSID. It did not  issue  these
                 or other documents itself. It also confirmed  that  Harikar
                 and Qandil [8] have indicated that they do not issue CSIDs.
                 The Norwegian Refugee Council told Dr Fatah that there is a
                 network of legal aid clinics in Iraq, which  is  funded  as
                 part of USAID's Iraq Access to Justice Programme. They also
                 provide legal advice, but do not issue CSIDs.

           186.        Drawing all of this together  we  conclude  that  an
                 Iraqi national should as a general matter be able to obtain
                 a CSID from the Civil Status Affairs Office for their  home
                 Governorate, using an Iraqi passport  (whether  current  or
                 expired), if they have one. If they  do  not  have  such  a
                 passport, their ability to obtain  a  CSID  may  depend  on
                 whether they know the page and volume number  of  the  book
                 holding  their  information  (and  that  of  their   family
                 members). Their ability to persuade the officials that they
                 are the person named on the  relevant  page  is  likely  to
                 depend  on  whether  they  have  family  members  or  other
                 individuals who are prepared to vouch for them.

           187.        An Iraqi national's ability  to  obtain  a  CSID  is
                 likely to be severely hampered if they are unable to go  to
                 the Civil Status Affairs Office of their  home  Governorate
                 because it is in an area where Article 15(c)  serious  harm
                 is occurring. As a result of the violence, alternative  CSA
                 Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar  and   Saluhaddin   have   been
                 established in Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence  does  not
                 demonstrate that the "Central  Archive",  which  exists  in
                 Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to  those  in
                 need of them. There is, however, a National Status Court in
                 Baghdad,  to  which  a  person  could  apply   for   formal
                 recognition of identity.  The  precise  operation  of  this
                 court is, however, unclear."

12    Mr Fraczyk argued that the decision in AA is  in  fact  unclear  where
      the alternative CSA office for Mosul is; paragraph 183  suggests  that
      it is in  Najaf,  and  paragraph  187  being  ambiguous,  referred  to
      alternative CSA offices for Mosul, Anbar and  Saluhaddin  having  been
      established in Baghdad and Kerbala. I queried with Mr Fraczyk  whether
      his ground of appeal was, therefore, so as to challenge the clarity or
      sustainability of the country guidance given in AA. He stated that  he
      did make such challenge, although I observed that this had not  formed
      part of the his grounds of appeal.

13    Further, Mr Fraczyk submitted that the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
      failing to make findings of fact which were sufficiently clear  as  to
      whether the Appellant had family members in Iraq that could assist him
      to obtain documentation,  and  where  those  family  members  were.  I
      observed that this was also not a  ground  of  appeal  that  had  been
      raised against the Judge's decision.

14    In relation to the Judge's reference to the National Status Court,  Mr
      Fraczyk argued that this  could  not  be  of  any  assistance  to  the
      Appellant, given that the Upper Tribunal had observed that the precise
      operation of the court was unclear.

15    Mr McVeety relied on a Rule 24 Response which argued  that  there  was
      no error within  the Judge's decision. He further argued that even  if
      there was lack of clarity in the Upper Tribunal's decision in AA about
      where the alterative CSA office for Mosul was, the cities of Najaf and
      Kerbala were no great distance from Baghdad. It  was  also  not  clear
      whether the Judge had actually made a finding that the  Appellant  had
      lost his ID card (as opposed to his passport) and  the  Appellant  may
      well therefore still have and ID card. There was no necessity  to make
      finding of fact about the location of any family members,  which  were
      any more specific  than  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge,  in  the
      particular circumstances of his case.

      Discussion

16    Paragraphs 163 and 170  of  AA  appear  to  indicate  that  without  a
      current or expired passport, travel to Iraq may be facilitated by  the
      issuing if a laissez-passer by the Iraqi embassy in the UK, and that a
      CSID card is needed to  achieve  that.  The  Judge  also  appeared  to
      consider whether  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID
      reasonably soon after returning to Iraq. (para 70).  It  seems  to  me
      that the Appellant will require a CSID before departure, in  order  to
      obtain a laissez-passer. Having read the relevant extract of AA  (173-
      187), I cannot see that  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  stated  that  past
      possession of a passport would make that process any easier.  To  that
      extent, I accept that the Judge may have misdirected himself as to the
      application of AA.

17    However, I find that any such error was not material  to  the  outcome
      of the appeal. It is to be recalled that the Appellant's past  account
      was rejected, and the only positive findings made in relation  to  him
      were that he was Iraqi, Kurdish, Sunni, and (impliedly) from Mosul.

18    Paragraph 177 of AA provides  that  a  person  without  a  current  or
      expired passport, or CSID in the UK, may be able to obtain a  CSID  by
      knowing the book and  page  number  where  his  family's  registration
      details are recorded. Given the  Judge's  findings  that  he  did  not
      accept that the Appellant has no family members whom he could  contact
      in Iraq, and that there are those in Iraq who would be able  to  vouch
      for the Appellant, and given also that the Appellant has already  been
      sent some of his family's identity documentation  from  Iraq,  I  find
      that even if the Judge had not erred in (i)  appearing  to  find  that
      past possession of a  passport  was  relevant,  and  (ii)  failing  to
      acknowledge that the CSID would be needed prior to departure from  the
      UK (to obtain the laissez-passer), and not  simply  after  arrival  in
      Iraq, I find that the Judge would inevitably have arrived at the  same
      conclusion; that the Appellant would not be destitute in Iraq, because
      he would be able to obtain the relevant information from  Iraq  for  a
      CSID card to be issued to him in the UK.

19    Further, to the extent that the  Appellant's  relatives  may  have  to
      attend at the alternate CSA office for Mosul, and to the  extent  that
      the Judge has found that they will be able to do that, I find that the
      possible ambiguity in AA about where the alternative  CSA  office  for
      Mosul actually is, is (i) something  not  raised  in  the  Appellant's
      grounds of appeal, and therefore not before me, and (ii) in any  event
      immaterial; Baghdad, Najaf and Kerbala are indeed  no  great  distance
      from one another.

20    Further, insofar as the Judge relied  on  the  relatives'  ability  to
      attend at the alternative CSA office for Mosul (wherever that may be),
      I find that the fact that it is not possible to obtain a CSID from the
      Central Archive in Bagdad is irrelevant, because these entities appear
      to be distinct from one another; there is no evidence that the Central
      Archive, and the alternate CSA offices that have been set up, are  the
      same thing, or that the alternate CSA offices have  the  same  problem
      the Central Archive does in not being able to issue CSID documents.

21    Further, I find that insofar as the Judge relied  on  the  functioning
      of the National Status Court in Baghdad as a matter  relevant  to  the
      Appellant being able to obtain relevant documents, I find that he  was
      entitled to do so. The Upper Tribunal refer to the existence  of  that
      Court as a means  of  possible  relief  to  those  needing  to  obtain
      relevant documentation. If it was the view of the Upper Tribunal in AA
      that the Court offered no assistance,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the
      Tribunal would have  stated  so.  The  mere  fact  that  the   precise
      operation of the Court is  unclear does not establish  any  ground  to
      argue that the Judge  was  not  entitled  to  make  reference  to  its
      existence.

22    Further, given the unchallenged rejection of the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant's account, I find that the Judge was required  to  state  no
      more than that he did not accept that  the  Appellant  has  no  family
      members whom he could contact in Iraq, and that  there  are  those  in
      Iraq who would be able to vouch for the Appellant.  No  more  specific
      findings of fact were required. The Appellant's account of past events
      in Iraq was unreliable (para 66). The Judge was not obliged to fill in
      the blanks which have been left by the Appellant's deception.

23    Finally, I find that the Judge did not find that either the  Appellant
      or his family members would have to travel to the CSA office in Mosul,
      and the Judge thus did not err in law in that respect,  and  there  is
      simply nothing in the Appellant's complaint that the  Judge's  finding
      that the Appellant was not at risk of destitution was irrational.

      Decision

      The making of the Judge's decision did not involve the making  of  any
      material error of law.


      I do not set aside the decision.

      I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Signed:                           Date:  5.10.17
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



