

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/04981/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20th March 2018                         |On 4th April 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                Sangar Fatah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ramzan Sharif, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  His date of birth is 5th  November
    1994 and he comes from a town in a contested area of Iraq called Daquq.
     The appellant travelled to the United Kingdom by lorry via France  and
    Italy, claiming to have arrived in the United Kingdom on  5th  December
    2016.  It was on 8th December 2016 that he claimed to be a refugee.

2.   On 10th May 2017, the respondent concluded that the appellant  was  not
    a refugee and  was  not  entitled  to  international  protection.   The
    appellant appealed and his appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Trevakis on 23rd June 2017 in Newport.

3.   The judge did not believe the appellant's claim and found  him  not  to
    be credible.  That was a finding which was not challenged.

4.   Having made that finding, the judge then appears to have become  rather
    confused, because he then considered the  question  of  sufficiency  of
    protection and concluded that it did not arise and then went on,  under
    the heading of "internal relocation" to note that the appellant did not
    come from the Kurdish Autonomous Region.  The judge noted that  it  was
    accepted that the appellant was an Iraqi Kurd and that his  destination
    for removal will be Baghdad.  The  judge  found  as  a  fact  that  the
    appellant did not have a CSID,  he  cannot  speak  Arabic,  he  has  no
    friends or family in Baghdad and no sponsor there for accommodation and
    is from a minority Kurdish community.  With regard to  the  appellant's
    ability to obtain a CSID, the judge found that it would require him  to
    return to his home area to get one, which is not possible.

5.   He went on, at paragraph 47, to find no evidence that the appellant  is
    an enhanced risk category as a returnee to Baghdad given  his  age  and
    lack of health problems and the judge believed that he would be able to
    return to Baghdad.  Under the heading "Article 15(C)" the  judge  noted
    that the appellant's home area is in a contested area of Iraq and  that
    returning the appellant to that  area  would  amount  to  a  breach  of
    Article 15(c).  The judge said at paragraph 49:

         "Since the appellant does not have a CSID, he  cannot  be  returned
         direct to the KRG, his return would be to Baghdad, which would  not
         amount to a  breach  of  Article  15(C).   However,  there  is  the
         question as to whether he would be able to obtain a  CSID;  if  not
         his situation in Baghdad may amount to destitution.  The respondent
         accepts that  it  is  not  presently  possible  to  return  him  to
         Baghdad".

6.   Pausing there, both Mr Sharif and Mr Richards told me that  they  could
    find no trace anywhere in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter,  of  the
    respondent accepting that it was not presently possible to  return  the
    appellant to Baghdad.  Quite where the judge gained that impression  is
    not clear.

7.   At paragraph 50 the judge said this.  "It may  therefore  the  be  case
    that, although the appellant has failed  to  establish  his  claim  for
    asylum or humanitarian protection, it is not presently possible for him
    to be returned safely to any  part  of  Iraq."   He  then  went  on  at
    paragraph 51 to say:

         "As to the suggestion that the appellant could be returned to Iran,
         to be reunited with his family, there is no  evidence  that  he  or
         they enjoy any status in that country, and therefore that he  could
         be lawfully returned there."

8.   Paragraph 51 is rather curious because the judge did  not  believe  any
    part of the appellant's account.  He did not believe,  therefore,  that
    the appellant's parents had gone to Iran.

9.   The first challenge to the determination  dealt  with  the  appellant's
    removal to Baghdad, but points out that there was no  consideration  as
    to whether or not it would be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the  appellant  to
    internally relocate.  It was also suggested that there was  a  lack  of
    reasoning in relation to whether or not the appellant is in an enhanced
    risk category in relation to return to Baghdad, because he is  a  Sunni
    Kurd who does not speak Arabic with no CSID.

10.  At the hearing before me Mr Sharif drew my attention  to  page  186  of
    his 465 page bundle.  This section of the Country of Origin Information
    Report draws on guidance given by the Tribunal in  AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  Having addressed me briefly  I  asked
    Mr Sharif why it would not be possible for the appellant  to  obtain  a
    CISD.  Mr Sharif drew my attention to the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    family were in Iran.  I drew  his  attention  to  the  judge's  adverse
    finding in respect of the appellant's claim and  suggested  that  there
    was no evidence that the appellant's parents had left Iraq or that  the
    appellant's uncle and aunt and cousin had left either.   As  a  general
    matter therefore, I suggested to Mr Sharif that it should  be  possible
    for the appellant to obtain a CSID with the assistance  of  his  family
    members in Iraq.  He told me  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant was in contact with his family members.

11.  Mr Richards submitted  that  any  errors  that  there  were,  were  not
    material.  I reserved my decision.

12.  I have concluded that the judge did not  make  any  material  error  of
    law.  AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)   makes  it
    abundantly clear that no Iraqi national will be returned to Baghdad, if
    not in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport or  a  laissez
    passer.  It also makes it clear that having  a  Civil  Status  Identity
    Document (CSID) is one of the ways for an Iraqi national in the  United
    Kingdom to obtain a passport or a laissez passer.   In  this  case  the
    appellant does not have a CSID and the question is whether  or  not  he
    will be able to obtain one reasonably quickly after  arrival  in  Iraq.
    They are required in order to  access  financial  assistance  from  the
    authorities, employment, housing, education and medical treatment.  The
    appellant's account of what led him to come to the  United  Kingdom  to
    claim asylum was not believed.  He did therefore have  parents  and  an
    uncle and aunt and a cousin who are likely to  be  able  to  provide  a
    means of support to the appellant and help him obtain a CSID.

13.  Paragraph 14 of the headnote of AA makes it clear that it will  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for a person  from  a  contested  area  to
    relocate to Baghdad City.  However, the  appellant  does  not  need  to
    relocate to Baghdad, because,  once  he  arrives  in  Baghdad  he  can,
    provided he obtains a CSID, travel on to the Kurdish Autonomous Region,
    which is virtually violence free.

14.  Paragraph 19 of the headnote of AA makes it clear that a Kurd who  does
    not originate from the Kurdish Autonomous Region can obtain  entry  for
    ten days as a visitor and then renew this permission for a further  ten
    days.  If he finds employment he can remain longer,  although  he  will
    need to register with  the  authorities  and  provide  details  of  the
    employer.  There is no evidence  that  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Region
    authorities proactively remove Kurds from the IKR  whose  permits  have
    come to an end.  I was told that there are flights to Erbil  and  there
    seems no reason at all why the appellant should not make  contact  with
    his family members and apply for  a  CSID  in  order  that  the  United
    Kingdom government can obtain a passport on his behalf.  He can then be
    returned to Baghdad Airport and, without actually leaving the  airport,
    he can embark for Erbil.  It would not be unduly harsh to expect him to
    do so.  He is a fit young man and would have a CSID.  He will  be  able
    to  access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities,  employment,
    education, housing and medical treatment.  If he  cooperates  with  the
    United Kingdom authorities he will be eligible to a resettlement grant,
    which would also assist him in the IKR until such time as he is able to
    find employment.

15.  I have  concluded  that  the  making  of  the  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Trevakis did not involve the making of a material  error
    of law.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the appellant anonymity.  I do  not  believe
there to be any reason why the appellant should be  afforded  anonymity.   I
remove the direction.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley                                        Date:
4th April 2018
