
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/04548/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 February 2018                        |On 20 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     a c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, of Counsel instructed by Legis
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal who in a decision promulgated on 18
    July 2017 dismissed his appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The grounds of appeal relate solely to the  refusal  by  the  judge  to
    grant an  adjournment  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  could  not
    understand the interpreter.  When the application  for  an  adjournment
    was made by the appellant's Counsel the judge refused the  adjournment,
    although she gave time to  the  appellant's  Counsel  to  take  further
    instructions.  The appellant had asserted that he could only understand
    30% to 40% of the translation of the interpreter.  The grounds  claimed
    that this raised an issue of fairness and stated  that  the  judge  had
    been wrong to state that what was relevant was her understanding of the
    questions and the answers and also to say that that where  it  appeared
    that there were three questions and answers which the  appellant  could
    not understand she would strike those answers from the record.

3.   When permission to appeal was granted the  Secretary  of  State,  in  a
    Rule 24 statement, referred to the fact that the judge  had  said  that
    she would not consider the answers to questions which the appellant had
    said that he had not understood. The rule 24 statement also stated that
    the Presenting Officer's  post-hearing  minute  did  not  suggest  that
    Counsel had formally requested an adjournment.

4.   When the hearing came before me there were witness statements from  the
    appellant who set  out  in  some  detail  what  questions  he  had  not
    understood, and also emphasised that the interpreter  had  a  different
    dialect from him as the interpreter was from the Yemen and spoke  Saudi
    Arabian Arabic, whereas the appellant  himself  was  from  Lebanon  and
    spoke Lebantine Arabic.  He stated that although there was some  common
    words, each dialect had  its  own  distinctive  vocabulary.   He  again
    repeated that he could only understand 30%  to  40%  of  the  questions
    being put to him.

5.   The appellant's wife repeated what the  appellant  had  stated  in  his
    statement.  Moreover, there was  a  witness  statement  from  Mr  Nazar
    Mohammad who had been the appellant's Counsel at the hearing.   He  set
    out the applications for an adjournment which he had made and that  the
    interpreter had said that he could not understand  the  appellant.   He
    stated that he had raised with the judge the level of understanding and
    his concerns about fairness and asked for an adjournment.

6.   In the light of the statements produced before  me  and  in  particular
    that of the appellant's  Counsel,  I  asked  Ms  Ahmad  what  were  her
    comments.  She stated that she would not oppose the appellant's appeal.

7.   I consider that that was the correct course of action.   While  I  have
    considerable sympathy for the judge who clearly conscientiously did her
    best to understand the proceedings and to deal with the evidence before
    her fairly, I consider that there may well be  a  perception  that  the
    appellant did not have a fair hearing and therefore I should set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier  Judge  and  remit  this  appeal  for  a
    further hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

This appeal is remitted for a hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed: [pic]                   Date: 18 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
