
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04731/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |           Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2019                |           On 23 December 2019           |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                              C Y C (Malaysia)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, David Tang & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Malaysia.  His date of  birth  is  either
    11 February 1976 or 11 February  1973.   It  matters  not  for  present
    purposes.  He claims to have travelled from Malaysia on 12 June 2014 by
    plane, arriving in Paris.  He left France either on 27 or 28 June 2014
    by train and arrived in the UK.  He was encountered  by  police  on  23
    August 2016 working illegally in Oxford.  He was arrested and  detained
    and claimed asylum on 28 August 2016.

2.   On  15  September  2016  he  was  referred  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism (NRM).  On 19 September 2016 a  positive  reasonable  grounds
    decision was made by the NRM and a positive conclusive grounds decision
    was made on 14 December 2018.

3.   His claim for asylum was based on his allegedly having  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Malaysia on the basis of  his  membership  of  a
    particular social group, in that he was a gay man  from  Malaysia.   He
    also prayed in aid that he  was  a  male  victim  of  trafficking  from
    Malaysia.

4.   His claims were refused in a letter dated 12 April 2019.

5.   The Secretary of State accepted his claim that he  was  trafficked  for
    the purposes of sexual exploitation. However, his claim that he  was  a
    gay man was  rejected,  as  were  his  accounts  of  the  circumstances
    surrounding his sexuality, including the relationships he had had  with
    others.

6.   It was accepted that he had been sexually exploited in the  UK.  As  it
    happens, the sexual exploitation which the appellant suffered was of  a
    particularly severe nature.

7.   At paragraphs 28 to 30 of the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  (RFRL)  the
    following is stated:

         "28. I have considered your  claim  that  you  cannot  go  back  to
             Malaysia as you are at risk of persecution because your  (sic)
             claim to be a gay man from Malaysia.

         29.   The  US  State  departments  Human  Rights  report  2018  for
             Malaysia, states the following  regarding  discrimination  and
             abuse faced by gay men (Section 6).

                  "Adult same-sex acts are  illegal  regardless  of  age  or
                  consent.  The law states that sodomy and oral sex acts are
                  "carnal intercourse against the order of  nature."   While
                  authorities rarely enforced this  provision,  it  was  the
                  basis for the controversial case  against  then-opposition
                  leader Anwar Ibrahim (see section  1.e.).   Religious  and
                  cultural  taboos  against  same-sex  sexual  conduct  were
                  widespread (see section 2.a.).  In  August  two  women  in
                  Terengganu State were  sentenced  by  a  sharia  court  to
                  RM3,300 ($825) in fines and six strokes of the  cane  each
                  after they  were  accused  of  same-sex  sexual  activity.
                  Authorities  caned  the  women  before  an   audience   of
                  approximately 100 persons, marking the first public caning
                  recorded in the state."

         30.  It is therefore considered that gay men in Malaysia  share  an
             innate, immutable characteristic, and they are  perceived  and
             treated  as  being  different  by  Malay   society   and   the
             authorities  in  Malaysia,  and  gay  men  from  Malaysia  are
             accepted as a PSG."

The Decision of the FtT

8.   The First-tier Tribunal (FtT) rightfully pointed out  that  the  burden
    was on the appellant to establish, to the lower standard,  that  if  he
    were  to  be  removed  to  Malaysia  he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution, serious harm, and/or ill-treatment.  In respect of Article
    8 ECHR it was for the appellant to establish that removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference in his family and private life.  If  that
    was established it was  then  for  the  respondent  to  show  that  any
    interference would be proportionate.

9.    The  FtT  Judge  considered  the  evidence  which  was  given  in  the
    proceedings as well as a substantive asylum interview record.   Putting
    matters shortly, the judge accepted that the appellant was  a  gay  man
    and for the most part accepted the account of his various relationships
    and the circumstances in which he realised  he  was  gay.   It  is  not
    necessary to go into details about all this for the  purposes  of  this
    appeal.

10.  The judge, however, found that there was insufficient  evidence  before
    her to suggest that gay men who lived openly were generally at risk  of
    persecution in Malaysia from the authorities or others.  She found that
    there was no satisfactory evidence to show that  there  was  widespread
    persecution of members of the gay community.  While she  accepted  that
    the appellant suffered harm at the hands of  a  particular  individual,
    the father of a person named S, she found  that  to  be  localised  and
    there was no evidence that he was still of interest to that individual.



11.  Thus she found that the appellant's case foundered at the  second  limb
    of the test set out in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31; [2011] AC 596.

12.  As far as trafficking is concerned, while the respondent accepted  that
    he had been  trafficked,  the  judge  found  that  the  authorities  in
    Malaysia were able to provide him with effective protection and in  any
    event that he had the option of internal relocation should he wish  not
    to go to his home area. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal,
    which was refused by a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

13.  Permission was sought from the Upper Tribunal on  the  basis  that  the
    First-tier Judge had failed to engage with  the  original  grounds  for
    permission and in particular had failed to engage with paragraphs 5 and
    6 of the original grounds.  Paragraph 5 contains the following:

         "5.  The central issue of this appeal is whether the  Appellant  is
             gay.  If it is accepted that the Appellant  is  gay,  it  must
             then be considered  whether  the  Appellant  could  return  to
             Malaysia and practise openly as a gay person."

    Reference is then made  to  the  US  State  Department  Report  and  to
    paragraph 30 of the refusal letter.

14.  The application goes on as follows:

         "The US State  Departments  (sic)  Human  Rights  report  2018  was
         featured in paragraph 29 of the Respondent's refusal  letter  dated
         12 April 2019.  It is compelling objective evidence to  demonstrate
         that people  engaged  in  same  sex  activities  are  punished  and
         discriminated.   The  objective  evidence  also  included  was  the
         Guardian article of 22 August 2018 and LGBT rights in Malaysia."

15.  It goes on to say that although the  two  articles  were  mentioned  in
    paragraphs 40 and 41 of the FtT's determination, there is no mention of
    the US State Department Human Rights Report at all.  This was  said  to
    be a material error of law.  The original grounds were incorporated  by
    reference.  It is not necessary to rehearse them here.

16.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable,
    where the appellant's claim to be gay was accepted and he had also been
    found to be a victim of trafficking, that the approach to the  risk  on
    return, including  the  application  of  HJ  (Iran),  and  the  country
    evidence on treatment of gay and lesbian individuals in Malaysia was an
    error.

17.  Before us the issue came to be fairly narrowly focussed and centred  on
    the fact that at no point in the determination did  the  FtT  refer  to
    relevant section of the US State Department's Report,  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 29 of the refusal letter.

18.  Before the FtT there had been presented  a  bundle  consisting  of  the
    following documents:

    (a)  A statement from the appellant;

    (b)  A letter from Migrant Help dated 11 June 2018 confirming that  the
         appellant was being supported by them  as  a  vulnerable  potential
         victim of trafficking and had been since  13  February  2018.   The
         letter indicated that, amongst other things, the appellant had  low
         esteem and suicidal thoughts every day.  He had  been  self-harming
         by superficially cutting his hand;

    (c)  A medical  assessment  dated  29  December  2017  by  a  community
         psychiatric nurse  setting  out  issues  to  do  with  anxiety  and
         depression, amongst other things;

    (d)  An article in the Guardian dated 22 August 2018  and  a  Wikipedia
         article on LGBT rights in Malaysia.

19.  Paragraphs 28 and 40 of the determination are in the following terms:

         "28. I have applied the burden and standard of  proof  to  which  I
             have already referred.  In  coming  to  my  decision,  I  have
             considered all the evidence before me.  I have looked  at  all
             the  evidence  in  the  round  before  making  any   findings,
             including my findings on credibility.  The appellant's  bundle
             includes an article from www.theguardian.com  of  August  2018
             with  the  heading  "Malaysia   accused   of   state-sponsored
             homophobia after LGBT crackdown" (pages 18-21)  and  Wikipedia
             article regarding LGBT rights in Malaysia, March  2019  (pages
             22-28).

         40.  I find that the background evidence  is  woefully  lacking  in
             this  case.   The  only  background  evidence  that  has  been
             submitted for my consideration has been mentioned above.   The
             Guardian article refers to a small night club in Kuala  Lumpur
             popular with the LGBT community was (sic) raided by the police
             and  government  officials.   Twenty  men  were  detained  and
             ordered  into  counselling  for  "illicit  behaviour"  by  the
             Federal Territory Islamic Religious  Department  of  Malaysia.
             The article also refers to a transwoman brutally beaten on the
             street in Seremban while seven others watched.  It also refers
             to a Sharia court's order for a lesbian  couple  to  be  caned
             after they were caught having sex in a car, the first time  in
             years such a punishment had been handed out in  Malaysia.   It
             refers to the fact that homosexuality is illegal in  Malaysia,
             a Muslim-majority country and there is no  anti-discrimination
             law encompassing sexual orientation and gender identity."

    Paragraph 41 goes on:

         "The Wikipedia article refers to Malaysia  retaining  its  colonial
         era criminal ban on sodomy (as well as oral sex),  broadly  defined
         to include both heterosexual and  homosexual  acts,  with  possible
         punishments including fines, prison sentences of up to 20 years and
         even corporal punishment.  In addition to the secular  law,  Muslim
         citizens may also be charged in special Islamic courts."

20.  As indicated, the judge found that there was insufficient  evidence  to
    suggest that gay men were generally at risk of persecution in  Malaysia
    from the authorities or others.

Submissions for the Appellant

21.  Mr Lam opened his submissions by criticising the judge's  treatment  of
    internal relocation but that point was not developed.  It  soon  became
    apparent that an alleged discrepancy between paragraphs 47 and  54  was
    non-existent, the two paragraphs dealing with  different  things.    He
    referred us to the refusal letter, in particular to paragraphs  29  and
    30 and the US State Department Report.  That was not mentioned  by  the
    judge at all.  It was submitted that there was enough evidence to  show
    that homosexual activity was criminal and that the appellant would face
    persecution if returned.

22.  The appellant made it quite clear in  his  statement  in  a  number  of
    passages that he feared persecution from the  government  if  he  lived
    openly as  a  gay  man.   This  evidence  was  not  challenged.   Under
    reference  to  the  US  State  Department  Report,  the  respondent  at
    paragraph 30 of the RFRL accepted that  gay  people  in  Malaysia  were
    perceived and treated as being different and they were  accepted  as  a
    particular social group.  The extract  from  the  US  State  Department
    Report was short, weighty and compelling as well as being unchallenged.
     Indeed it was accepted by the respondent.

23.  This was not a safe determination.

Submissions for the Respondent

24.  In response Mr Melvin relied on the respondent's Rule  24  notice.   He
    submitted that the judge had fully  considered  all  the  evidence  put
    forward to her and was within her rights to find  that  the  background
    evidence  was  woefully  lacking.   Although  much  had  been  made  of
    paragraph 29 of the RFRL and the US State  Department  Report,  it  was
    clear that while there were legal provisions in place,  alongside  many
    countries with old laws, authorities rarely enforced them.

25.  The Guardian article related to a club raided in  election  time.   For
    years the club had been left  alone  and  that  pointed  to  a  general
    tolerance until the government was seeking votes.

26.  The Wikipedia article had said the same as the respondent said  in  the
    RFRL.

27.  There was not enough objective background information to show that  gay
    people would be persecuted on return or that the  appellant  could  not
    relocate.

28.  The judge had considered HJ (Iran) and  had  not  misdirected  herself.
    She had considered that there was a localised threat six years ago  and
    the appellant would relocate.

Consideration and Reasons

29.  In dealing with the latter point first, it is not clear to us that  the
    judge did deal with  relocation  in  connection  with  the  appellant's
    homosexuality.  She certainly  did  in  relation  to  the  question  of
    trafficking.  As it was, having decided  that  there  was  no  risk  of
    persecution at all in Malaysia on account of his sexuality,  there  was
    no need for her to go on to consider  the  question  of  relocation  in
    relation to that.

30.  It seems to us that the main issue in this case,  as  was  focussed  in
    the argument, is  whether  or  not  the  FtT  fully  engaged  with  the
    background material.

31.  We are inclined to agree  with  her  assessment  that  it  is  woefully
    lacking.  Nonetheless she had to engage properly with what was there.

32.  Before we move on to this we should point out that at paragraph 46  the
    judge made the following comments:

         "It is pertinent to take into account that the  appellant  was  not
         harmed by the police when he was detained at the  behest  of  (S's)
         father.  I also take into account the appellant's statement in  his
         interview relating to the police that: "They only discriminate  and
         not respect you if you are gay, but they don't hurt you.   If  they
         know you are doing gay activities they won't physically hurt you or
         do anything unlawful" (Q187).  The appellant's evidence is that  he
         went to live in Kuala Lumpur where  he  lived  with  a  friend  and
         worked as  a  chef.   It  is  not  the  appellant's  case  that  he
         encountered problems from (S's) father or the authorities in  Kuala
         Lumpur."

33.    S was one of the men with whom the appellant had a  relationship  and
    these passages clearly do not help the  appellant's  case.   They  are,
    however, only part of the case and fell to be considered along with his
    statement and the whole of the interview in its context.  In particular
    the background information had  to  be  assessed  thoroughly  and  with
    anxious scrutiny.

34.  The synopsis of the Guardian article is incomplete.   The  article,  as
    we have indicated, is dated 22 August 2018 and, as  the  FtT  says,  it
    narrates that in the early hours of Saturday the police and  government
    officials raided a small nightclub in Kuala Lumpur that was known to be
    popular with the LGBT community but for years had been relatively  left
    alone by the authorities.  Twenty men were detained  and  ordered  into
    counselling  for  illicit  behaviour.   A  government  minister   later
    released a statement on  the  motivations  behind  the  raid  and  said
    "hopefully this initiative can mitigate the LGBT culture from spreading
    into our society".  The co-founder of a trans rights group, Justice for
    Sisters, said "We are  under  attack  in  an  unprecedented  way".   As
    indicated, a trans woman was brutally beaten on the street in  Seremban
    and in the same week a Sharia court ordered  a  lesbian  couple  to  be
    caned.  That was the first time in years such  a  punishment  had  been
    handed out in Malaysia.  The judge went on to say that it was "a lesson
    and reminder to not just the two of you but the members of society".

35.  The article went on to say that the general election in  May  had  been
    celebrated for ushering in a new era, but the  new  government's  first
    100  days  in  power  had  been  marked  by  increased  discrimination,
    harassment and violent  hate  crime  against  the  LGBT  community.   A
    spokeswoman for Justice for Sisters said that  what  she  described  as
    "state-sponsored homophobia and transphobia" had heightened the climate
    of fear and resulted in increased discrimination over  the  past  three
    months.  She went on to say the following:

         "We are also seeing a lot of shrinking spaces  for  LGBT  people  -
         offline, online, everywhere.  This level of aggression is  new  and
         the situation is becoming really alarming.  We are hearing a lot of
         cases of people in the community feeling depressed and suicidal and
         not feeling safe using public  facilities  or  even  going  out  in
         public spaces."

    The article goes on as follows:

      "The previous government led by Najib Razak was vocally homophobic and
      used sodomy laws to slander and lock up political opponent Anwar
      Ibrahim for almost a decade.  Now in opposition, politicians including
      those associated with the Islamic party PAS, have amped up anti-LGBT
      rhetoric further. It is a tactic aimed at gaining popularity and
      putting the new government in a difficult political position, forcing
      them to clarify their stance on an issue seen as a poisoned chalice.
      Deputy prime minister Wan Azizah has said privately LGBT people should
      have equal rights so long as they keep their "practice" behind closed
      doors and do not "glamourise their lifestyle"
         Others have been more forthright in their public condemnation.  The
         minister for religious affairs, Mujahid Yusof Rawa,  has  said  the
         government would "take  proactive  measures  to  curb  the  growing
         lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender issues, and help them to return
         to the right path and lead a normal life".  The deputy minister for
         public affairs, Dr Lee Boon Chye, stated last week that LGBT people
         have an "organic disorder".

         The first public victim of the push was Numan Afifi, who is gay and
         an LGBT rights activist.  He was appointed press secretary  to  the
         minister of youth and sports in July but had to  step  down  within
         days in response to an opposition campaign.

         "I  always  anticipated  there  would  be  some  backlash   to   my
         appointment but I didn't expect it to happen in the first week, and
         we weren't prepared for  how  fierce  it  would  be,"  says  Numan.
         "Trans women are now reporting to us they  are  being  harassed  by
         their employers, some were forced to cut  their  hair  suddenly  or
         dress differently."

36.  It goes on to indicate that in July  authorities  organised  a  seminar
    for 300 school counsellors, teachers and government officials focussing
    on ways to avert and "cure" LGBT behaviour.  In  August,  the  minister
    for religious affairs ordered the portrait of two prominent LGBT rights
    activists to be removed from a public art exhibition and also announced
    that a regulator would be set up to monitor LGBT activity online.   The
    opposition women's minister said in the previous week that LGBT  people
    should be banned from teaching in nursery schools  and  a  campaign  to
    boycott businesses run by trans people was gaining momentum.

37.  It can be seen therefore, that the treatment of  the  Guardian  article
    is superficial.

38.  The same could be said of the treatment of the Wikipedia  article.   No
    reference was made, for example, to the information that in March  2019
    the tourism minister denied the existence of  gay  people  in  Malaysia
    saying "I don't think we have anything like that in our  country".   It
    also narrated that when a Women's Day march was held in Kuala Lumpur in
    the same month  it  was  condemned  by  government  officials  and  the
    political parties of UMNO and PAS.

39.  It went on to  say  that  in  April  2019  Malaysian  authorities  were
    accused of intimidating gay rights activist Numan Afifi by  questioning
    him in a police station about a speech he made in  the  United  Nations
    Human Rights Council in Geneva in March 2019, this speech pointing  out
    that Malaysia rejected the recommendations of  a  coalition  of  twelve
    Malaysian LGBT organisations on gender identity and sexual orientation.



40.  The treatment  of  these  documents  is  so  superficial,  as  we  have
    endeavoured to point out, that it cannot confidently be said  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  applied  to  the  material  the  sort  of  anxious
    scrutiny which is required. We are by no means saying that it had to be
    accepted but it certainly had to be dealt with.

41.  When that is added to the fact that no reference is made to  paragraphs
    29 and 30 of the  RFRL,  containing  the  extract  from  the  US  State
    Department Report and the concession  that  gay  men  in  Malaysia  are
    perceived and treated as being  different  by  Malay  society  and  the
    authorities in Malaysia and that they  are  accepted  as  a  particular
    social group, we are satisfied that the FtT fell into an error  of  law
    in not engaging with all of the background information, such as it was.



42.  It follows that  the  judge  erred  in  resolving  the  second  of  the
    questions posed by Lord Rodger at [82] of HJ (Iran), in that she failed
    to take material evidence  into  account  in  considering  whether  gay
    people who live openly in  Malaysia  would  be  liable  to  persecution
    there.  We therefore set aside the judge's decision on  that  question.



Decision and Reasons

43.  The appeal is allowed to the  extent  that  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The judge's primary findings of fact
    - particularly those in relation to the appellant's sexual  orientation
    - are  preserved.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  FtT  for  fresh
    consideration of Lord Rodger's second question from [82] of  HJ  (Iran)
    and, if necessary, for consideration also of the remaining questions.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                      Date: 20 December 2019
