
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04475/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 September 2018                          |On 05 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                   Mrs M J
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Allen of Counsel, Hubers Law Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She  was  born  on  12  August
    1984.  She appealed against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  her
    asylum dated 20 March 2018.

 2. Judge M A Khan (the judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal against the
    respondent's refusal to grant her asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    on human rights grounds because he found that the appellant was  not  a
    credible witness with regard to her claim, that she was not at risk  on
    return and that the respondent's decision was proportionate in terms of
    Article 8.

 3. The grounds claim the judge erred as follows:

      a)  Refusing  the  adjournment  request.   See  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
         fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC);

      b) Rather than treating the previous  determination  as  the  starting
         point of his analysis, the judge considered the same conclusive  of
         the appellant's credibility.

      c) Failure to give adequate reasoning for his decision.  See MK  (duty
         to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).

      d) Failure to adequately evaluate the risk of suicide.

      e) Failure to adequately  engage  and  reach  findings  on  Paposhvili
         41738/10 [2016] ECHR 1113 in light of AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ
         6.

      f) Failure  to  consider  and  reach  adequate  findings  on  relevant
         considerations under Article 8,  in  particular  276ADE(1)(vi)  and
         failure to treat the best interests of the children  as  a  primary
         consideration including failure to adequately consider S.117B(6) of
         the 2002 Act.

 4. Judge Andrew granted permission on 26 July 2018.  She said inter alia:

         "2.  I am satisfied, given the mental health of the  appellant  and
             the nature of the claims made by the  appellant  that  it  may
             well have been in the interests of  fairness  to  adjourn  the
             appeal and to allow the matter to be heard  by  an  all-female
             court.  In saying this  I  have  noted  that  the  appellant's
             representatives had not asked for such a court at CMR and they
             had  instructed  male  Counsel  to  represent  the  appellant.
             However, the application at the hearing was clear.

         3.   I am further satisfied that there are arguable errors  of  law
             in the decision in that the judge may not have considered  all
             the evidence before him and fails to reach findings in respect
             of the documentary evidence that was before him.

         4.   It is arguable  that  the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to
             Article 3 are inadequate in that they have not considered  the
             risk of suicide.  Further, the judge fails to engage with  the
             evidence that the appellant's family and that of  her  husband
             may not be available to them on return to Pakistan.

         5.   The judge has not considered paragraph  276ADE.   He  has  not
             applied the principles in Section 117A and B.  This is also an
             arguable error of law".




 5. The respondent's Rule 24 response was dated  13  September  2018.   The
    judge considered the adjournment request at [9]-[11] of  the  decision.
    As observed by the judge, there was no previous  request  for  an  all-
    female court either at the CMR or  prior  to  listing  of  the  appeal.
    Further, there was no complaint made by the appellant or her Counsel at
    the hearing that the questions put in cross-examination were in any way
    inappropriate or could have affected the evidence.

 6. The judge said at [13] that he  had  considered  all  of  the  evidence
    including the appellant's appeal bundle which included further  witness
    statements from the appellant, her husband and Doctor Stallworthy.   He
    said again  in  [26]  what  he  had  taken  into  account.   The  judge
    considered Dr Stallworthy's evidence at [37]-[39] and [55]-[57].

 7. S.117 and 276ADE were adequately addressed on the evidence provided.

 8. Read holistically and taking the previous determination as  a  starting
    point, the judge found there was no new evidence that caused him to  be
    persuaded to overturn the decision of Judge Webb.  At the core  of  the
    claim was  the  appellant's  incredible  account  regarding  events  in
    Pakistan.  The appellant could expect family support.   Her  medication
    would be available there.

 9. Any error on the part of the judge was not material.

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Ms Allen  relied  upon  the  grounds.   The  judge's  approach  to  the
    application for an adjournment was  at  odds  with  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note at [5.1.7].  The appellant needed to feel comfortable and
    at ease.  She was denied a fair hearing.

11. In any event, the judge carried out no analysis of his own, rather,  he
    relied upon previous findings made by Judge Webb.

12. Mr Melvin relied upon the Rule 24 response.  This  was  a  long-running
    appeal lacking credibility.  The last  minute  application  before  the
    judge was a cynical ploy to avoid the  hearing,  which  the  judge  was
    right to disregard.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13. This was a fresh  hearing  before  the  judge  involving  a  vulnerable
    witness.  The judge clearly took a view regarding  the  merits  of  the
    adjournment request  which  failed  to  take  into  account  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note and Nwaigwe.  It might well have  been  that
    the judge took a cynical view of the application bearing in  mind  that
    those instructing Mr Solomon had not previously requested an all-female
    court but given the nature of the application, the judge  could  hardly
    have taken "... all precautions  to  accommodate  the  appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness".

14. Judge Webb had previously dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  and  the
    judge drew upon his findings.  At [45] the judge correctly referred  to
    the Devaseelan principle in terms of  the  previous  decision  being  a
    starting point but then  went  on  to  quote  at  length  Judge  Webb's
    reasoning without making his own analysis.  All the judge said at  [48]
    was that he did not find the appellant or her husband  to  be  credible
    consistent  witnesses.   He  said  that  they  both  avoided  answering
    questions put to them in cross-examination or by the judge and that  at
    times they were extremely vague and evasive in answering  the  simplest
    of questions.  At [53] the judge said that the core of the  appellant's
    and her husband's account had been previously disbelieved by Judge Webb
    and the fresh  medical  evidence  did  not  overcome  or  change  those
    previous findings without explaining his reasoning with regard  to  the
    same.

15. The judge acknowledged the appellant was a vulnerable witness  at  [47]
    but failed to take into  account  such  vulnerability  in  his  adverse
    credibility findings at [48].

16. The appellant's claim was that since  Judge  Webb's  decision  she  had
    obtained further evidence which included an FIR dated 21 March 2013 and
    new medical evidence addressing Judge Webb's criticisms but  the  judge
    failed to engage with  the  same  in  terms  of  any  analysis  of  the
    appellant's credibility.  The failure to  address  these  issues  is  a
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

17. I have found that the judge  materially  erred.  The  remaking  of  the
    appeal will require significant fact-finding.  Having regard  to  [7.2]
    ([of the practice statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal), I consider this is  an
    appeal which is appropriate to be remitted de novo  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date         14 September 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



