


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/04378/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     K K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Clough heard  the  appellant's  appeal  on  2  May  2018  and
    dismissed it by a decision promulgated on 4 September 2018.

 2. There is no doubt that a decision should explain such a long delay, but
    the matter is not mentioned.

 3. The grounds of appeal to the UT are delay, and inadequacy of reasoning.

 4. The reasons of the FtT are at paragraphs 22 and 23.

 5. It is doubtful whether the matters referred to  as  self-contradictions
    properly bear that construction.

 6. It is not said why it is  implausible  for  someone  to  realise  their
    sexuality at the age the appellant says he did.  I do  not  think  that
    the matter speaks for itself; and as Mr Martin submitted,  the  country
    and cultural background might make that more likely than in a more open
    society.

 7. It was open to the  judge  to  find  the  account  of  the  appellant's
    departure implausible, but "wholly implausible" goes rather far.  It is
    not beyond the bounds of all possibility.

 8. Mr Whitwell accepted that none of the  reasons  was  very  strong,  but
    submitted that taken together they were  enough,  and  that  there  was
    nothing to form the  necessary  nexus  between  delay  and  any  errors
    identified.

 9. That was a valiant attempt to defend the decision, but  it  is  plainly
    weak.   While  concision  is  usually  a  virtue,  the  nexus   between
    unexplained delay and the paucity of explanation in  this  case  rather
    speaks for itself.

10. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

11. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.  The member(s)  of  the  FtT  chosen  to
    consider the case are not to include Judge Clough.

12. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


            [pic]


            18 July 2019
            UT Judge Macleman




