
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04626/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2018                           |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                    (SC)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Francesca Clarke of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Stefan Kotas, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   In this decision I will refer to  the  parties  by  their  designations
    before the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) notwithstanding that  those  roles
    are reversed in the Upper Tribunal (UT).

2.   The appellant appeals to the UT with  permission  from  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede given on 27 March 2018.

3.   The appeal originally came before me on 17  May  2018  when  I  decided
    that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn (the judge) in the
    FtT contained a material error of law and I set aside that decision.  I
    determined that the UT would  remake  the  decision  having  heard  any
    updating  evidence  at  an  adjourned  hearing  but  I   reserved   the
    possibility of revisiting the favourable credibility findings  made  by
    the Immigration Judge once that hearing had taken place.

4.   It is unfortunate that the appeal had to be adjourned on two  occasions
    - the first occasion because of the lack  of  an  interpreter  and  the
    second occasion because an expert's report was imminent.

5.   The hearing was re-convened on 18 December 2018.

The Hearing

6.   At the hearing I heard submissions by both  representatives  and  brief
    oral evidence from the appellant.

7.   The appellant referred to her two witness statements - the first  dated
    31 July 2017 is found in a bundle submitted on 31 August 2018 at Tab 2,
    the second (supplementary) statement is in the latest bundle  submitted
    31 August 2018 also at Tab 1 (page 12).  I was also  referred  to  some
    testimonials by the Reverend Kong Ching Hii one dated 14  May  2018  at
    page 14 of the bundle submitted 31 August 2018 (Tab 1) and  an  earlier
    one in the bundle before the FtT.  Ms  Clarke  explained  that  Mr  Hii
    could not attend but  he  had  attended  on  previous  occasions.   The
    appellant having confirmed her two witness  statements  were  true  and
    that her address had  not  changed.  She  therefore  adopted  both  her
    witness statements.

8.   She was cross-examined by Mr Kotas. The appellant said  that  initially
    she had attended a "registered church" but she stopped going  in  2014,
    when she was about 20 years old.  She was asked how often she  went  to
    church.  She said approximately every two months.  She did  not  recall
    the name of the church or where it was situated other than to say  that
    it was in Nanchang City which is situated in Jiang  Xi  Province.   The
    appellant said she  did  not  know  about  different  denominations  of
    Christianity such as Protestantism or Catholicism.  She  did,  however,
    know that there were differences.

9.   There was no re-examination.  As  it  was  the  respondent's  appeal  I
    heard submissions from Mr Kotas first.  He said that in the case of  SG
    (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940 pointed  out  the  importance  of  following
    country guidance case  law.  There  had  to  be  "very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence" to justify departing from that case.   He
    said that the judge here did not have very strong grounds supported  by
    cogent evidence.  Therefore, even if the  credibility  findings  stood,
    which was doubtful in the light of the  appellant's  apparent  lack  of
    interest or knowledge of Christianity, the decision  could  not  stand.
    In any event, I was invited to reach the opposite conclusion  than  the
    FtT had reached in this case.

10.  I was referred to the leading country guidance  case  of  QH.  In  that
    case the Upper Tribunal, sitting at Field House on 6th June 2013,  gave
    the relevant country guidance in relation to  Christian  worshipers  in
    China. It was indicated in that case, following an  assessment  of  the
    evidence, that those Christians in China, who number  several  million,
    do not face persecution on the whole. They were able to worship  either
    in State-registered churches or in unregistered "house"  churches.   It
    was noteworthy that the case of QH was less than five years old and had
    been only three years old at the date of the decision  of  the  FtT  in
    this case.  In QH the Upper Tribunal considered a body  of  documentary
    and oral evidence,  including  expert  evidence.   They  preferred  the
    evidence of Dr Christopher Hancock, a leading academic and chaplain  at
    St Peter's College, Oxford.  The China Aid Organisation, to  which  the
    judge attached a great deal of significance, was criticised as  it  had
    not applied the correct threshold for an asylum claim  but  rather  had
    equated harassment or discrimination with persecution.  I was  referred
    to a number of passages in the case of QH, including:

       . Paragraph 69 - where the UT pointed out  that  material  background
         reports emanating from China Aid routinely referred to  persecution
         but those reports do not deal with the definition of  "persecution"
         within the Refugee Convention.


       . Paragraphs 105-106  -  where  the  UT  pointed  to  the  China  Aid
         "headline" figure of a 42% growth in the amount of  persecution  of
         Christians  represented  a  very  small  figure  given   the   very
         substantial increase in the  number  of  Christian  worshippers  in
         China.   Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the   increase   in   apparent
         persecution  of   Christians   within   China   was   statistically
         insignificant given the numbers.  He said that nothing  had  really
         changed since QH.

11.  He then referred me to the evidence in  this  case.   First,  Mr  Kotas
    referred me to the statistics at page 55 (Tab 2)  in  the  most  recent
    bundle (August 2018), which was an extract from one of  the  China  Aid
    reports.  This showed a 20% increase in the number of persons  alleging
    persecution on grounds of their Christian religion in  2016.   He  said
    this was still a small out of percentage of several million  Christian-
    worshippers in China that that it was of no statistical significance.

12.  He said there were problems in some areas including the  demolition  of
    religious structures and the relocation of some churches constructed in
    breach of city planning laws.  This was by no  means  relevant  to  the
    issue of persecution since such laws existed in many other countries.

13.  Mr Kotas then referred me to the "World Watch Monitor" at  page  10  of
    Tab 3 which suggested that  there  was  no  systematic  persecution  of
    Christians but that the church, and those  who  worshipped  within  the
    Christian church, were regarded as  "misfits"  in  a  strict  communist
    system since their allegiance was not to  the  communist  party.   This
    presented an obvious conflict of interest.

14.  I was then referred to pages 32-33 (at  Tab  2  in  the  same  bundle).
    That indicates that the fact that Jiang Xi, the province of East  China
    from which the appellant comes, is said to have  more  than  500  total
    persecution cases in  the  previous  year  (the  China  Aid  Report  in
    question having been prepared in late 2017) . That  was  a  very  small
    number, although it represented an increase.

15.  Dr Elena Consiglio's report, which has been  prepared  since  the  last
    hearing, was criticised.  It was said that Dr Consiglio was an  Italian
    citizen from a legal background.  She has not done a great deal of work
    relevant to the QH decision or indeed human rights in China  generally.
    She was "quite focused" on legal matters.  Pages 4 and 5 of her  report
    were criticised as being statistically light and paragraph 10 of page 7
    was referred to because it indicated that the evidence of a "crackdown"
    was evidence that had been considered in the QH decision.  Some  of  Dr
    Consiglio's evidence was criticised as being "sloppy", for example, her
    reference to the impression  she  gained  of  Catholic  and  Protestant
    registered churches paying "lip service" to the government.   Paragraph
    14 of Page 9 was criticised for being unspecific.

16.  Page 10  paragraph  20  which  criticised  as  was  page  16  where  Dr
    Consiglio referred to a number of statistically non-important facts.

17.  Mr Kotas submitted on behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk on return, having been released without charge  by
    the authorities in the past.  Her claim did not establish that she  had
    suffered past persecution and this meant it would be unlikely she would
    be at risk on return.  The Chinese Constitution guaranteed  freedom  of
    religion and although a few arrests occurred this did  not  necessarily
    result  in  imprisonment.   This  was  supported  and  dealt  with   at
    paragraphs 17 and 49 in QH.

18.  Mr Kotas then dealt with a  number  of  additional  paragraphs  in  QH,
    including:

       . 52 - where Dr Hancock's evidence was accepted.


       . 55 - where it was pointed out that the government of China accepted
         the existence of unregistered churches.


       . 76 - where it was clear that it was important to consider not  only
         what  Chinese  law  permitted  and  prohibited  as   to   religious
         observance but how it was implemented in practice.   It  was  clear
         the two often differed significantly.


       . 77 - where it is recorded that Chinese law expressly  provided  for
         religious freedom including Christianity.


       . 85 -  where the Upper Tribunal commented on the high quality of  Dr
         Hancock's evidence.


       . Paragraph 86 -  where  the  Upper  Tribunal  commented  on  the  US
         Congressional-Executive Committee on China ("CECC")  and  its  2013
         report on China.


       . Paragraph 87 - where the authors of that report  pointed  to  Falun
         Gong practitioners and  Muslim  Chinese  being  exceptions  to  the
         government's general lack of concern over religious practice.


       . Paragraph 88 - which points to a continuing growth in Christianity.


       . Paragraph 91 - where Professor Aguilar's evidence was rejected.


       . Paragraph 98 - which dealt with registered churches but pointed  to
         there being  few  material  restrictions  on  Christians  attending
         registered churches or on their ability to practice their religious
         faith.


       . Paragraph 106 - which referred to  the  growth  in  the  number  of
         incidents  reported   by   China   Aid   as   being   statistically
         insignificant.


       . Paragraph 113 - which pointed to the constitutional  protection  of
         freedom of religion in China but stated that there were issues  for
         Chinese society flowing from the conflict between a rigid communist
         system and freedom of religion.  The majority of worship took place
         in churches but there were also "house churches".


       . Paragraph 118 - which recorded that the demolition of churches  was
         rare in practice and suggested that the finding at  that  time  was
         that there had been no general crackdown on Christians as had  been
         claimed.


       . Paragraph 121 - which suggested  that  the  predominant,  allegedly
         malignant, motive on the part of the authorities in  China  towards
         Christians  was  not  made  out  on  the  evidence,  including  the
         statistics presented before the Tribunal.


       . Paragraph 123 - which accepted Dr Hancock's evidence and said  that
         there was a "localised problem" in some parts of China.


       . Paragraph 128 - where the risk factors  were  summarised  including
         worshipping in unauthorised church buildings.  Even when  this  was
         established, however, many of the examples given by China Aid  were
         remarkable for the absence of any suggestion of  physical  violence
         towards  unregistered  congregations  although  on  occasions   the
         authorities may be angered by resistance against the demolition  of
         a church or something similar.

19.  In reply, Ms Clarke said that the adverse credibility  points  made  by
    respondent had to be seen in their proper context.  Her client had been
    criticised for responding to the question  over  the  "significance  of
    Easter" at question 85 in  the  substantive  interview  by  saying  "it
    (Easter) remember Jesus" and in response  to  a  question  "what  about
    Jesus does it celebrate?" responding "eggs and rabbits".  Clearly,  her
    client had  been  confused  by  the  question  and  correctly  answered
    question 88 she argued  by  stating:  "What  is  Easter  a  celebration
    about?" by stating "to  celebrate  his  (Jesus's)  resurrection".   Her
    client had correctly answered these questions.  She said that the judge
    had been entitled to  find  that  there  was  "cogent  evidence"  which
    justified the judge's departure from the leading country guidance  case
    of QH.  Furthermore, there was additional evidence in the shape  of  Dr
    Consiglio's report which was commended to me as being  a  comprehensive
    document by a highly qualified individual.  She said that Dr  Consiglio
    had extensive experience including  experience  of  the  government  of
    China, legal practice and social fabric of the  Chinese  society.   She
    had worked with various people throughout China and  her  evidence  was
    commended  to  the  Tribunal.   It  was  submitted  that   the   report
    established  a  pattern  of  religious  persecution  including   lethal
    violence meted out to  those  who  practised  Christianity.   The  1982
    Constitution  did  not  adequately   protect   Christian   groups   and
    unauthorised  (house  churches)  was  not  always  tolerated   by   the
    authorities.  There was more interference today than there was  in  the
    past.  Ms Clarke invited me to look at the evidence  beyond  the  China
    Aid reports which, she said, supported her client's case.  Furthermore,
    the expert who prepared a report  for  the  appellant  had  interviewed
    people who worshipped or who have first-hand experience of  people  who
    worshipped.

20.  Ms Clarke also referred me to a number of key passages in her  client's
    expert's report and made the following submissions:

       . At Paragraph 22 of the appellant's expert  report  the  expert  had
         opined that there was a risk of the appellant being:


             "listed  by   the   authorities,   reported   by   neighbours,
             investigated, questioned,  arrested,  and  even  detained  for
             one's  religious  beliefs,  attending  a  private  or   public
             religious  gathering,  using  religious  materials   including
             bibles, participating in  overseas  religious  gatherings  and
             participating in online proselytising and blogging".


       . She said that the main difference between the  circumstances  which
         prevailed at the time of QH and those at the time  of  the  hearing
         was that a new set of Regulations have been introduced (referred to
         at page 12 of  the  expert's  report).  Those  Regulations,  whilst
         recognising a citizen's freedom of religious worship,  nevertheless
         prohibited any organisation or individual from compelling  citizens
         to believe (or not believe) or express  belief  in  any  particular
         religion and the revised Regulations can  be  used  to  affirm  the
         State's perception of what it regards as "normal" activities.


       . Paragraph 37 of the report which indicates increased control by the
         one-party state on religious organisations.


       . Paragraph 38 of the expert's report, where  it  is  suggested  that
         since 2017 religion has been regarded with suspicion and there  was
         widespread violation of the constitutional position.

21.  Ms Clarke said that religious practices  were  frequently  violated  in
    practice.  She especially highlighted other features which emerged from
    her client's expert's report including the risk of  being  reported  by
    neighbours.  She also referred to passages from QH including  paragraph
    49 which showed different patterns of behaviour in different  parts  of
    China by the authorities.

22.  In conclusion, Ms Clarke reiterated that  the  departure  from  the  QH
    decision was justified even if one ignored the China Aid reports.

23.  Mr Kotas on the other hand  briefly  replied  by  indicating  that  the
    appellant could not be expected to practise her religion in exactly the
    way that she wished.   It  may  be  that  she  is  required  to  go  to
    mainstream churches rather than "house churches" or  similar.   It  may
    even be that she needs to relocate, if that is what is required of her.
     Again, he reiterated that nothing has really changed since the case of
    QH and I was invited to uphold this leading country  guidance  case  by
    allowing the respondent's appeal and  setting  aside  the  decision  to
    allow  the  appeal   against   the   refusal   of   asylum/humanitarian
    protection/human rights protection within the UK.

24.  I now turn to consider the merits of this appeal.

My Findings and Reasons

25.  The UT only reluctantly  interferes  with  credibility  findings  which
    have been made following a hearing at which the  witnesses  have  given
    their evidence. Only  the  judge  hearing  those  witnesses  can  fully
    appraise the contents  of  the  evidence  given.  As  I  indicated  (in
    paragraph 16 of the decision I gave following the  hearing  on  17  May
    2018) I nevertheless  reserved  the  possibility  of  revisiting  those
    credibility findings having made a full appraisal after the re-convened
    hearing which subsequently took place on 18 December 2018.

26.  The judge clearly took  a  generous  view  of  credibility,  since  the
    appellant apparently did not know which church  she  worshipped  at  in
    China, was unable to answer a  number  of  basic  questions  about  the
    Christian  faith   and   professed   ignorance   over   the   different
    denominations of the Christian faith.  It is  difficult  not  to  share
    some of the scepticism  that  the  respondent  had  when  she  came  to
    consider the appellant's asylum  claim  as  set  out  in  the  detailed
    reasons for refusal letter dated 4 May 2017.  Those concerns included:

    (1)  A significant delay between the appellant's arrival in the UK  and
         her claim for asylum.


    (2)  Her lack of association with any  denomination  of  the  Christian
         faith.


    (3)  Her failure to recall the church at which she worshipped.


    (4)  Her tardy response to the question as to the meaning of  Easter  -
         central to the Christian faith.

27.  However, whatever concerns  I  have  over  her  credibility  would  not
    themselves justify reaching  a  different  conclusion  than  the  judge
    reached and I would not interfere with  his  decision  solely  on  that
    basis.

28.  More fundamentally, the judge departed from  a  country  guidance  case
    which had been promulgated only three years prior to the hearing.  As I
    indicated in my earlier decision, this required me  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT. It is now necessary to remake that  decision.  The
    appellant claims to be a persecuted individual by reason of a clampdown
    by the authorities in  China  on  religious  freedom  and  particularly
    Christian religious freedom). However, I have concluded that  the  case
    of QH is still essentially correct. The reliance on material from China
    Aid was not justified and I have  concluded  that  Christians,  whether
    they  practise  their  religion   in   State-registered   churches   or
    unregistered or "house churches", who are essentially not  at  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm/ill-treatment but there are isolated  cases
    where an individual Christian may be at risk in certain areas.

29.  I have concluded that there was  insufficient  evidence  to  justify  a
    departure from the country guidance case law in this case.  I  have  no
    reason to be directly critical of Dr Consiglia's report but  it  cannot
    be said to be the work of as much care or thoroughness as  that  of  Dr
    Hancock, whose report was subject to close scrutiny by the U T  in  QH.
    Fairly, Ms Clarke agreed for the purposes of her client's  case  before
    the U T to set on one side the  China  Aid  evidence.   However,  China
    constitutionally  guarantees  religious  freedom  and  has  its   large
    population of Christian worshippers (believed to be up to 40,000,000 in
    registered churches and 70-80,000,000 in unregistered  churches  -  see
    paragraph 78 of QH). The extent of interference with religious  freedom
    is statistically insignificant as a proportion of those worshippers.  I
    therefore agree with Mr Kotas's submission that the percentage increase
    in the number of persecuted Christians  and  still  represents  such  a
    small proportion of the whole as not to justify a  departure  from  the
    earlier country guidance case law.  The risk  factors  that  there  are
    (summarised at paragraph 113 of the decision in QH) do  not  amount  to
    persecution of Christians as a group. Christianity is tolerated by  the
    authorities provided those carrying out their worship so in a way which
    respects the other laws which exist in China  -  a  rigid  party  State
    controlled by the communist party.

30.   Furthermore,  the  appellant's   individual   circumstances   do   not
    demonstrate that she was in fact persecuted prior to her departure from
    China. It appears that she was released without  charge  when  she  was
    previously detained by the authorities and there is no reason  why  any
    future contact with the authorities would be  any  more  sinister  than
    this. This is an important point as past persecution is known to be  an
    indicator  of  possible  future  risk  (see  paragraph  339K   of   the
    Immigration Rules).

31.  There appears to be nothing particularly significant about the town  or
    province from which the appellant comes, which has a  large  number  of
    Christians who are not persecuted.  Ms Clarke submitted  that  she  was
    arrested in the past and would want to continue to worship in a "house"
    like she did before but that seems unlikely and even if it were  likely
    that she could  resume  her  previous  religious  worship  without  any
    alteration, given that this had occurred in the past.  In any event, in
    reality the appellant is likely to change  her  religious  practise  to
    reflect the need to comply with local  laws  where  applicable  not  to
    expose herself to unnecessary risk.

32.  Alternatively, the appellant has the option of moving  to  a  different
    area.




Conclusion

33.  The judge considered himself satisfied, in the light  of  the  evidence
    before the FtT, that that the situation for  Christians  in  China  had
    changed "markedly" since Q H so as to entitle him to reach a  different
    conclusion than the conclusion reached by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  QH.
    Even if the appellant's account was wholly credible, I am not satisfied
    that the real  risk  of  being  persecuted  on  her  return  to  China.
    Christians are not per se a persecuted group in China for  the  reasons
    given  in  QH  and  the  change  since  that  decision  has  not   been
    significant.  Therefore, the judge ought to  have  concluded  that  the
    appellant had failed to demonstrate to the low standard of  proof  that
    applied that she would be at any risk of persecution on return.

34.  For these reasons I have concluded that the appellant did  not  satisfy
    the test for being a refugee within the Refugee Convention nor were her
    human rights protected under Articles 2 or 3  of  the  ECHR  unlawfully
    interfered with in that there would be  no  real  risk  of  torture  or
    inhuman and degrading treatment.  She did not qualify for international
    humanitarian protection in the UK within the meaning of paragraph  339C
    of the Immigration Rules because there were no substantial grounds  for
    believing that there would be a real risk of serious  harm  to  her  on
    return to China.

Notice of Decision

Having set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  remake  that
decision.

I have decided to dismiss the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of
the  respondent  to  refuse  asylum/humanitarian   protection/human   rights
protection in the UK.  The respondent's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
therefore allowed.   I  substitute  the  above  decision  for  that  of  the
Immigration Judge.

The  FTT  made  an  anonymity  direction  and  I  continue  that   anonymity
direction.


Signed                                  Date 8 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 8th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
