

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/04255/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 3 May 2019                            |On 4 July 2019                           |
|                                         |                                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                    K N M
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
LLP solicitors For the respondent:  Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appealed with permission against the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal to dismiss her appeal against the respondent's decision  of
   20 April 2017 refusing her international  protection  under  the  Refugee
   Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to  remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom on human rights grounds, and certifying that she is a person  who
   committed a particularly serious crime  for  the  purposes  of  the  non-
   refoulement  provisions  of  section  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention
   (exclusion from refugee  protection),  pursuant  to  section  72  of  the
   Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended).     The
   appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.

2. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  set  aside  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal in a decision sent to the parties on 29 January 2019 and is  now
   to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

Conviction

3. On 22 June 2016, the appellant was convicted of conspiring to  steal  and
   sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment.  She had taken part in  a  conspiracy
   at the Paddy Power betting shop in Dalston where she  worked,  calculated
   to appear as a robbery by a third party.  The appellant was the  cashier,
   and one of the other defendants was the shop manager.  Her two co-accused
   were also convicted.

4. The appellant did not plead guilty and on conviction was sentenced  to  2
   years' imprisonment.  The Judge found that she had  '[lied]  consistently
   and systematically' in her oral evidence and  that  it  was  a  carefully
   planned operation which he treated as a category 2 offence.

5. The appellant appealed against her sentence, but she did not  pursue  her
   appeal and the challenge to the 2-year sentence lapsed on 14 June 2016.

6. The appellant had no previous  criminal  history  and  has  not  offended
   again since her release in 2017.

Refusal letter

7. In his refusal letter of 20  April  2017,  the  respondent  reminded  the
   appellant that on 8 March 2016 she had been notified that  section  32(5)
   of the UK Borders Act 2007 was applicable  to  her  and  that  she  is  a
   foreign criminal sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  12
   months and as such her deportation was  required,  as  conducive  to  the
   public good, under the 2007 Act, unless she could show that  one  of  the
   exceptions in section 33 was applicable to her.

8. Representations asserting that the appellant qualified under Exception  1
   in section 33(2) were  submitted,  referencing  the  Refugee  Convention,
   humanitarian protection and Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

9. The Refugee Convention submission was based on  the  appellant's  claimed
   bisexuality and the risk to her in Jamaica from a  former  male  partner,
   who had caused her serious physical  harm  over  a  period  of  3  years,
   allegedly because he had  discovered  her  primarily  lesbian  sexuality.
   The appellant said that in 1996, she terminated a pregnancy by  her  male
   partner without his knowledge or consent, which caused him  to  beat  her
   and tell everyone in the community that she was lesbian.  In April  1997,
   the appellant came to the United Kingdom and has only returned once since
   then, for a wedding in 2011.

10. The appellant claimed to have seen  her  former  partner's  brother  and
   sister in 2011, when she returned to Jamaica with her  husband  and  sons
   for her brother-in-law's wedding, and  she  claimed  that  she  had  been
   threatened then with further harm. Her husband, who said he had known  of
   the appellant's orientation since meeting  her  in  1997,  supported  her
   account of her sexuality and the threats.

11.  The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant  was  a  lesbian  as
   alleged, nor that she was bisexual. The appellant had not  mentioned  her
   sexuality between 1997 and her imprisonment on 26 February 2016,  and  on
   arrival in prison had said that she was heterosexual.  The appellant  had
   named her current lesbian partner, but there was no supporting  evidence,
   written or oral, from that woman or any other Jamaican or United  Kingdom
   lesbian partner. She had produced no evidence of going to  gay  clubs  or
   joining lesbian organisations before making her asylum claim.

12. The respondent also did not accept that  there  was  a  continuing  risk
   from the claimant's previous partner in Jamaica, despite the serious harm
   alleged, which was supported by a Rule 35 report.

13. The respondent considered that the Refugee Convention exception was  not
   made out, rejecting  the  appellant's  claimed  sexuality  and  also  her
   account that she had been 'outed' in Jamaica by her former partner.   The
   respondent accepted that if the appellant's  claimed  sexuality  (or  the
   perception thereof) was established, that she would be at risk of serious
   harm or mistreatment, amounting to persecution.

14.  The  appellant's  humanitarian  protection  claim  under  the   Council
   Directive 2004/83/EC (the Qualification Directive)  and  the  Refugee  or
   Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations
   2006 fell with the Refugee Convention claim.  Article 3  failed  for  the
   same reason.

15. The respondent  then  considered  Article  8  ECHR  which  also  engaged
   Exception 1 if  established.   The  appellant  had  been  in  the  United
   Kingdom, mainly lawfully, for 19 years at the date of  decision  and  had
   indefinite leave to remain before the  deportation  decision  was  taken.
   She was a person of previous  good  character  who  had  no  previous  or
   subsequent  offences  or   convictions.    Her   conviction   now   stood
   unchallenged.

16. The appellant's husband and three sons were all  British  citizens.   It
   was accepted that the appellant had a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
   relationship with them, and that given their ages,  it  would  be  unduly
   harsh for the children to go to Jamaica with the appellant.  However, the
   respondent did not consider it would be unduly harsh for the  three  boys
   to remain in the United Kingdom with their father, if the appellant  were
   deported.

17. The appellant's  relationship  with  her  husband  began  when  she  was
   lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1997,  but  her  status  then  was
   precarious.  The children were all born when she was here without  extant
   leave and they are all British citizens.

18. The respondent accepted that it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
   appellant's husband to go and live in Jamaica with  her.  The  respondent
   considered that it would not be unduly harsh to expect him to  remain  in
   the United Kingdom without the appellant.   He had his own mother and two
   brothers here, as well as the appellant's uncle, and although he had some
   health problems, he was able to work at times.  The  respondent  did  not
   accept that the family would become destitute, or the children  homeless,
   as claimed: state support would be available and he had managed while the
   appellant was incarcerated.

19. The respondent considered whether, applying the  Exceptions  in  section
   117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and
   paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended),  the
   appellant should be granted leave on the basis of her private life.   The
   respondent accepted that the appellant had been lawfully resident in  the
   United Kingdom for most of her life, but not that she  was  socially  and
   culturally integrated (by reason of her criminality) nor that there  were
   very significant obstacles to  her  reintegration  in  Jamaica  following
   deportation.

20. The respondent  then  considered  whether  there  were  very  compelling
   circumstances  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   The
   appellant had polycystic ovary syndrome and had experienced depression in
   prison, caused by separation from her husband and children, for which she
   received counselling.  There were suitable medical facilities in Jamaica.



21. The respondent considered whether the appellant should be  permitted  to
   remain as  a  Zambrano  carer  for  her  sons,  but  concluded  that  the
   appellant's husband was able to do that.

22. The section 33 Exception was not made out and the respondent  considered
   that there was a strong public interest in  deporting  the  appellant  as
   quickly and efficiently as possible, for the prevention  of  disorder  or
   crime.  The application was certified under section 72.

23. The appeal was not certified under section 94B of the 2002 Act, and  the
   appellant had an in-country right of appeal which she exercised.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

24. In remaking this decision, I have had regard to the record of  the  oral
   evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, which is admissible although the
   Judge's conclusions have been set aside. I heard oral evidence  from  the
   appellant  and  Ms  Sherratt,  and  I  have  the  assistance  of  written
   submissions from the appellant's Counsel and the Home  Office  Presenting
   Officer.

25. I have had regard to the hearing bundle, which  comprises  84  pages  of
   evidence from the school and social services about the children; 16 pages
   of medical evidence; evidence that the appellant is working and a copy of
   her student ID; 45 pages of evidence  about  rehabilitation  and  ongoing
   dangerousness; and 58 pages of  evidence  about  the  appellant  and  her
   husband.  The medical evidence about the children supports the school and
   social work evidence of the impact on the  children  of  the  appellant's
   absence.  I have had regard to it but there is no need to set it  out  in
   this decision.

Vulnerability adjustment

26. At the beginning of the hearing, Ms Radford said that the appellant  was
   a vulnerable person: she had post-traumatic stress disorder and was  very
   anxious.   She  took  citalopram  and  medazepam  for  her  anxiety,  and
   metformin for her polycystic ovarian syndrome.  Ms Radford relied on  the
   Presidential Guidance regarding vulnerable persons (see AM  (Afghanistan)
   v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123).

27. I asked what adjustments might be required to enable  the  appellant  to
   cope with the hearing.  Ms Radford said that no specific adjustments were
   needed, save that the hearing should be dealt with early in the  list  so
   that the appellant did not need to 'hang around' and feel  more  anxious.
   That was done.  I  have  had  regard  to  the  appellant's  status  as  a
   vulnerable witness, when assessing credibility in this appeal.

28. At the beginning of the appellant's oral evidence, I asked her  how  she
   was feeling and she said that she had taken her medication before  coming
   to Court.  I asked her to let me know if she was uncomfortable or  needed
   a break. That did not  happen.   At  the  end  of  the  appellant's  oral
   evidence, I asked her how she felt.  The appellant said that she had felt
   'OK' in the Court and thanked me.

Appellant's evidence

29. The appellant gave an account of her experiences in  Jamaica,  which  is
   not supported by any evidence from a female partner, or  from  anyone  in
   Jamaica.   There is no evidence from any of the female partners  she  has
   had in the United Kingdom either. The appellant's  evidence  is  that  on
   arrival in 1996, she did not tell her grandparents what had  happened  to
   her or about her lesbian sexuality.  There is no evidence other than that
   of the appellant and her husband about the incident at the family wedding
   in 2011.

30. There is no corroborative evidence of her  pregnancy  or  the  abortion,
   and nothing from any doctor, counsellor, social worker, prison officer or
   any of her female partners to support the lesbianism/bisexuality  element
   of the appellant's case, revealed for the first time  during  her  prison
   sentence in 2016, some 19 years after the appellant came  to  the  United
   Kingdom.

31. The appellant has produced a Rule 35  medical  report,  which  evidences
   extensive scarring supporting the physical abuse the appellant is said to
   have endured in Jamaica at the hands first of her mother, before she left
   for America when the appellant was 8 years old, and  later  of  her  male
   partner. The Rule 35 report does not mention  abuse  by  the  appellant's
   mother and there is no attempt to differentiate the scarring which  might
   have been caused in  the  appellant's  early  childhood  and  that  which
   occurred at the hands of an abusive partner in her teenage years.

32. The core of the appellant's current claim is based on the effect of  her
   deportation on her family members, her husband and her  three  sons.  The
   appellant's evidence was that the extended family provided  only  limited
   support for her husband  while  she  was  incarcerated.  Social  services
   became involved and the children were  referred  to  CAMHS,  a  situation
   which did not end until several months after the appellant  was  released
   from immigration detention following her prison sentence.

33. By the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the appellant's  husband
   was out of work again, having had a dispute at  his  previous  employment
   about pay.  Social services were no longer involved with  the  family  as
   there were no child protection concerns once the  appellant  was  out  of
   prison and back home.

34. The appellant's updated witness statement of 26 April 2019  was  adopted
   at the hearing.  It is relevant particularly for details  of  her  family
   life in the United Kingdom and her children's  educational  difficulties.
   The appellant described her  relationship  with  her  sons  as  extremely
   close: all three of  them  were  clinging,  loving  and  emotional  boys,
   relying on her for emotional support.

35. Before the appellant went to prison, her evidence is that her boys  were
   outgoing and happy, and doing well at school,  although  the  eldest  had
   been diagnosed with special educational needs (SEN) at primary school and
   received support at school under the supervision of a Special Educational
   Needs Coordinator (SENCO).  The appellant had a strong feeling  that  the
   youngest boy also had SEN needs, and her instinct  was  later  confirmed.
   The youngest boy now has a SENCO.   The elder has left school and  is  at
   further education College.

36. At home, the appellant said  she  made  sure  all  the  boys  did  their
   homework.  She provided healthy meals, and the family cycled  a  lot  and
   went for family days out to various parks.  They were an  active  family;
   the eldest boy was involved with kick boxing.

37. The eldest boy was added to the SEN  register  at  the  end  of  primary
   school, in year 5 (age  9-10),  although  the  appellant  had  raised  it
   previously with that school.   The  appellant  worked  closely  with  the
   eldest boy's primary school: he had support every  day  at  school,  plus
   additional materials to bring home.  The appellant spoke to his SENCO  at
   least three times a week.

38. At secondary school, the appellant remained closely  involved  with  the
   eldest boy's education, emailing and meeting his teachers regularly:  she
   bought GCSE materials once he was about 14, so that they  could  work  on
   them together.

39. When the appellant went to prison, her husband and the boys visited  her
   almost every weekend, but the circumstances of the children deteriorated.
   The elder two did not want to leave their  home  or  go  to  school.  The
   appellant telephoned the children before and after  school  from  prison,
   every day.  She did all  she  could  to  support  them,  but  they  still
   suffered.

40.  The  eldest  boy  was  very  distressed.   He  was  taking   his   GCSE
   examinations, but he was tearful and unwilling  to  go  to  school.   The
   school arranged for him to see a counsellor, but that did  not  help:  he
   just said he wanted his mother back.   The eldest  boy  comfort  ate  the
   less healthy food the appellant's husband cooked  for  the  boys  in  her
   absence and became obese.

41. The appellant obtained from prison teachers  practice  sheets  for  GCSE
   papers which she handed to an officer to give  to  the  eldest  boy  each
   weekend when he visited, but that was not enough to save  his  education:
   he would not complete them, or say he could not do  the  work,  and  that
   summer he failed all of his GCSE examinations. The eldest  boy  asked  to
   see a doctor and told the doctor he was not coping  without  his  mother.
   The doctor made a referral to social services.

42. The middle child was keen to learn and took to  school  very  well.   He
   was an A grade student. The  appellant  was  closely  involved  with  his
   homework and working with the school. There were  no  educational  issues
   and he progressed well, but when the appellant went to school, he was  14
   years old and took her absence hard.  He did not spend time with friends;
   he withdrew and spent time alone in the library and would not talk  about
   his problems.  His grades dropped from A to C in that year.

43. The youngest boy was a playful, happy baby but when he went  to  school,
   the appellant realised he had SEN problems like the eldest.   He  was  in
   the top set at school when the appellant went to prison, but while he was
   away, the youngest boy dropped to set 3 from set 1, and began to wet  the
   bed.  He was very unhappy at school, not eating his lunch and crying  for
   no reason.

44. After coming out of prison, the appellant took all three boys  in  hand.
   She worked with the teachers and with them at home.  She could not repair
   the eldest boy's wholesale failure in his GCSE examinations, but  she  is
   supporting him while  he  studies  electrical  engineering  at  Tottenham
   College; he took a test for entry and the appellant took it  herself,  to
   help him.  The appellant passed the test: her eldest son failed  it,  but
   under persuasion from the  appellant,  the  College  admitted  him.   The
   eldest boy has passed the first year at Tottenham College, and his mother
   has obtained a copy of the workbook being used by the school so that they
   can work through it at home.  She is certain that if she can continue  to
   support him, he will succeed in his studies and his life, but if  she  is
   sent back to Jamaica, the appellant thinks that the eldest boy will  drop
   out of college and his future is bleak.

45.  The  middle  child  also  received  intensive  home  support  from  the
   appellant once she was out of prison, and he was awarded  a  'gifted  and
   talented' certificate at the end of his GCSE year.  He had taken his GCSE
   examinations and the results were awaited at the date of hearing.

46. The youngest boy has been moved back up to a  higher  group,  after  the
   appellant spoke to the school and persuaded them.  She is working at home
   with him to make sure he catches up on what he missed while  she  was  in
   prison.  He is no longer bedwetting, eats his  lunch,  does  not  cry  at
   school and plays with the other children again.

47. The appellant had been the main earner before going to prison and  wants
   to get back into  employment  and  support  her  family.   She  described
   herself as 'a very determined  and  driven  person'.   The  appellant  is
   deeply sorry for the offence and has been punished for it; her family has
   suffered too.  She says she will never ever get  into  such  a  situation
   again. If removed to Jamaica, the appellant would not take her  children;
   they are British citizens and in education here with friends and  family,
   whereas there is nothing and nobody for her in Jamaica and  they  do  not
   know the culture.

48. The appellant gave oral evidence at the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.   She
   adopted her evidence to date and gave brief supplementary evidence  about
   correspondence from CAMHS which is  in  the  bundle.  She  said  that  Dr
   Annette Wilson was still meeting with the family  at  St  Ann's  Hospital
   every two or so months, engaging with the family as a group, but speaking
   to each one of them.  Dr Wilson encourages the family to get through  the
   experience together, asking the boys how they were doing at  school,  and
   speaking about their anxiety and how to cope  with  it.  Dr  Wilson  also
   telephones the family between appointments to see how they are coping.

49. In cross-examination, the appellant said that the last such meeting  had
   been in the Easter Holiday this year.  None of the boys  was  now  taking
   any medication or receiving  counselling.   Social  services  had  closed
   their child protection case for the family after the  appellant  returned
   home in June 2017, but the appellant could not quite remember when  (from
   correspondence in the bundle, the final decision  was  made  in  November
   2017).  The social worker who had been  visiting  the  family  was  quite
   happy with them.

50. Mr Melvin asked the appellant no questions about her sexual  orientation
   or history, either in Jamaica or the United Kingdom.  There  was  no  re-
   examination.

Appellant's husband's evidence

51. The appellant's husband provided a brief written witness  statement  for
   the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  He confirmed  what  the  appellant  had
   said about the family circumstances, and the threats made at the  wedding
   (which took place in St Ann's, the other side of the  island  from  where
   the appellant had lived with her abusive former partner).

52. In his  oral  evidence  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant's
   husband said the abuser's sister and brother called her a lesbian, chased
   after her, and made gun signs.  He had not previously believed they  were
   taking much of a risk in travelling to Jamaica as they were not going  to
   the same area. He did not think that the appellant would  have  relations
   with women in Jamaica.

53. The appellant's husband provided an updated witness  statement  for  the
   hearing in May 2019.  He said that the  appellant  had  always  been  the
   primary carer of their sons and worked to provide for the family, as well
   as taking care of everything to do with the boys'  education.   He  could
   not help, as he had not had a proper school  education  and  had  trouble
   reading and understanding things.

54. The boys had been devastated when she went to prison.   They  could  not
   concentrate and their education suffered.  They began having  nightmares,
   and the youngest wet his bed.  They visited the prison almost every  week
   but having to go home without their mother was  very  difficult  for  her
   husband, and for the children.  He got depressed and had an injury to his
   hand which made it much more difficult. He struggled  to  cope  with  the
   family alone.

55. Everything got better when the appellant came home, and the  husband  no
   longer took antidepressant medication.  However, the husband and the boys
   remained very anxious about the possibility of her being deported;  their
   lives were at a standstill, awaiting the outcome of the appeal.   If  the
   appellant were deported, the husband and his sons would be unable to cope
   without the appellant and the children would be 'destroyed'.

56. The husband did not give any oral evidence  at  the  May  2019  hearing,
   although he was present.   Ms Willocks-Briscoe did  not  seek  to  cross-
   examine him.

Social work evidence

57. A letter dated 4 May 2017  from  Sharon  Charles,  the  family's  social
   worker, confirms  her  concerns  and  those  of  the  school  during  the
   appellant's incarceration.  The boys' basic care needs were being met  by
   their father, but their emotional needs  were  of  concern  and  a  CAMHS
   referral was made, as well as asking the school to put in  extra  support
   for the children, who were not keeping up with their school work. A Child
   and Family Assessment of July 2017 confirmed the same issues and recorded
   that the school is helping but that the father was  not  coping  well  at
   home.   The litmus test would be when the appellant returned home.

58. A further Child in Need report of 24 November 2017 noted that the  Child
   in Need Plan was being maintained to ensure a smooth reintegration of the
   appellant who was now back home with the family.  The children were happy
   to have her home, but still worried about her  being  deported  following
   the First-tier Tribunal hearing in January 2018.

59. A letter dated 8 January 2018 from Nicholas  Cotterill,  Social  Worker,
   Safeguarding and Support Service, says that the children still had  'huge
   anxiety as they fear that their mother  will  be  taken  away  from  them
   again...I believe the deportation of [the  appellant]  would  place  [the
   boys] at a heightened risk of further suffering and emotional harm'.   Mr
   Cotterill offered to provide a report detailing his work with the  family
   but that offer was not taken up.

60. A letter from Dr Annette Wilson, Systemic Family Psychotherapy Lead  and
   Interim CAMHS Access Lead dated 23 April 2018 noted  that  the  boys  had
   been referred to CAMHS by Sharon Charles, the social  worker,  after  her
   home visit.  She had seen the  family  on  four  occasions,  as  well  as
   numerous telephone conversations, to get an update on the boys' emotional
   wellbeing and how  they  were  managing  the  uncertainty  regarding  her
   possible deportation.  Dr Wilson said that the children were still 'in  a
   stage of anxiety' and that the  secure  foundation  which  the  appellant
   provided for the family:

         "...contributes  to  the  overall  emotional   wellbeing   of   the
         children's mental health presentation.  It would have a detrimental
         effect on the boys' wellbeing and adverse impact  on  their  mental
         health long term if [the appellant] was removed. Due  consideration
         needs to be given to  the  vulnerability  of  these  children,  who
         desperately need their mother.   From  my  assessment,  I  have  no
         concerns about parenting,  or  either  parent's  relationship  with
         their children.  I would recommend that the family continue to stay
         together as any decision to deport  [the  appellant]  would  create
         serious irreversible damage to her children."

Evidence from the school

61. The First-tier Judge had before him evidence from Mr  David  Hearn,  the
   vice-principal of the Greig City Academy where the younger  two  children
   studied.  Mr Hearn considered the appellant a good parent, very proactive
   in her sons' education, and that while she was in prison, their  academic
   achievement had been significantly affected, based  on  feedback  from  a
   number of members of staff.  Head  of  Year  teachers  described  her  as
   'brilliant' and the best parent they had dealt with; he considered her to
   be  in  the  top  5%  of  positive  school-parent   relationships.    The
   appellant's husband was still actively involved but not the  same  degree
   of engagement, although he was doing his best.

62. Mr Hearn was not aware of any issues of neglect, but  the  children  had
   fallen below the high standards she  achieved  with  them  when  she  was
   there.  Mr Hearn told the First-tier Judge in oral evidence that  he  did
   not consider this family to be 'in crisis' while  the  appellant  was  in
   prison.  However, in his witness statement for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   hearing, he said this:

         "13. [The appellant] is a very supportive no nonsense parent.   She
         knows her boys'  strengths  and  weaknesses  and  has  always  been
         totally honest and transparent in her dealings  with  school.   She
         has moved heaven and  earth  to  keep  the  family  functioning  in
         difficult circumstances and it must be horrible for the  family  to
         have the uncertainty of  this  possible  deportation  hanging  over
         them.

         14.  I have been a deputy head teacher in  inner  city  schools  in
         London for the last 20 years.  I have seen the damage  that  family
         break down and many single parent families can cause.  I understand
         some of the pressures that these boys are under on the streets  and
         the need for a strong family unit to give them  the  structure  and
         support that their peers do not have in their home lives.

         15.  If [the appellant] is deported a strong family  unit  will  be
         severely  disrupted  with  potential  long-term  consequences   for
         society and the individuals concerned.  All teenage boys and  young
         men need their mothers.  It is an awkward and unacceptable fact  of
         life that young black boys in particular are at much  greater  risk
         of stabbing and street crime in inner city London where this family
         lives. ..."

63. Following the First-tier Tribunal hearing,  on  24  September  2018,  Mr
   Hearn wrote a 'to whom it may concern' letter, clarifying  his  assertion
   that the family was not 'in crisis' while the appellant  was  in  prison.
   He said that while there were difficulties, the school  had  not  had  to
   make any urgent referral to social services because of immediate concerns
   about neglect and abuse which was harming or endangering the boys,  which
   would have required the involvement of a duty  social  worker.   However,
   there were ongoing concerns about how the family was coping; the youngest
   boy in particular was developing anger management issues with  aggression
   and violence to other students, and his attendance dropped  off,  missing
   approximately one day a fortnight.  The middle  boy,  previously  a  very
   good student, also began missing school.  All  this  stopped  when  their
   mother came home.

64. In March 2017, the school completed a Multi-Agency Information  Form  at
   the request of social services.  In late spring or early summer 2017,  Ms
   Sharon Charles, a social worker, visited the family and found the boys to
   be struggling emotionally and presenting  with  mental  health  symptoms,
   following which there was a referral to CAMHS and a  CAMHS  report  which
   led to a Child in Need Plan for the family.  On 9 May 2017, the  youngest
   boy was teased about his mother being in prison.  He became upset and the
   school tried, unsuccessfully, to contact the social worker.

65. The appellant was released on 24 May 2017  and  on  21  July  2017,  the
   Child in Need  Plan  commenced.   The  school  was  contacted  by  social
   services for information in November 2017 and  Mr  Hearn's  understanding
   was that at the Child  in  Need  meeting  on  24  November  2017,  social
   services decided to continue Child in Need support  while  the  appellant
   resettled into the family.

66. In a covering letter (undated) enclosing emails between the  school  and
   the appellant, Mr Hearn refuted the statement in the Home Office  refusal
   letter that there was 'little evidence to show' that  the  appellant  was
   playing a significant role in her eldest son's education before she  went
   to prison.  The Home Office had not contacted the school to ask for  such
   evidence.  In the six years that the boys had  been  at  his  school,  Mr
   Hearn had been able to find 39 surviving emails  from  the  appellant  to
   Dawn Henriques, Head of SEN at Greig  City  Academy,  some  of  which  he
   enclosed, all of which showed  the  intensity  and  significance  of  the
   appellant's involvement with the boys' schooling.

Samara Sherratt's evidence

67. Ms Sherratt is the youngest boy's SENCO at  Greig  City  Academy.  In  a
   letter dated 20 September 2018, she confirmed he is on the  school's  SEN
   register with the status  'SEN  support'.   A  letter  from  his  primary
   school, St Anne's Primary, confirmed that he was also identified  as  SEN
   at that school.

68. Ms Sherratt described the youngest boy  as  sensitive,  with  low  self-
   esteem and poor mental health in consequence  of  having  been  separated
   from his mother while she was in  prison.   He  was  very  close  to  his
   mother, who had been 'incredibly supportive' and in regular personal  and
   telephone contact, to  speak  about  his  progress.   The  appellant  had
   attended a session for parents on  how  to  support  children's  learning
   outside school. The letter concludes:

         "I am extremely worried about the  effect  that  [the  appellant's]
         deportation will have on [her youngest son's] outcomes.  He  is  on
         the SEN register because he has learning difficulties.  He is  also
         extremely vulnerable because of his emotional immaturity.  We  have
         been working really hard to address [his] needs  and  he  has  made
         excellent progress since his mother has been back in his  life,  as
         she has ensured he is supported both academically and  emotionally.
         She has also supported the school in ensuring he gets the provision
         he needs.  He is on the SEN register because he needs  considerable
         support.  The support we give him in school to  ensure  he  reaches
         his potential will not be enough without a secure home environment.
          It is well known that broken attachments can  have  a  devastating
         effect on children's outcomes.  I am genuinely concerned that [his]
         outcomes will be extremely poor if his mother is removed  from  his
         life."

69. Ms Sherratt gave a witness statement on 24 April 2019.  Much of what  is
   in  the  statement  is  summarised  above.   The  youngest  boy  was  not
   'secondary ready' when he transitioned  from  St  Anne's  to  Greig  City
   Academy: he was 'sweet,  kind,  gentle  and  can  be  overly  sensitive'.
   Counselling and mentoring were recommended, as well as learning  support.
    He had difficulty with both spatial and verbal abilities, and while  his
   mother was in prison, he developed a stammer.  He was  extremely  anxious
   and often appeared sleep deprived.   He remained emotionally immature for
   his age, lacking in resilience and coping mechanisms.

70. 'Parent voice' was an important component of SEN support, which was  far
   less effective when the parent  was  not  involved:  in  this  case,  the
   appellant had a supportive,  pro-active  approach,  supporting  her  sons
   emotionally as well as educationally, and having  high  expectations  and
   aspirations, extremely keen for them to  better  themselves.  The  middle
   child's head of year told Ms Sherratt that she was 'one  of  the  easiest
   and best parents I have ever dealt with...I wish I had  200  others  just
   like her'.

71. The youngest boy's mental health had improved when his mother  came  out
   of prison, but now he was worried again that she would be  deported,  and
   his behaviour was causing concern.  He was not eating properly and  would
   often try to leave lessons and come to sit with Ms Sherratt instead.   In
   November 2018, when someone upset him, he came  to  her  office  'crying,
   laughing out loud and rocking at the same time and had to go home'.   The
   statement concluded:

         "I am extremely worried about [his] ability to cope if  his  mother
         is deported because his coping mechanisms are poor.  He is  already
         extremely traumatised by the uncertainty of the last few years.  He
         is also extremely reliant on her support, and thrives when he  gets
         this support, but the opposite  happens  when  this  support  risks
         being taken away as this [witness] statement shows.  He  will  fail
         to thrive because of her punishment, this would be very  harsh  and
         unfair when he has done nothing wrong."

72.  Ms Sherratt adopted her witness statement and was tendered  for  cross-
   examination. Asked about  her  qualifications,  she  said  that  she  had
   qualified at Cambridge University in  teaching,  and  had  a  Masters  in
   Special Educational Needs from Middlesex University.  She qualified as  a
   SENCO in 2018, and was pursuing  a  further  qualification  at  Middlesex
   University, which hopefully she would complete in 2022,  specialising  in
   social and emotional mental health.  Her work was only with the  youngest
   boy, she had no knowledge of the rest of the family.

73. Ms Sherratt said that the  youngest  boy  was  no  longer  supported  by
   CAMHS, nor was he taking medication  or  receiving  counselling,  to  her
   knowledge.  The youngest boy received SEN  lessons  in  literacy,  maths,
   some in-class support, and herself as the person to  go  to  if  he  were
   troubled or anxious.  He  remained  very  weak  cognitively,  relying  on
   prompting, support and encouragement, and his mother's  contribution  was
   vital.  He was in Key Stage 4, with GCSE examinations in 2020, but  there
   was a risk  in  his  mother's  absence  that  he  would  not  obtain  any
   qualifications.

74. The outcomes for black boys  in  Tottenham  were  'not  great'  and  the
   youngest boy needed a decent start as an adult.  His mother's support had
   been amazing: if  she  were  removed,  all  SEN  efforts  would  make  no
   difference, as parenting was  a  crucial  component.   Parents  were  the
   centre of everything: there was only so much the school could do. Schools
   could not parent, hear a child read, make sure he did his  homework.   In
   his mother's absence, there would be nowhere near enough support, setting
   the child up to fail.

75. The boy's father also was not emotionally resilient and he had  suffered
   from lack of parenting while his  mother  was  in  prison.   Ms  Sherratt
   thought that the boys' father  probably  also  had  some  learning  needs
   himself.

76. There was no re-examination.

Prison and Probation evidence

77. The appellant has provided the pre-sentence report, a  bail  application
   from March 2016, her OASys report from April 2016, and a letter from Amba
   Rajaloo, Probation Service Officer, dated 21 May 2018, which is the  most
   up to date assessment of her ongoing risk to the public. Mr Rajaloo  said
   that the appellant had complied with her licence since her  release  from
   immigration detention on 23 May 2017 and that her licence conditions  had
   expired on 25 February 2018.  A home visit had been undertaken and  there
   were no concerns.  Regarding the level of risk, the letter says this:
         "Since being released from custody and immigration detention,  [the
         appellant] has fully complied with the conditions  of  her  licence
         and the requirements of supervision.  [She] has  attended  all  her
         instructed appointments and has never been  late  for  any  one  of
         them.  She has always been polite, compliant, and engaged very well
         with myself.  [Her] level of risk of serious harm was  assessed  as
         low and has always remained the same since she  was  released  from
         prison.  Due to her positive compliance, her reporting to probation
         has been reduced to fortnightly before her licence  expired  and  I
         was satisfied that this frequency is sufficient to  manage  as  her
         assessed level of risk of harm was low and her assessed level of re-
         offending was low."

   The earlier documents support that analysis.

78. The appellant also provided a Rule 35(3) report dated 20 April  2017  by
   Dr Rebecca Ward describing the physical marks of the harm  she  said  had
   been inflicted by her abusive partner. The accompanying  body  map  shows
   multiple scars to the appellant's body, including  a  bite  mark  on  her
   forehead and a screwdriver scar just below  her  chin.   Her  account  is
   given as follows:

         "In Jamaica she was raised by her father who died when she was  15.
         She was living alone and started a relationship with another  girl.
         One night she was in bed with her girlfriend and she was seen by  a
         male friend.  He used this to blackmail her and forced her, and her
         friend, to sleep with him.  As she lived alone,  she  was  targeted
         the most, and he forced himself to be her boyfriend.

         He was very violent towards her and would attack her with  a  knife
         or razor blade.  He would often stab her with a screwdriver and  on
         one occasion, heated the screwdriver on a burner  and  stabbed  her
         with it.  When beating her, he would sometimes use a 2-pin plug and
         cable.  He was  also  sexually  abusive  and  would  hurt  her,  by
         clipping wooden clothes pegs to her clitoris.  After  each  attack,
         she was not allowed to go to hospital and if needed stitches  would
         be taken to a local nurse.

         She identifies as bisexual and this  is  accepted  by  her  current
         husband.

         She fears a return to Jamaica will put her under threat as when she
         returned for a family wedding in 2011, she was seen by the  brother
         of her abuser.  Her and her  husband  were  attacked  with  bottles
         thrown at them and escaped by running back to  their  hotel,  which
         had security.  The police were informed, but no action was taken."

79. Dr Ward concluded:

         "The scars are consistent with  the  explanation  given.   She  has
         extensive scarring that would be consistent with systematic  abuse.
         The scar on her arm is large, and  looks  like  the  stitches  have
         split before fully healed, as there is widening in the middle.

         Her stab wound to her buttock has fat necrosis and  this  could  be
         due to the screwdriver having been heated and causing damage to the
         fat.  She gave good detail for how each was caused and was able  to
         demonstrate this.

         She has a history of depression and has access  to  healthcare  and
         our mental health team.  I have referred her to  them  for  support
         and they will be able to  alert  accordingly  should  deterioration
         occur."

80. There is no mention of the physical abuse which the appellant  says  her
   mother inflicted on her, which on  her  account  occurred  when  she  was
   younger than 8 years old, as  distinct  from  that  caused  by  her  male
   partner when she was in her late teens (15-19 years old).

Health evidence

81. The bundle  contains  the  appellant's  medical  records  from  Holloway
   Prison, showing that the appellant had  a  shoulder  injury  in  February
   2016. She tested negative for drugs and infections such as  tuberculosis,
   Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C and HIV/AIDS.  There were no concerns about  her
   being a risk to herself  or  to  others,  no  self-neglect  or  disturbed
   thinking,  and  no  disabling  social   problems   with   activities   or
   relationships with others.  She was  not  bullied  in  prison.   She  had
   polycystic ovary syndrome. She did not drink at all, but smoked in prison
   because she was stressed. There is  both  hospital  and  general  medical
   practitioner evidence that the appellant's husband has a  long-term  back
   problem caused by curvature of the spine.

82. On 24 October 2016, Dr H  Rahman  BSc  MBCHB  MRCGP,  the  family's  GP,
   recorded the husband's hand injury from glass laceration, which  required
   the RMF extensor tendon to be repaired, and hand therapy: as a result  of
   that injury he could only work 'on and off' and struggled to cook for the
   children or attend to house chores.  He was taking  pain  medication  and
   also Gabapentin for his depression.

83. The eldest boy told Dr Rahman that he was helping his  father  with  the
   housework, because his father was not coping very well.  The  eldest  boy
   suffered from seizures and obstructive  sleep  apnoea:  he  endured  many
   sleepless nights in his mother's absence and 'continues to build fear'.

84. The middle child was  also  having  sleeping  and  eating  problems  and
   struggling to maintain a good level of education at school.

85. The youngest  had  a  history  of  chronic  constipation,  treated  with
   Movicol and sodium picosulphate; he also had  obstructive  sleep  apnoea,
   secondary to hypertension.  He was waking up at night and crying for  his
   mother. Dr Rahman's report concluded:

         "This family have been residents of the  United  Kingdom  for  many
         years and deporting the mother will cause an unstable upbringing of
         these young males.  The family have not been in  Jamaica  for  many
         years and feel home is the United Kingdom.  Given that [the father]
         has back and hand problems, he is unable to  always  cook  and  his
         absence from work because of  this  is  resulting  in  a  financial
         crisis.  I would  be  most  grateful  if  you  would  consider  the
         emotional and  wellbeing  of  the  children  when  you  assess  the
         family's needs.  I would recommend that she does not  get  deported
         as this will affect the children's physical and mental  health  and
         will continue to do so for many years."

86. On 18 September  2018,  Dr  Rahman  wrote  a  letter  to  Becket  House,
   following a previous letter on 30 August 2018 saying  the  appellant  was
   not able to report as required.  He said that the appellant suffered from
   anxiety, and now panic attacks, as well as post-traumatic stress disorder
   and depression.  She found public transport difficult as  the  crowds  on
   buses or trains caused her to feel she was being choked,  with  breathing
   difficulties, palpitations, chest  pains,  severe  headaches,  dizziness,
   nausea, and feeling faint.  She was seeking counselling.  He  enclosed  a
   list of medication (Mirtazapine, Metformin, Citalopram) and asked whether
   her reporting could be reconsidered.

87. That is the evidence before the Upper Tribunal for the remaking of  this
   decision.

Findings of fact and credibility

88. I have  considered  the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's  claimed
   sexuality.  I have regard to the lower standard of  proof  applicable  in
   international protection claims.  I note the lateness  of  her  assertion
   that she is lesbian and/or bisexual, which was not  made  until  she  had
   completed her prison sentence and was in immigration detention  prior  to
   removal, decades after she entered the United Kingdom.

89. I also note the complete lack of any  supporting  evidence  (apart  from
   that of her husband); there is nothing from any previous female  partner,
   although the appellant has been living in the United Kingdom for over  20
   years and, on her account and that of her husband,  been  free  to  enter
   into such relationships with his approval and consent.

90. I do not consider that the appellant  has  discharged  the  burden  upon
   her, to the lower standard appropriate in protection claims,  of  showing
   that she is of lesbian  or  bisexual  orientation.   I  find  her  to  be
   heterosexual.

91. The appellant has scars which are diagnostic of  very  serious  physical
   abuse.  I bear in mind that the Rule 35 report is not a full medico-legal
   report prepared to the Istanbul Protocol standard, and the appellant does
   not appear to have mentioned that she was also abused by her mother as  a
   child.  However, the harm which the scarring discloses  is  clear  and  I
   accept that the appellant was badly abused by someone, in Jamaica  before
   she left in 1997.  I do not accept any other part  of  her  account  (and
   that of her husband) about what happened in Jamaica and in particular,  I
   do not accept that her former male partner retains an interest in harming
   the appellant 22 years later.

92. The appellant's husband left school at  14  years  old  and  it  is  the
   appellant who has always  provided  educational  support  for  all  three
   children, even during her imprisonment, when  she  bought  textbooks  and
   taught them each week when they visited.  I accept that the appellant  is
   an important  educational  resource  for  all  three  boys,  as  well  as
   providing a safe and loving home for her family, including  her  husband,
   and that they coped less well in her absence,  to  the  extent  that  the
   school referred the children's circumstances to CAMHS and social services
   were involved.

93. I also accept that in  the  appellant's  absence,  and  because  of  his
   various injuries, the appellant's husband got into  financial  difficulty
   and had trouble cooking for and generally coping with his sons.

Submissions

94. In written submissions on behalf of the  respondent,  Mr  Melvin  argued
   that at [45] of my error of law decision the Upper Tribunal  had  already
   excluded the possibility of rebuttal on asylum grounds, on the basis that
   the appellant could advance a heterosexual narrative on  return  (see  SW
   (Lesbians - HJ and HT applied) Jamaica CG [2011] UKUT 251  (IAC)).   That
   is inaccurate: however, Mr Melvin also contended that the respondent  did
   not accept that the appellant was lesbian or bisexual as claimed nor that
   she faced persecution for that reason either in Jamaica before coming  to
   the United Kingdom in 1997, on a visit to Jamaica in 2011, or now if  she
   were returned.

95. Mr Melvin observed that the appellant had  not  engaged  with  the  LGBT
   rights community in the United Kingdom, until after the  service  of  the
   deportation decision, and failed to mention her  claimed  bisexuality  to
   anyone while in prison, although she received counselling. The  issue  of
   bisexuality was not raised until the appellant was placed in  immigration
   detention at the end of her sentence.

96. In relation to the best interests of the children, Mr Melvin noted  that
   there were no up-to-date statements from any of them, and 'no  indication
   of their current situation or their opinions on life if their mother were
   deported to Jamaica'.  Mr Melvin accepted that there was a  large  amount
   of evidence demonstrating that it would be in the best interests  of  the
   children for their mother to remain in the family unit.   Mr  Melvin  did
   not suggest that the family should relocate to Jamaica, but  argued  that
   the family could maintain  contact  after  the  appellant's  removal,  by
   modern methods of communication and visits.

97. The question for the Upper Tribunal was whether the appellant's  removal
   would be unduly  harsh,  either  for  the  children  or  the  appellant's
   husband, with reference to section 117C of the  Nationality,  Immigration
   and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended). The respondent did not accept that  the
   appellant would have difficulty in returning or reintegrating to Jamaica,
   where she lived until she was 20.  Mr Melvin submitted that separation of
   the family would not be unduly harsh and invited the  Upper  Tribunal  to
   dismiss the appeal.

98. In oral submissions, Mr Melvin relied on his skeleton  argument,  adding
   only that although the appellant when younger  had  been  in  the  United
   Kingdom for 10 years without leave, nothing turned thereon.

Appellant's submissions

99.  For  the  appellant,  Ms  Radford  set  out  the  appellant's  history,
   beginning by making submissions on  the  section  72  certificate,  which
   introduced a rebuttable presumption  of  seriousness  based  on  sentence
   length.

100. Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention  was  described  in  the  UNHCR
   guidance  as  a  'measure  of  last  resort'  which  should  be   applied
   'restrictively and with great caution'.   More  than  a  past  crime  was
   required: it was not the previous conviction which was required  to  show
   dangerousness, but it was for the State to  show  'that  one  or  several
   convictions are symptomatic of the criminal, incorrigible nature  of  the
   person and that [she] is likely to commit offences again'.  Article 33(2)
   was concerned with the present  and  the  future,  not  the  past.   This
   appellant was  not  an  incorrigible  offender:  she  had  committed  one
   offence, albeit a serious one.

101. There followed lengthy excerpts from decided cases about the  delay  in
   claiming  asylum  and  in  advancing  the  bisexuality  element  of   the
   appellant's claim.   Ms Radford asked me to accept that  the  appellant's
   account of her sexual history was both detailed and consistent, supported
   by her husband's account and the scarring  evidence,  and  that  she  had
   given a proper reason  for  not  claiming  earlier.    There  followed  a
   lengthy excerpt from, and explanation of, HJ  (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)
   [2010]  UKSC  31,  arguing  that  as  the  appellant  had  suffered  past
   persecution and she had already been outed as a  lesbian  by  her  former
   abusive partner, she would be at risk on return  and  'discretion'  would
   not avail her.

102. In submissions on  the  Immigration  Rules,  Ms  Radford  set  out  the
   evidence about the children, noting that there was no  dispute  that  the
   appellant had a genuine parental relationship with them and that it would
   be unduly harsh to expect them to move to Jamaica. The issue  between  Ms
   Radford and Mr Melvin was whether it  was  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
   children and their father to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without  the
   appellant. The appellant noted the distress and hardship which  had  been
   caused to the husband and the boys while the  appellant  was  in  prison,
   even though they saw her regularly.  The appellant and  her  husband  had
   been together for over 20 years now, 15 of them before the index  offence
   was committed.  The appellant had lived in the  United  Kingdom  lawfully
   for most of her life and was socially and culturally  integrated,  having
   all her tertiary  education  and  employment  history,  her  husband  and
   children  here.   There  were   very   significant   obstacles   to   her
   reintegration now in Jamaica.

103. Ms Radford accepted that the index offence was serious, but  it  was  a
   lone offence, the appellant having lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  22
   years, without committing any other offences.  It was neither  a  violent
   nor a drug-related offence. There was no suggestion that the  appellant's
   husband  had  any  knowledge  of  her  offence  before  her  arrest   and
   conviction.

104. It was now almost five years since the index offence, for  three  years
   of which the appellant had been at liberty,  and  her  conduct  had  been
   'very good', with 'excellent' progress with probation services, a low  or
   no risk of reoffending, a stable marriage (despite some early  problems),
   superb educational and familial support for her  children,  and  no  real
   connection now with Jamaica.  Ms Radford concluded that:

         "45. Even giving the public interest its  appropriate,  significant
         weight, all the circumstances suggest that deportation in this case
         is unnecessary and disproportionate. The appellant has worked  hard
         at rehabilitation, she is providing crucial care for her vulnerable
         children, and she does not pose a risk of harm or reoffending.  The
         impact on her children would, on the other hand, be devastating and
         permanent."

105. Ms Radford asked the Upper Tribunal to allow the appeal.

106. In brief  oral  submissions,  Ms  Radford  reminded  me  of  the  UNHCR
   guidance on Jamaica of 2014  and  that  the  appellant  had  no  internal
   relocation option, given that she had also had a problem in  Montego  Bay
   in 2011.

107. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Section 72 certification

108. Where there is a section 72  certificate,  the  Court  or  Tribunal  is
   required to deal with whether  to  uphold  it  and  with  the  issues  of
   exclusion from refugee and  humanitarian  protection  before  considering
   inclusion. The effect of section 72(2) of  the  2002  Act  is  that  this
   appellant must be treated as having been convicted by a final judgment of
   a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to the  community
   of the United Kingdom.

109. Section 72(6) provides that "A presumption under  subsection  (2),  (3)
   or (4) that a person constitutes a danger to the community is  rebuttable
   by that person."  Section 72(1) provides that where  the  presumption  is
   not rebutted and the section 72 certificate  upheld,  the  Tribunal  must
   dismiss the appeal in so far as it relies on an appeal under the  Refugee
   Convention.

110. Unless  the  appellant  can  rebut  the  dangerousness  presumption  in
   subsection 72(6), Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention  applies,  such
   that the benefit of the prohibition on refoulement in  Article  33(1)  is
   disapplied:

         "Article 33 - prohibition of expulsion or return (refoulement)

         1. No contracting  state  shall  expel  or  return  ('refouler')  a
            refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories
            where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of  his
            ...membership of a particular social group ...

         2. The benefit of  the  present  provision  may  not,  however,  be
            claimed by a refugee  whom  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for
            regarding as a danger to the security of the country in which he
            is, or who, having been convicted  by  a  final  judgment  of  a
            particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the security
            of that country. "
                                                            [Emphasis added]

111. I am satisfied, on the facts before me, that the presumption  has  been
   rebutted.  The appellant's single offence was serious,  but  she  has  no
   previous history of criminality (apart from a period  of  overstaying  on
   which Mr Melvin did not rely) and  her  behaviour,  both  in  prison  and
   subsequently, has been uniformly good.  She received high praise from the
   Probation Service, the social workers involved with the family,  and  the
   school.  She was considered in the OASys report to present a low to  non-
   existent risk of reoffending or  further  harm,  and  she  has  not  done
   anything to contradict that assessment.

112. I do not uphold the section 72 certificate and I  proceed  to  consider
   the appeal substantively.

Analysis and conclusions

113. I consider whether the appellant can bring herself within (in  context)
   Exception 1 in section 33 of the 2007 Act, either on  Refugee  Convention
   grounds, under the Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection
   (Qualification) Regulations 2006, or on human rights grounds.

114.  As  regards  the  Refugee  Convention  claim,  and  the   humanitarian
   protection and Article 3 ECHR claims, the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
   claimed sexuality is very weak, consisting of her assertion and  that  of
   her husband, with nothing from any of her  partners.   I  note  that  her
   lesbianism or bisexuality was not asserted until  the  appellant  was  in
   immigration detention, having completed her prison sentence, and that the
   evidence of the alleged threats in 2011 rests on similarly weak evidence.
    I have regard to  the  assessment  of  the  sentencing  judge  that  the
   appellant was not a witness of truth.

115.  I  am  not  satisfied,  even  having  regard  to  the  lower  standard
   applicable to protection claims, that the appellant  has  discharged  the
   burden of showing that she is a refugee nor that Exception 1  of  section
   33(2)(b) is engaged on Refugee Convention grounds.

116. I turn, therefore, to the human rights claim.  I  have  regard  to  the
   Supreme Court judgment in KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of State  for
   the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 and to the guidance given by the Upper
   Tribunal in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]
   UKUT 123 (IAC), as follows:

         "(1)    In KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of State for  the Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53, the approval by the Supreme Court of the
         test of "unduly harsh"  in  section  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, formulated by the  Upper  Tribunal
         in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), does not mean that the test includes the way
         in which the Upper Tribunal applied its formulation to the facts of
         the case before it.

         (2)    The way in which a court or tribunal should approach section
         117C remains as set out  in  the  judgment  of  Jackson  LJ  in  NA
         (Pakistan) & Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

         (3)     Section  117C(6)  applies  to  both  categories  of foreign
         criminals  described  by  Lord  Carnwath  in  paragraph  20  of  KO
         (Nigeria);  namely,  those  who  have   not   been   sentenced   to
         imprisonment of 4 years or more, and those  who  have.  Determining
         the seriousness of the  particular  offence  will  normally  be  by
         reference to the length of sentence imposed and what the sentencing
         judge had to say about seriousness and mitigation; but the ultimate
         decision is for the court  or  tribunal  deciding  the  deportation
         case.

         (4)    Rehabilitation will not ordinarily bear  material  weight in
         favour of a foreign criminal."

117. The appellant in this case is a 'medium offender' in the  terms  of  NA
   (Pakistan):  her sentence did not exceed  4  years.   If  she  can  bring
   herself  within  Exception  1  (section  117C(3),  the   long   residence
   exception) or  Exception  2  (section  117C(4),  the  partner  or  parent
   exception) then her Article 8  ECHR  claim  succeeds  (see  [36]  in  the
   judgment of Lord Justice Jackson, giving the judgment of the Court).

118. If she cannot, then applying both NA (Pakistan) and RA (Iraq),  I  must
   consider  section  117C(6)  and  determine  whether   there   are   'very
   compelling circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
   and 2', in which case the public interest does  not  require  deportation
   and again, the Article 8 ECHR claim succeeds.

119. The evidence before me is that the appellant is a  hard  working  woman
   who takes education very  seriously,  and  that  her  support  is  really
   significant in the educational future and the achievements of  all  three
   of her sons, two of whom have SEN needs and all three of whom suffered in
   her absence in prison,  causing  their  school  to  trigger  social  work
   involvement and CAMHS support.  I have regard to the  acceptance  by  all
   concerned that the appellant's husband cannot perform this role,  because
   he left school at 14 and probably has SEN needs himself. In any event, he
   cannot read easily or understand the boys' school  work  enough  to  help
   them with it.

120. I remind myself that under part 5A of the 2002 Act, the maintenance  of
   effective immigration controls is in the public  interest,  and  that  by
   section 117C(1), the deportation of foreign  criminals  is  also  in  the
   public interest.  At section  117C(2)  we  are  directed  that  the  more
   serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,  the  greater  the
   public interest in the deportation, and at section 117C(3),  that  where,
   as  here,  a  foreign  criminal  has  been  sentenced  to  a  period   of
   imprisonment of four years or more, the  public  interest  requires  that
   criminal's deportation, unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

121. Exception 1 applies  where  the  foreign  criminal  has  been  lawfully
   resident in the United Kingdom for most of  her  life;  is  socially  and
   culturally integrated; and there would be very significant  obstacles  to
   her integration into her country of origin if she were to be deported  to
   Jamaica.  I have regard to  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
   Secretary of State for the Home Department v Viscu [2019] EWCA  Civ  1052
   at [44] in the judgment of Lord Justice Flaux,  with  whom  Lord  Justice
   Lewison and Lord Justice Underhill agreed:

         "44.  The CJEU jurisprudence to which I have  referred  establishes
         (i) that the degree of protection  against  expulsion  to  which  a
         Union national resident in another member state is  entitled  under
         the Directive is dependent upon the degree of integration  of  that
         individual in the member state; (ii) that, in general, a  custodial
         sentence is indicative of a rejection of societal values  and  thus
         of a severing of integrative links with the member state but  (iii)
         that the extent to which there is such a  severing  of  integrative
         links will depend upon an overall assessment  of  the  individual's
         situation at the time of the expulsion decision."

122. This appellant has been in the United Kingdom for 22  years,  of  which
   just under 11 years, from 31 October 1998 to 18 August 2009 were  without
   leave, although she later achieved indefinite leave  to  remain.  She  is
   almost 42 years old now.  Her situation when the expulsion  decision  was
   taken on 20 April 2017 was that she was still detained while  her  asylum
   claim was being considered.  She was supporting her family  as  best  she
   could while detained, but the rejection  of  societal  values  which  her
   crime represented was not counterbalanced by the school support of  which
   there is so much subsequent evidence. Nor, on the facts  as  found,  does
   the evidence establish significant obstacles to reintegration in Jamaica.
    Exception 1 does not avail the appellant.

123. The next issue is  Exception  2.   The  genuine  and  subsisting  links
   between the appellant and her husband and sons are not disputed: the only
   issue under exception 2 is the meaning of 'unduly harsh'. The appellant's
   eldest and youngest sons are  on  the  SEN  (special  educational  needs)
   register and require extra educational support, which is  being  provided
   at their school and further education College respectively,  and  by  the
   appellant at home.  I accept that they have very significant  educational
   needs which would not be easily met without the appellant's  support,  if
   they could be managed successfully at all.

124. It would be in the children's best interests if their  mother  remained
   in the United Kingdom to help them  with  their  education,  which  their
   father cannot do because he left school at 14  and  has  difficulty  with
   reading and understanding school work.  There is a great deal of reliable
   evidence of her significant contribution to their education,  even  while
   she was in prison, and of the support that the appellant provides for all
   three of her sons in their secondary and tertiary education, particularly
   the eldest and youngest who have SEN needs.

125. The expression 'unduly harsh' sets a high test:  see [22-23]  and  [27]
   in KO (Nigeria) in the opinion of Lord Carnwath, giving the  judgment  of
   the Court, approving the formulation in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015] INLR  563  at
   [46]  that  'harsh'  denotes  more  than  'uncomfortable,   inconvenient,
   undesirable or merely difficult... something severe, or bleak', and  that
   the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises that already elevated standard
   still higher.

126. The question whether deportation of a  parent  or  partner  is  'unduly
   harsh' and engages Exception  2  will  always  be  a  question  of  fact,
   requiring careful reflection and bearing in mind the potency of the  main
   public interest in play.  I have considered carefully whether Exception 2
   is met here.  I have had regard to all of the evidence from  the  school,
   the SENCO, the doctors, the social worker,  and  the  appellant  and  her
   husband.  I have also considered the evidence as to  what  happened  when
   the appellant was removed  from  the  family  for  her  imprisonment  and
   immigration detention: even though she saw the children and  her  husband
   almost every week, they deteriorated rapidly, particularly the oldest and
   youngest boy, who have SEN needs and  are  particularly  emotionally  and
   educationally dependent on their mother.

127. On the facts of this appeal, I  am  satisfied  that  exception  2  does
   apply.  In the 'real world' situation, if the  appellant  is  removed  to
   Jamaica, the effect on her children will be unduly harsh.   While she was
   in  prison  they  were  very  distressed  and  the   evidence   is   that
   contemplation of her removal has caused the youngest  to  become  anxious
   again and to detach himself from class at school.

128. I have given particular weight to the evidence of Ms  Sherratt  of  the
   importance of the 'parent voice' and her opinion that no  amount  of  SEN
   assistance will  be  enough,  absent  this  particular  parent  from  her
   youngest son's life, as well as to the abundant evidence  of  how  poorly
   the rest of her family coped with the appellant's absence in  prison  and
   detention.

129. Even if exception 2 were not  applicable,  I  would  consider  that  on
   these particular  facts,  very  compelling  circumstances  under  section
   117C(6) had been shown.  The boys are closely  bonded  to  their  mother,
   much more so than normal because of their  SEN  needs  and  their  father
   cannot assist them, because he has similar issues and no education beyond
   the age of 14.  I remind myself that he finds reading  and  understanding
   very difficult.

130. The Article 8 ECHR claim  therefore  succeeds  and  the  appellant  has
   successfully brought herself within section  33(2)(a)  of  the  2007  Act
   (Exception 1 to the automatic deportation requirements of section  32  of
   that Act).

DECISION

131. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.
   I do not uphold the section 72 certificate.
   I remake the decision in this appeal by allowing the appeal.

Date:         1 July 2019           Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                        Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


