
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04842/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2020                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Goldman Bailey Solicitors


                   DECISION AND REASONS (given ex tempore)

      1. In a decision dated  14  September  2019  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ('FtT') dismissed the respondent's appeal against a decision of the
         Secretary of State for the Home Department ('SSHD') dated 26  March
         2018, in which he treated the respondent's submissions as  a  fresh
         claim but refused to revoke an earlier  deportation  order,  having
         found that the respondent was not entitled to asylum.



Background

      2. The respondent is a  citizen  of  Turkey.   In  2004  he  raised  a
         protection claim in  the  United  Kingdom  ('UK')  however  he  was
         removed to Germany and eventually returned to Turkey in 2006.  Upon
         return to Turkey the respondent claimed that he  was  detained  for
         some three days during which time he was questioned  regarding  the
         activities and alleged association that he and his  family  members
         had with the PKK.  Prior to this detention in 2006  the  respondent
         claimed that he had already been questioned,  threatened  and  ill-
         treated in 2002 and 2004.  He therefore claimed to be a person  who
         was held by the Turkish authorities  to  be  of  adverse  political
         interest to them because of his perceived association with the PKK.
          The respondent was ultimately released from his detention in  2006
         but claimed that he was told that he  was  required  to  become  an
         informer.  He was again arrested in 2007 and claims  to  have  been
         detained and subjected to torture.  In 2008 he was  again  arrested
         and beaten.  He arrived in the UK in January 2009  where  he  again
         claimed asylum.  In  addition,  he  was  convicted  of  falsely  or
         improperly  obtaining  another  person's  identity   document   and
         sentenced to twelve  months'  imprisonment  in  January  2009.   He
         became the subject of a signed deportation order  in  January  2013
         and his appeal against that decision was dismissed by the panel  of
         the FtT in a decision dated 8 May  2013  ('the  2013  FtT  panel').
         With the assistance of solicitors, the respondent made a number  of
         further submissions in  support  of  his  international  protection
         claim.  It is unnecessary to go into the  detailed  history  as  to
         what happened in relation to those submissions  save  to  say  that
         they resulted in the fresh claim decision refusing his asylum claim
         dated 26 March 2018, which I have already referred to above.   This
         is how the matter came to be before the FtT on 23 August 2019 which
         resulted in the decision under appeal.

The respondent's vulnerability

      3. The FtT treated the respondent as a vulnerable witness -  see  [12]
         and [99] of the FtT's decision.  There was no  opposition  to  this
         approach by the respondent's representative before the FtT.  In  so
         doing the FtT took into account, in particular a report prepared by
         a clinical psychologist, Miss Chisholm dated 18 October 2007.  That
         report is a  very  detailed  report  running  to  61  pages.   Miss
         Chisholm concluded that the respondent was suffering from PTSD with
         complex features as well as depression.   She  observed  that  that
         diagnosis was consistent with medical records going back  a  number
         of years.  She set out her diagnostic opinion in this way:

             "202.    Post-traumatic stress disorder arises as a result  of
                    experience of traumatic experiences.  In my  opinion  Mr
                    [A]'s symptoms of PTSD are highly  compatible  with  his
                    alleged experiences of repeated  imprisonment  including
                    repeated and severe violence, sexual abuse, and  threats
                    of death in these situations.

             203  In keeping with this he reports that the content  of  his
                    traumatic nightmares and intrusive memories include  the
                    situations in which his life and physical integrity have
                    been threatened (sexual assault, beatings and threats of
                    death).

             204  In my opinion the  repeated  and  severe  nature  of  his
                    traumatic  experiences  which  began  in  childhood  has
                    resulted in a set of symptoms more akin to complex PTSD.
                     Complex PTSD is a  potential  outcome  of  exposure  to
                    repeated or prolonged instances  of  multiple  forms  of
                    interpersonal trauma often occurring under circumstances
                    where escape is not possible (Herman, 1992).

             205. In my clinical opinion Mr [A]'s depression has arisen out
                    of a very strong sense  of  being  stuck  with  repeated
                    imprisonments.   As  he  described  it  -  now   feeling
                    imprisoned both externally and internally by  his  post-
                    trauma symptoms.

             206. In my opinion Mr [A]'s experience  of  complex  PTSD  and
                    depression  are  in  keeping  with  the  experiences  he
                    reported of repeated interpersonal  trauma  and  chronic
                    fear.

             Psychological opinion

             207. In order to understand  the  likely  cause  of  Mr  [A]'s
                    complex  post-traumatic  stress  disorder,   depression,
                    feelings  of   hopelessness   I   consider   below   the
                    psychological  mechanisms  behind  these  disorders   in
                    relation to Mr [A]'s account and experiences."

      4. At the hearing before me I made it clear that the respondent should
         continue to be treated as vulnerable.  Both representatives  agreed
         with that approach.

Proceedings before the FtT

      5. At the  beginning  of  the  hearing  before  the  FtT,  the  SSHD's
         representative requested an  adjournment  in  order  to  carry  out
         verification checks on court documents that had been  submitted  by
         the respondent, indicating that he was subject to court proceedings
         arising out of his  alleged  PKK  associations.   That  adjournment
         request was refused and the hearing proceeded.   The  FtT  decision
         does not outline in  any  detail  what  actually  happened  at  the
         hearing.  I therefore asked the representatives to check their  own
         records.  Their records were consistent with what  I  was  able  to
         make out from the FtT's own record of proceedings.  The  respondent
         and three witnesses were called to give evidence but there  was  no
         cross-examination whatsoever and as a result, the hearing proceeded
         by way of submissions only.

      6. The FtT acknowledged that the correct approach was to use the  2013
         panel's decision as its  starting  point  in  accordance  with  the
         Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 principles.   See  [100]  and  [101].
         With that in mind the FtT noted the 2013 FtT panel's conclusions at
         [102].  These included a finding that the respondent had joined the
         DDP in 2006 but his politics had been at a  relatively  low  level.
         Although the 2013 FtT panel accepted  that  he  was  questioned  on
         arrival in 2006, they did not accept that this amounted to torture.
          The 2013 panel's conclusions are set out in more detail at [32] of
         its decision.  The FtT  also  considered  those  findings  and  the
         summary at [102] of its decision is just that, a summary.  The  FtT
         went  on  to  set  out  the  evidence  available  to  it  that  was
         unavailable to the 2013 FtT panel.  On any view  that  evidence  is
         detailed and far-reaching.  The FtT first  of  all  turned  to  the
         report prepared by Dr Chisholm that I  have  already  referred  to.
         The FtT found that it was highly likely  that  the  respondent  had
         been suffering from PTSD at the time of the hearing before the 2013
         FtT panel.  The FtT also referred to medical  evidence  to  support
         the respondent's claim that he had scarring  as  a  result  of  the
         torture he experienced in Turkey.   The  FtT  then  turned  to  the
         evidence provided by the witnesses, who referred  to  close  family
         members who had been the  subject  of  arrest  and  challenges  for
         reasons relating to political associations in Turkey since the 2013
         FtT panel decision.  The FtT also  noted  the  court  documentation
         that had been provided in support of the respondent's claim that he
         had court proceedings against him in  Turkey.   At  [111]  the  FtT
         then:

      7. At [112] the FtT then  said  "I  accepted  the  evidence  that  the
         appellant has suffered past serious harm.  In this respect  I  took
         into account Immigration Rule 339K.  I found that  the  appellant's
         past ill-treatment was a serious indicator as to future risk".  The
         FtT then turned to the risk that the respondent would  face  if  he
         returned to Turkey and said this:

             "113.    I took into account the  fact  that  the  appellant's
                    case was not that he was at real risk  of  serious  harm
                    solely on the basis of his  own  political  profile.   I
                    noted  that  it  was  his  case   that   there   was   a
                    concatenation of circumstances that meant he would be at
                    risk.  In particular I noted  that  he  was  of  Kurdish
                    ethnicity, an active member of the DTP  in  Turkey.   He
                    had grown up in a PKK area and that he  had  family  who
                    were  members  of  the  PKK  or  perceived  so  by   the
                    authorities.  I noted that he had come to the  attention
                    of the authorities on a number of occasions and had only
                    been released on the proviso that he  would  report  and
                    become an informer.  I also noted that  he  had  avoided
                    military service and that he had been politically active
                    in the UK.

             114. In the light of those matters I  concluded  that  it  was
                    likely the appellant would be identified on  arrival  at
                    the airport in Turkey and be subjected to  serious  harm
                    as he had been previously.  In this respect I took  into
                    account the country guidance case  if  IK  (returnees  -
                    records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.

             115. I took into account  the  Secretary  of  State's  Country
                    Policy and Information Note: Turkey.  Turkish  political
                    parties' version 3.0 August 2018.   I  noted  that  this
                    recorded that the BDP had been founded in 2008 and  that
                    it was an extension of the DTP.  I noted that  this  was
                    the party that the appellant had been a  member  of  and
                    that this party had been bound.  I noted  that  the  BDP
                    was the founder member of the HDP and shared most of its
                    political ideology.  I found that the appellant would be
                    perceived as being a member of the HDP.  I noted that in
                    the policy  information  note  the  Secretary  of  State
                    accepted that a member of the HDP might be at  risk.   I
                    referred myself to paragraph 2.4 onward in the  note  in
                    this respect.  In  addition  I  took  into  account  the
                    report of the country expert which  was  to  the  effect
                    that the appellant would be at risk on return to  Turkey
                    due to his political identity and also as being a  draft
                    evader."

      8. The FtT went on to allow the respondent's appeal on asylum  grounds
         as well as human rights grounds.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      9. The SSHD  has  applied  with  permission,  to  appeal  against  the
         decision of the FtT and relied upon three grounds of appeal.

          i) Ground 1 submits that the FtT erred in law in failing to apply
             the country guidance case of IA and Others (risk -  guidelines
             - separatist) [2003] UKIAT 00034 and failed to properly engage
             with the Country and Policy Information Note on  Turkey  ('the
             CIPN').

         ii) Ground 2 submits that  the  FtT  failed  to  provide  adequate
             reasons for its finding at [111] in relation to  the  findings
             made by the 2013 FtT panel.

        iii) Ground 3 submits that the FtT failed to address the submission
             made by the SSHD that the respondent could follow the  example
             of a brother in Turkey by giving up his  political  activities
             and starting afresh.

     10. Permission to appeal was granted by UT Judge Kebede in  a  decision
         dated 8 November 2019.  The respondent has relied upon  a  Rule  24
         notice dated 6 December 2019.

     11. At the hearing before me Ms Bassi relied  upon  the  three  pleaded
         grounds.  She accepted that it was appropriate to deal with  ground
         2 first and then to move on to grounds 1 and 3 because  the  latter
         two dealt with prospective risk whereas the first ground dealt with
         the FtT's approach to its findings  of  fact.   Ms  Bassi  made  no
         application to amend the grounds of appeal and her submissions were
         firmly focussed upon the grounds of appeal as  drafted.   Ms  Dirie
         responded  to  those  grounds  and  I  deal  with   both   parties'
         submissions in more detail below when  I  discuss  each  ground  of
         appeal.

Discussion

Ground 2

     12. Ground 2 is  summarised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  follows:
         "Failure to provide adequate reasons for material  findings".   The
         submissions that then follow are  based  entirely  upon  the  FtT's
         approach as set out in [111].  I have set out the relevant parts of
         that paragraph above.

     13. Ms Bassi criticised the FtT's findings at [111] for three  reasons.
         She first of all submitted that the FtT provided inadequate reasons
         for its decision to approach the respondent's  case  on  the  basis
         that it needed to be "considered afresh".  She argued that that was
         not an approach that was open to this FtT but even if  it  was,  it
         was simply inadequately reasoned.  The FtT was clearly  aware  that
         it was obliged to use the 2013 FtT panel's findings as  a  starting
         point and expressly directed itself to that.  The  FtT  effectively
         found that although those findings ought to be a starting point, it
         was appropriate to depart from them because there  were  very  good
         reasons to do so.  That is an approach that was in  principle  open
         to the FtT - see Devaseelan itself, as well as AL (Albania) v  SSHD
         [2019] EWCA Civ 950 at [25].  The FtT set out  the  detail  of  the
         evidence available to it, that was not available to  the  2013  FtT
         panel from [103] to [110].  The FtT noted that not  only  was  that
         evidence not before the panel, but clearly considered that  it  was
         cogent and  detailed  evidence  that  went  to  the  heart  of  the
         reliability of the respondent's evidence that was given before  the
         2013 FtT panel.  The respondent gave evidence then at a  time  when
         on this FtT's findings it was likely that  he  was  suffering  from
         complex PTSD.  This FtT found that in  all  the  circumstances  the
         respondent's failure to produce the medical evidence that he relied
         on more recently should not be  held  against  him.   That  medical
         evidence was not challenged before the FtT and it has not been  the
         subject of any challenge in the grounds of appeal.  In other words,
         the SSHD accepted the medical evidence and accepted  that  the  FtT
         was entitled to accept that medical evidence.  That evidence  alone
         was sufficient for the FtT to reach the view that the  respondent's
         case needed to be considered on a fresh basis  notwithstanding  the
         previous findings being a starting point.  The medical evidence  in
         effect constituted very good reasons to depart from the findings of
         fact made by the 2013 panel.  That medical  evidence  however  does
         not stand in isolation but was accompanied by further  evidence  as
         to how family members have been treated in Turkey as provided by  a
         number of witnesses, none of whom were cross-examined.

     14. In my judgment the FtT was entitled to adopt the  approach  to  the
         2013 FtT panel's findings that it did and has sufficiently reasoned
         why it took that course by adequately addressing and accepting  the
         new evidence that was available to it.  The SSHD has been told  why
         the FtT opted to make fresh findings and there has been no  failure
         to provide reasons for taking this  course.   The  reasoning  could
         have been clearer and more explicit but the reasons for considering
         matters  afresh  are  tolerably  clear:  there   was   overwhelming
         significant and cogent evidence that had not been challenged  which
         called into question the reliability of factual  findings  made  in
         the absence of that evidence.

     15. The second limb to Ms Bassi's submission is that the FtT failed  to
         make clear which of the findings made by the  2013  FtT  panel,  it
         considered itself bound by.  That submission must be viewed in  the
         context of the whole of [111].  Although the first two sentences of
         that paragraph are clear ("I noted that all this evidence  had  not
         been before the previous Tribunal.  I found  in  the  circumstances
         that the appellant's case needed to be  considered  afresh."),  the
         third sentence is not ("In the light of this  I  did  not  consider
         that I was not bound by all the findings of the  previous  decision
         maker.").  Indeed,  both  representatives  agreed  that  the  third
         sentence is impossible to follow.  It is so unclear that  it  seems
         to me that when the decision is read as a whole, it is  appropriate
         to disregard it.  The FtT  clearly  reached  a  decision  that  the
         respondent's case needed to be considered afresh  and  it  was  not
         bound by any of the previous factual findings.   In  my  view  that
         reading of [111] in the context of the  decision  as  a  whole,  is
         entirely appropriate bearing  in  mind  the  strength  of  the  new
         evidence and the SSHD's position in response to it.

     16. It follows that the FTT was not required to indicate which findings
         it considered itself bound by, when it is sufficiently  clear  that
         it was making findings afresh given the nature and  extent  of  the
         new evidence.

     17. Ms Bassi also submitted that the FtT failed to make any finding  on
         the level of the respondent's political activity in Turkey and  the
         UK.  She asked me to note that the 2013 FtT panel  considered  that
         activity to be low.  The difficulty with that  submission  is  that
         the respondent has not alleged that his political  activities  were
         sophisticated or at a high level.  His case is  that  although  his
         activities were relatively low, the authorities perceived  him  and
         close family members to have such an adverse political  profile  as
         to justify repeated arrests, ill-treatment and torture.   In  those
         circumstances it was not necessary for the FtT to make  a  specific
         finding as to the level of political activity.  Whatever the  level
         of his activity the FtT  accepted  that  he  had  been  of  adverse
         interest to the Turkish authorities.  The FtT clearly accepted  the
         respondent's evidence and accepted that the authorities imputed  to
         him a political opinion to justify their past adverse  interest  in
         him.

     18. Before leaving ground 2 it is important  to  acknowledge  that  the
         FtT's reasoning for accepting  this  respondent's  claim  was  very
         brief indeed.  It is undoubtedly clear that the  FtT  accepted  the
         respondent's  evidence  and  said  so  at  [112]  in  terms.   This
         paragraph must be read together with the remainder of the  decision
         including the second half of [105] where the FtT said this:

             "I found that the  appellant  had  given  a  clear  consistent
             account which was in keeping with the background evidence.   I
             found that his  account  was  partially  corroborated  by  the
             evidence of his mental health problems including the diagnosis
             of PTSD.  I noted that both Dr Chisolm and Dr  Cohen  were  of
             the view that the appellant was not feigning  or  exaggerating
             his symptoms.  I further noted that the  independent  physical
             evidence of scarring  was  said  by  Dr  Cohen  to  be  highly
             consistent with the appellant's claimed experiences."

     19. I accept that the FtT's structure of his credibility findings is at
         best odd and the reasons for  those  findings  very  brief  indeed.
         There is also a surprising failure to make any  clear  findings  on
         the important court documents, in relation to which the SSHD sought
         an adjournment.  These are regrettable matters.  However as I  have
         already indicated there can be no doubt that the FtT  accepted  the
         respondent's evidence.   There  was  no  clear  challenge  to  this
         evidence on the part of the SSHD.  There has  also  been  no  clear
         challenge to the FtT's acceptance of  the  respondent's  past  ill-
         treatment in Turkey.  Ms Bassi referred me to the manner  in  which
         ground 2 itself  was  worded  i.e.  "failure  to  provide  adequate
         reasons for material finding".  She highlighted that this  referred
         to [111] of the FtT's decision.  That paragraph however deals  with
         the FtT's decision to consider the respondent's  case  afresh.   It
         does not deal with the respondent's acceptance of the  respondent's
         claim to have been ill-treated many times for reasons  relating  to
         his perceived political opinion in the past.   There  has  been  no
         attack on [105] or [112] in ground  2.   That  is  not  necessarily
         surprising bearing in mind the SSHD's decision not to cross-examine
         the respondent or any of his witnesses at the  hearing  before  the
         FtT.  In short, there has been no  clear  challenge  to  the  FtT's
         decision to accept this respondent's claim as to what  happened  to
         him in Turkey.

     20. In any event when the FtT's decision is read as a whole,  the  SSHD
         has been provided with adequate reasons to know why it is  the  FtT
         accepted the respondent's account.  I summarise the  FtT's  reasons
         below.

          i) The 2013  FtT  panel  did  not  have  the  evidence  that  the
             respondent was suffering from PTSD and the FtT found that  the
             failure to provide that evidence should not  be  held  against
             him.

         ii) Bearing in mind the respondent is vulnerable, he gave a  clear
             and consistent account.

        iii)  That  account  is  consistent  with  the  country  background
             evidence.

         iv) That account is partially  corroborated  by  the  respondent's
             mental health problems.

          v) That account is  corroborated  by  the  physical  evidence  of
             scarring.

         vi) That account is supported by politically active family members
             who gave evidence postdating the 2013  FtT  panel  that  other
             close family members  have  been  arrested  and  charged  with
             offences relating to terrorism.

     21. None of those observations by the FtT  have  been  challenged.   As
         pleaded ground 2 is not made out.  I now turn to ground 1.

Ground 1

     22. I am satisfied that although the FtT did not refer to  the  country
         guidance case of IA (supra), it was clearly aware of it and applied
         the relevant risk factors set out therein.

     23. First, the risk factors contained in IA were expressly referred  to
         and endorsed by the subsequent  country  guidance  decision  of  IK
         (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312, which was
         referred to by the FtT at [114].   Indeed  the  SSHD's  grounds  of
         appeal acknowledge that the factors set out in IA were endorsed  in
         the later country guidance case of IK, which the FtT  referred  to.
         It is also clear from the decision of IK itself that  the  IA  risk
         factors were approved of and set out in full.

     24. Second, the IA risk factors are also set out in full in the CPIN at
         [2.4.13].  That report was expressly taken into account by the  FtT
         - see [115].

     25. Third, the FtT clearly took into  account  all  the  relevant  risk
         factors and identified those it considered to be most  relevant  to
         this particular case at [113].  I have already set that out in full
         above.  This is  a  case  in  which  the  FtT  considered  all  the
         circumstances cumulatively.  It was unnecessary to pinpoint any one
         factor such as level of political  activity  because  the  FtT  was
         satisfied that when all the factors  were  considered  cumulatively
         this respondent is clearly  at  prospective  risk  upon  return  to
         Turkey.  The FtT did precisely that which was  recommended  by  the
         country guidance case of IA and considered all the factors  in  the
         round.  At [47] of IK the Tribunal made it clear  that  they  could
         not emphasise too strongly the importance of avoiding treating  the
         risk factors as "some kind of checklist" and that the assessment of
         the claim must be carried out in the round.

     26. Ground 1 also submits that the FtT simplistically referred  to  HDP
         members being at risk without  any  consideration  of  the  factors
         identified in the CG case.  As I have already noted  the  FtT  took
         into account all the relevant risk factors at [113]  and  concluded
         at [114] that in light of those matters  the  respondent  would  be
         identified on arrival and subjected to serious harm bearing in mind
         the country guidance case of IK (which as I have noted endorsed and
         quoted in full the country guidance case of IA).  It was only after
         that that the FtT went on  to  deal  with  the  respondent's  being
         perceived as a member of HDP.  That membership of HDP must be  seen
         in the context of the FtT's earlier finding as set out a  [113]  to
         [114].   The  FtT's  findings  regarding   the   respondent's   HDP
         activities must also be seen in the context of the CIPN,  which  as
         the FtT noted at [2.4.14-2.4.15] makes it plain that a  person  who
         otherwise come to the adverse attention of the authorities  because
         of suspected involvement with the PKK or support for  autonomy  for
         Kurdish people may be at risk, irrespective of the level  of  their
         political activity.  This is not a case in which the FtT found that
         this respondent is at risk solely because of  his  HDP  activities,
         rather the  FtT  concluded  that  when  all  factors  are  assessed
         cumulatively, there is a real risk  that  the  respondent  will  be
         subjected to repetition of  the  past  ill-treatment  that  he  has
         already been party to.  That was a finding entirely open to the FtT
         that was made with full respect being given to the country guidance
         and  background  country  information  available.   Ground   1   is
         therefore not made out.

Ground 3

     27. I can take ground 3 more quickly.  Ms Bassi relied upon the  ground
         as pleaded and did not make any oral submissions.  Ground 3  raises
         two matters.

     28. First, it  is  said  that  the  FtT  did  not  address  the  SSHD's
         submission within the decision letter  that  the  respondent  could
         have given up political activity upon return to Turkey in a  manner
         similar to one of his brothers who was  living  in  Turkey  without
         adverse attention.  Second, it is submitted that the FtT should not
         have accepted the country expert report which  was  devoid  of  any
         reasoning.

     29. I entirely accept Ms Dirie's submission that the SSHD's  contention
         that the respondent should give up all political activity in  order
         to  avoid  persecution  runs  contrary  to   the   well-established
         principle in RT (Zimbabwe) and Others v SSHD [2012] UKSC as applied
         in MSM (Somalia) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 715 at [42].  In any event,
         even assuming that this respondent gave up all  political  activity
         or association, on the FtT's findings he would  on  any  legitimate
         review remain at risk because he has already been labelled  by  the
         Turkish authorities as having come to their  adverse  attention  by
         reason of perceived political activity and or association.

     30. It follows that although it would have been better for the  FtT  to
         have dealt with this submission, its failure to  do  so  is  not  a
         material error of law because the submission is doomed to  failure.



     31. Turning to the FtT's approach to the country expert report, the FtT
         simply noted at [116] that the country expert  report  was  to  the
         effect that the respondent would be at risk on return to Turkey due
         to its political identity and  also  being  a  draft  evader.   The
         reference to the country expert report is by way of  an  aside  and
         does not form any part of the foundations for the FtT's reasons  as
         to why this respondent is at risk.  The FtT  is  in  effect  merely
         commenting that the country expert's report is consistent with  the
         findings that it has reached.  Ground 3 is not made out.

Conclusion

     32. The FtT's decision has a number of defects and could have contained
         far clearer  and  more  structured  reasoning.   However  the  SSHD
         accepted and has not  challenged  the  significant  cogent  medical
         evidence  both  in  relation  to  the  respondent's   psychological
         symptoms and his physical  evidence  of  serious  ill-treatment  in
         Turkey.  That evidence entirely supported  the  FtT's  approach  to
         consider the evidence afresh.  The FtT acted consistently with  the
         Devaseelan principles.  Having accepted the respondent's  evidence,
         the FtT was entitled for the reasons it has  provided  to  conclude
         that given the past harm that he had suffered there is a real  risk
         that that will be repeated in the future.  Indeed, the evidence and
         the country background information points in one direction in  this
         case and the SSHD has not been able to identify how this case could
         produce any other  result  given  the  stance  that  was  taken  in
         relation  to  the  medical  evidence,  together  with   the   FtT's
         acceptance of the past harm that the respondent had come to.



Notice of decision

The FtT's decision does not contain an error of law and shall stand.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: Melanie Plimmer    Dated: 10 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
