
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04537/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2019                           |On 10 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     RD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 1 May 2019 in which his protection claim was refused. His  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 10 July 2019. That decision was set aside, with
    no findings preserved, following a hearing before the Upper Tribunal on
    30 October 2019 and is remade below.



Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is repeated below because this
    is a protection matter.

Background

 3. The appellant continues to advance the same claim as  previously,  that
    is he is at risk in Iran as an apostate. In short, the appellant was in
    a relationship with a woman who was born a Christian and they  attended
    a house church in Iran. The appellant fled Iran after the house  church
    was raided, having been informed that the authorities were seeking him.



 4. In refusing the protection claim, the Secretary of State  accepts  that
    the appellant was an Iranian national and that he was born a Muslim but
    rejects his claim  to  have  converted  to  Christianity,  because  his
    responses  to  questions  posed  during  his  asylum   interview   were
    considered to be both internally inconsistent as well  as  inconsistent
    with country information.

    The hearing

 5. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr Singh requested an adjournment  for
    the respondent to consider the evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant on 12 December 2019. Mr Gayle objected to  that  application,
    stating that the only new matters were the appellant's baptism and  his
    use of Facebook. I declined  to  adjourn  given  the  lateness  of  the
    application as well as the fact that the parties and witnesses were  in
    attendance and ready to proceed with the hearing.

 6. I heard oral evidence from the appellant as  well  as  [MG]  who  is  a
    member of the Leadership Board  of  the  Iranian  Christian  Fellowship
    (ICF),  both  of  whom  were   cross-examined   by   Mr   Singh.   Both
    representatives made oral submissions and  Mr  Gayle  relied  upon  his
    recent  skeleton  argument.  I  made  a  note  of  the   evidence   and
    submissions, which I will not repeat here but take  into  consideration
    in reaching my conclusions.

 7. At the end of  the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  accepted  that  the
    appellant had given a credible account and that his appeal was allowed.
     I now give my reasons.

Reasons

 8. In protection claims, the burden of proof is on the appellant  and  the
    standard of proof is lower, in that the appellant need  only  establish
    that there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  he  would  face
    persecution if returned to Iran.

 9. Mr Singh's submission was that  the  main  issue  was  the  appellant's
    credibility and if he was found to be credible about his  religion  and
    evangelising on return, he would  be  at  risk  of  persecution  as  an
    apostate.

10. The documentary evidence before me includes the respondent's bundle  of
    material submitted to the First-tier Tribunal on 22 May  2019  and  the
    appellant's bundle which was enclosed under cover of a letter  dated  6
    June 2019.  The respondent's bundle consists of the screening interview
    record dated 12 December 2018, a preliminary information form dated  28
    March 2019 and the substantive asylum interview record dated  18  April
    2019.

11. The  appellant's  original  bundle  contains  the  appellant's  witness
    statement  dated  29  May  2019,  a  skeleton  argument   and   a   not
    inconsiderable  number  of  country  reports  and  press  articles.  In
    addition, there is a letter dated 10 June 2019 from  Malcolm  Steer,  a
    pastor for the Iranian Christian Fellowship (ICF) as well as a  witness
    statement from Mr [G], dated 13 June 2019.

12. On 12 December 2019, the Upper Tribunal received a supplementary bundle
    of evidence on behalf of  the  appellant  which  included  his  further
    witness statement,  a  further  letter  from  Malcolm  Steer  dated  28
    November 2019, an email from the ICF Leadership Board dated 11 December
    2019, evidence in relation to the appellant's baptism,  an  email  from
    the appellant's brother "AD" as well as a printout of  the  appellant's
    Facebook pages. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Gayle  submitted  an
    addendum statement from Mr [G] dated 16 December 2019.

13. In considering this matter, I have considered the  relevant  case  law,
    with particular reference to the guidance in TF and MA [2018] CSIH  18,
    FS and Others (Iran - Christian Converts) Iran CG [2004]  UKIAT  00303,
    AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]  UKUT
    0257 (IAC) as well as SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)
    Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC). I have also taken  into  consideration
    all the evidence and submissions before me, both oral and  written  and
    assessed it in the round, in reaching my conclusions.

14. The appellant relies on a letter dated 28 November  2019  from  Malcolm
    Steer, the pastor of  the  ICF  in  which  it  is  confirmed  that  the
    appellant "is a Christian," that he had been attending church  services
    since  February  2019,  that  he  converted  to  the  Christian  faith,
    successfully completed a  course  teaching  new  converts  about  basic
    Christian doctrines and was  baptised  on  22  November  2019.   In  an
    earlier letter dated 10 June 2019, Mr Steer  also  confirmed  that  the
    witness Mr [G] had the backing of the ICF's pastors  to  represent  the
    church before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  appellant's  case.  A
    subsequent email confirms that Mr [G] remains authorised  to  represent
    the church before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Singh  had  no  criticism  to
    make of any of this correspondence. Furthermore, I could  see  no  good
    reason to reject of any of this  evidence  and  consequently,  place  a
    significant degree of weight upon it.

15. Having heard oral evidence from Mr [G], I could see no reason to reject
    his evidence. Indeed, Mr Singh raised no criticism of Mr [G]'s evidence
    and emphasised that the witness was aware of the appellant's  religious
    journey. In his most recent witness statement, Mr  [G]  confirmed  that
    the appellant was a genuine and committed convert to Christianity, that
    the appellant attended every Sunday service, completed the Alpha course
    and was baptised. He also explained that he was the appellant's  mentor
    and met him on a one to one basis weekly and  that  the  appellant  was
    fully engaged with church life and routinely volunteered his  help.  Mr
    [G] was able to credibly expand upon his witness statement during cross-
    examination and demonstrated during his oral evidence that he was aware
    of the appellant's circumstances including how he became interested  in
    Christianity in Iran. Mr [G] further expressed awareness of  the  issue
    of some Iranian  nationals  posing  as  Christian  converts  to  secure
    refugee status, explaining that the ICF assessed people by putting them
    through the Alpha course, mentoring them, monitoring  their  lifestyles
    and any changes and  talking  to  them.  He  emphasised  that  the  ICF
    Leadership Board took its time to decide if an individual was a genuine
    Christian convert. Mr [G] had not previously given evidence  on  behalf
    of any other appellant. I find Mr [G] to be a credible  expert  witness
    to the appellant's Christian conversion and attach  substantial  weight
    to his evidence.

16. In the appellant's recent bundle  are  a  quantity  of  Facebook  posts
    dating from around 27 September 2019 to shortly before the  bundle  was
    put together. There are many images  of  Jesus  Christ  accompanied  by
    comments in Farsi  which  are  interspersed  with  photographs  of  the
    appellant. Mr Singh's conceded that these posts appeared to  be  public
    and if not deleted would put the appellant at risk if  he  were  to  be
    removed to Iran. The appellant's explanation for these posts  was  that
    he aimed to spread the light of Jesus Christ and share his faith.

17. I place some weight on the Facebook evidence which does  appear  to  be
    visible, at the very least, to a long list of the appellant's  contacts
    many of whom have Iranian names.

18. The appellant further relies on an email from his brother  AD  dated  8
    November 2019 and translation in which he castigates the appellant for,
    in the words of Iranian officials who detained their father "using  the
    internet to draw the people of Iran towards Christianity." Mr Singh had
    made no submissions in relation to this item and I can see no reason to
    find it to be  unreliable.  The  email  from  the  appellant's  brother
    alludes to the authorities being  aware  of  the  appellant's  Facebook
    activity and that they stepped  up  their  pursuit  of  the  appellant,
    evidenced by the recent detention of his father. Consequently,  I  find
    that even if the appellant were to delete  his  Facebook  account,  the
    damage has already been done.

19. Mr Singh made no  criticisms  of  the  appellant's  oral  evidence.  He
    submitted that it was "clear" that the appellant had a  good  knowledge
    of churches in the vicinity of his home and not just the ICF, that  the
    appellant had been to services held in English in his area and that his
    evidence regarding his change of faith was consistent and supported  by
    his witness.

20. Mr Singh relied on the reasons for refusal letter and I have considered
    the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  carefully   in   assessing   the
    credibility of appellant. Those reasons include  that  the  appellant's
    responses in interview failed to "detail a depth of emotion that  would
    reasonable be expected of someone...questioning their religion."  There
    is no further exposition of this issue and I find, in any  event,  that
    the appellant's explanation of his faith in  his  interviews  does  not
    detract from his claim. It is also  asserted  by  the  respondent  that
    there is an inconsistency in the appellant's account regarding when  he
    was first introduced to Christianity. Having considered the appellant's
    response to this  issue  in  his  witness  statement  as  well  as  his
    interview record, I am satisfied that there is no such discrepancy. Nor
    is there any inconsistency between the appellant's account of attending
    a house church in Iran with his girlfriend who was born a Christian and
    the background evidence showing that existing members of house churches
    are cautious in introducing new people. I  have  assessed  the  replies
    given by the appellant in his interviews with the  respondent.  He  was
    able to answer questions in a  level  of  detail  consistent  with  his
    involvement with Christianity at the time as well  as  to  consistently
    explain  the  path  of  his  conversion.  There  is   nothing   overtly
    implausible about his description of his faith and I  accept  that  the
    appellant is a genuine and committed Christian convert.

21. In his recent witness statement, the appellant explains that evangelism
    is central to his faith and how he has encouraged others to attend  his
    church and opened a Facebook page to "publicise" his  faith.  I  accept
    that the appellant feels compelled to share his faith with  others  and
    that his recent actions cannot  be  dismissed  merely  as  attempts  to
    bolster his appeal. His oral evidence was consistent with  the  content
    of his statement, in that the appellant's understanding is  that  Jesus
    had urged his followers to "spread the light" and  that  the  appellant
    genuinely wished to do so just that.

22.  Considering  all  the  evidence  cumulatively,  I  conclude  that  the
    appellant fled Iran owing to a well-founded fear of  persecution  owing
    to his attendance at church. His faith has deepened since  arriving  in
    the United Kingdom approximately a year ago, in that  he  has  attended
    church weekly, completed a course, been assessed by  his  church,  been
    baptised and has begun evangelising. ICF's Leadership Board  authorised
    a member to support his appeal, which I heard is a rare  event  because
    the church takes its responsibility seriously. I have therefore  placed
    significant weight on the attendance of Mr [G].

23. The parties agreed that if the appellant's claim was  credible  (and  I
    have found that he is an evangelising apostate  whose  activities  have
    come to the attention of the Iranian authorities),  he  was  reasonably
    likely to be detained and subjected to conditions likely to breach  his
    Article 3  rights,  at  a  minimum,  if  removed  to  Iran  .  This  is
    uncontroversial and supported by all the background material before  me
    including the respondent's CPIN on Christians  and  Christian  Converts
    dated 6 March 2018 as well as the decision in SSH and HR at [23].

24. In summary, the appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

25. The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 03 March 2020


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

