
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04448/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th September 2018                        |On 25th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     a a
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Holmes, (Senior HOPO)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Short (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Coutts, promulgated on 1st June  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 8th May 2018.  In the determination, the judge  allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon  the  Respondent,  Secretary  of
    State, subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on 1st January
    1993.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 20th March 2018, refusing his application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is from Mosul in  Iraq,
    is a Sunni Muslim, of Kurdish ethnicity, who speaks Bahdini.  He claims
    that he fled Iraq in fear of Daesh because they had  taken  control  of
    Mosul in June 2014.  His father arranged for him to escape as young men
    like him were either being killed or being forced to  join  Daesh.   He
    escaped to a small town of Akreh.  This was controlled by  the  Kurdish
    Regional Government (KRG).  He remained in hiding  because  his  father
    had previously worked as a mercenary for the Zebari clan,  who  had  in
    the past collaborated with Saddam Hussain in persecuting the Kurds.  As
    a result the Zebaris had a blood feud with the Barzani clan, who govern
    the KRG and the Appellant was at risk.



The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not find the Appellant to be credible with respect to his
    claim that he was part of the Zebari tribe.  He had claimed that  there
    was a feud between the Zebari and the Barzani tribes.  This started  in
    the 1940s.  He had also claimed that he had links with the Zebari clan.
     He further stated that the leader of the Zebari  tribe  was  a  Sheikh
    Ahmed.  He further stated that Mustafa Barzani married  the  sister  of
    Sheikh Ahmed.  The judge disbelieved the Appellant with respect to  all
    these matters (see paragraphs 30 to 34).  The judge did not accept that
    the Appellant was even from the Zebari tribe, because the Appellant was
    unable to name their first leader, and when that tribe was  established
    (paragraph 36).  As a result, the judge concluded that "there would  be
    no issue for the Appellant to return to his home area of  Mosul,  which
    is now liberated from Daesh, or to internally relocate within Iraq  say
    to Erbil in the KRG, provided that that is not unduly harsh" (paragraph
    38).

 5. However, that said, the judge immediately then went on to consider that
    the issue that was now raised for the determination of the Tribunal was
    the Appellant's CSID (paragraph 39).   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant, on the lower standard, had been able to  establish  that  he
    left Mosul when Daesh arrived.  He subsequently  fled  Iraq  without  a
    CSID.  The judge went on to say that, "in  the  mayhem  and  fear  that
    Daesh's arrival would have caused to the inhabitants of that city,  the
    urgency of his departure is entirely plausible.  It is  also  supported
    by the background information" (paragraph 40).

 6. The judge went on to then say  that  the  background  information  does
    demonstrate that the CSID

         "is an essential document for life  in  Iraq  and  those  who  lack
         private resources to access  food  and  basic  services  will  have
         difficulty.  Moreover, being returned on a laissez-passer does  not
         guarantee that an  individual  will  be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID"
         (paragraph 41).

 7. Thereafter, the judge went on to make two specific findings.  These are
    that the Appellant had no family to return to in Iraq, because that was
    his evidence, and against the background evidence that  the  judge  had
    just described, it was entirely plausible for  the  Appellant  to  have
    stated that.  He had stated that he had no contact with them  since  he
    left there "and the background evidence information  shows  the  almost
    complete  devastation  that  has  befallen  Mosul.   It  is   therefore
    plausible that he does not know their whereabouts or whether  they  are
    still alive" (paragraph 42).

 8. The second finding that the judge made was  that  the  Appellant  would
    have no-one to contact to provide him with details of his CSID,

         "such as the family page and book number, to assist with  obtaining
         a  replacement.   Moreover,  without  family  support  or   private
         resources, it is reasonable to conclude that the Appellant would be
         unable  to  avoid  falling  into  destitution  upon   his   return"
         (paragraph 43).

    With this, the judge concluded that  "his  return  would  therefore  be
    unduly harsh" (paragraph 44).

 9. The appeal was allowed.



Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge's determination was  at
    every level flawed.  In grounds that are extensive and detailed, it  is
    stated  that,  given  the  judge's  own  adverse  credibility  findings
    (paragraph 37) the judge was wrong to have allowed the  appeal  "solely
    on the Appellant's ability to obtain a Civil Status ID card" (paragraph
    1.1).

11. It is stated that the judge  was  wrong  to  have  allowed  the  appeal
    because Mosul was now liberated from Daesh.  It was  also  stated  that
    the Appellant's dishonest testimony was such that, when the totality of
    the evidence was considered, especially against the background  of  the
    CPIN or case law, it was wrong to have allowed the appeal.

12. The security situation in Iraq was now much improved and indiscriminate
    violence against citizens did not meet the  threshold  requirements  of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  The judge had failed  to
    explain why the Appellant  could  not  get  a  CSID  card  against  the
    objective evidence alone given that the  Appellant's  own  account  was
    entirely unreliable and untruthful, it  was  wrong  to  have  given  it
    priority.  Finally, the judge failed to  consider  that  the  Appellant
    could reasonably attend the Iraqi Embassy in  the  UK  and  attempt  to
    obtain a CSID.

13. On 2nd July 2018 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the
    court needed to clarify the extent of  the  claims  of  no  ability  to
    obtain a CSID card.



Submissions

14. On 25th September 2018, Ms Holmes, appearing on behalf of the Secretary
    of State, began by stating that she had difficulty  in  supporting  the
    entirety of the grounds because it was possible for the judge  to  have
    found the Appellant to have been credible on some matters, but  not  on
    others.  This meant that the judge could have held, as  indeed  he  did
    hold, that the Appellant's claim that he was connected  to  the  Zebari
    clan, was unfounded.  However, the judge could then also conclude  that
    given that the Appellant came from Mosul, the  utter  devastation  that
    followed the liberation  of  that  city,  would  have  meant  that  the
    Appellant would not know what had happened to his family, such that  he
    would not be able to contact them, with a view to getting a CSID  card.



15. Ms Holmes submitted that if one looked at the CPIN  of  September  2017
    (version 5.0) this makes it quite clear that even for the Appellant  to
    go to an Iraqi Embassy in the UK would not be a straightforward matter.
     What is said in the CPIN is that,

         "A CSID can be obtained in the UK through the Iraqi  Embassy  if  a
         person has a current or expired passport and/or the book  and  page
         number for their family registration details.  Otherwise,  a  power
         of attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq to obtain a CSID for
         them" (paragraph 3.3.4).

16. In the instant case, Ms Holmes, helpfully has stated that the Appellant
    could not identify the book and page  number  for  family  registration
    details.  This is exactly what had been  found  by  the  judge  in  the
    determination (at paragraph 43).  Moreover, for a power of attorney  to
    be granted to someone in Iraq  to  obtain  a  CSID,  there  had  to  be
    identified a family  member,  or  some  other  trustworthy  individual,
    again.  The judge had  found  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  in  these
    respects.

17. For her part, Ms Short submitted that she would rely,  given  her  well
    prepared representation in this matter, upon a copy of AA (Iraq) [2017]
    EWCA  Civ  944  which  she  had  helpfully  marked  up  both  for   the
    Respondent's  representative  and  for  this  Tribunal.   She  drew  my
    attention to what was said at paragraph 39 of this important  decision.
    It is said here that,

         "The position with a CSID is different.  It is  not  merely  to  be
         considered as a document which can be  used  to  achieve  entry  to
         Iraq.  Rather, it may be an essential document for  life  in  Iraq.
         It is for practical purposes necessary for  those  without  private
         resources to access food and basic services.  Moreover, it is not a
         document that can be automatically acquired after return  to  Iraq.
         In addition, it is feasible that  an  individual  could  acquire  a
         passport or a laissez-passer, without possessing or being  able  to
         obtain a CSID.  In such a case, an enquiry would need to  establish
         whether an individual would have other means of supporting Iraq, in
         the absence of which they might be at risk of breach of  Article  3
         rights" (see paragraph 39).

         Ms Short submitted that the Appellant did not have a passport.   He
         had no other identity document.  He would not be in a  position  to
         make the first steps to acquire a CSID.  She also referred  to  the
         Annex of that decision  where  it  is  made  clear  (see  Annex  at
         paragraph 9).  That,

         "Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will be  necessary
         to decide whether P has a CSID, or will  be  able  to  obtain  one,
         reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  If he shows  there  are  no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds  are  provided
         to P by the Secretary of State or agents to assist P's return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID" (paragraph 9).

18. Second, Ms Short submitted that, given what had been said by the  Court
    of Appeal in AA (Iraq) at paragraph 39, whilst the judge had found that
    the Appellant would not have a CSID,  or  a  means  of  acquiring  one,
    because he had no family  page,  or  book  number,  to  assist  him  in
    obtaining a replacement, the judge should not have concluded that  "his
    return would therefore be unduly harsh" (paragraph 44).

19. What followed from AA (Iraq) was that the judge should  have  concluded
    that the Appellant would, because of the destitution that would  befall
    him, have qualified for  the  right  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  an
    infringement on his Article 3 ECHR rights.  However, the failure of the
    judge (at paragraph 44) to state that, and  to  instead  say  that  his
    return would be "unduly harsh", did not lead to  a  material  error  of
    law.



No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by Judge Coutts, did not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2017) such that I should set aside the decision.   There  are  two
    reasons for this.

21. First, there is consensus between both parties before me that the judge
    did not err in law.

22. Second, and in any event, it is well-established  by  the  case  of  AA
    (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, that it is possible  for  the  Tribunal  in
    fact to find the Appellant to be lacking credibility, and yet  to  find
    that he qualifies under Article 3 ECHR, simply by virtue  of  the  fact
    that it would not be possible for him to acquire a  CSID  card  in  the
    circumstances that are set out in that decision.  These  are  the  very
    circumstances that the judge very  carefully  addressed  and  pointedly
    specified at paragraphs 41 to 43  of  the  determination.   This  is  a
    careful and well-compiled determination.  There is no error of law.



Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th September 2018

