
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/04994/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th December 2017                       |  On 19th  December 2017         |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   Mr m.R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Sellwood, Counsel

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
I hereby make an anonymity direction. As a protection claim, it is
appropriate to do so.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andonian) which in a decision  promulgated
    on 8th September 2017 allowed Mr M.R.'s appeal against the decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse to grant him asylum and to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order made under Section 32(6) of the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007.

 2. For the sake of clarity, throughout this decision I shall refer to  the
    Secretary of  State  as  "the  Respondent"  and  to  Mr  M.R.  as  "the
    Appellant" reflecting their respective positions before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born 22nd August 1986.  In  a
    decision promulgated on 8th September 2017, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian allowed his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State dated 29th February  2016  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and
    refusing to revoke a deportation order  made  under  Section  32(6)  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

 4. The Secretary of State appeals  with  permission  granted  by  Resident
    Judge Phillips dated 29th September 2017.  In granting  permission,  RJ
    Phillips stated, with reference to the grounds seeking permission, that
    the FtTJ arguably erred by:

       . failing to take into account previous decisions  relating  to  past
         appeals brought by the Appellant and which  should  have  been  the
         starting point of any consideration, in accordance with Devaseelan;

       . failing to give due weight to the public interest considerations in
         deportation appeals;

       . failing to take into account  the  "unduly  harsh"  principle  when
         considering the best interests of the Appellant's children;

       .  giving  undue  weight  to  the  corroborative  evidence   of   the
         Appellant's relatives as to his sexuality;

       . failing to take into account the principles of HJ Iran [2010]  UKSC
         31.

The FtT Hearing

 5. The FtTJ noted the Appellant's history of offending  and  set  out  the
    index offence of burglary, which had prompted the deportation order  to
    be made.  He noted that the Appellant said that he could not return  to
    Bangladesh on account of his sexuality. The FtTJ said at [48] "I accept
    that the appellant is a bisexual" and accordingly allowed the appeal.

Error of Law Hearing

 6. Before me Mr Sellwood appeared on behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  Miss
    Ahmad for the Respondent.  Mr Sellwood's submissions were set out in  a
    lengthy Rule 24 response which followed  the  lines  of  the  grant  of
    permission. In summary, he said, it was difficult to see why permission
    had been granted in this appeal.  So far as the  Devaseelan  point  was
    concerned the FtTJ had referred to both previous decisions  at  several
    points in his determination.  Likewise it was clear that the  FtTJ  was
    aware of the seriousness of the index offence which  had  prompted  the
    making of the deportation order, because  the  comments  regarding  the
    Appellant's offending, made at [42], were ones that were open to him.

 7. Mr Sellwood added that essentially the Respondent's  challenge  to  the
    decision was a "reasons" one.  Any "reasons"  challenge  faces  a  high
    hurdle.  The legal duty to give reasons requires  a  brief  explanation
    only of the central issues sufficient  to  show  that  the  conclusions
    reached by the FtTJ were ones open to him.  It was his submission  that
    the FtTJ had given sufficient reasons when dealing with the evidence of
    the public interest considerations, the best interests of the  children
    and the corroborative statements of the Appellant's brother  and  aunt.
    Finally the FtTJ had referred to the  country  background  evidence  at
    [47].  The decision should be upheld.

 8. Miss Ahmad's submissions followed the  lines  of  the  grounds  seeking
    permission, and did so by reference to the grant  of  permission.   She
    emphasised  that  the  core  issue  in  this  matter  centred  on   the
    Appellant's sexuality.  The Respondent did not  accept  this  claim  at
    all; the Reasons for Refusal letter of 29th February 2017 detailed  why
    not.  It was incumbent on the FtTJ to deal  with  the  material  points
    raised by the Respondent.  This he had failed to do.  It had to be kept
    in mind that the Appellant had made no mention of his  sexuality  until
    faced with the deportation order despite having had previous  hearings.
    Further the FtTJ had not meaningfully engaged  with  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
    UKSC 31.

 9. Following the lines of the grounds, Miss Ahmad further  submitted  that
    it was not sufficient for the FtTJ to simply say that  the  Appellant's
    brother and aunt corroborated  what  he  said.  There  were  simply  no
    reasons set out to support this conclusion. The same  applied  when  it
    came to dealing with the seriousness of the index offence and the  best
    interests of the Appellant's children.

10. Following submissions I reserved my decision  which  I  now  give  with
    reasons.

Discussion

11. It appears to me that the central issue and the starting point in  this
    appeal, revolves around the Appellant's  asylum  claim.   That  is  the
    first matter that needs to be considered,  because  clear  findings  on
    whether or not the asylum claim is made out,  impacts  upon  the  other
    parts of the Appellant's claim.

12. The Appellant who is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  claims  that  he  is
    bisexual and therefore at risk  of  persecution  if  returned  to  that
    country.  The Respondent wholly disbelieves the  Appellant's  claim  to
    his sexuality.  That is the crucial issue in this appeal and it  is  on
    that issue that clear reasoned findings must be made by the FtTJ taking
    into account all the evidence before him.

13. The evidence which the FtTJ sets out relating to the Appellant's asylum
    claim is contained for the most part under a heading  "The  appellant's
    evidence."  In [21], [24], [30] and [32] the  evidence  concerning  the
    Appellant's sexuality is interwoven with other evidence concerning  the
    other factors in his appeal, namely the effect  his  deportation  would
    have on his children and their wellbeing.

14. The judge's findings are apparently set out in [44] to [46].   This  is
    under a heading "Asylum Claim".  I take this to be the judge's analysis
    of the evidence relating to the asylum claim.

15. He sets out at [44]:

         "Insofar as the appellant claimed to be a homosexual  is  concerned
         (sic) or rather  a  bisexual,  I  heard  his  evidence.   This  was
         corroborated by his brother to whom he had confided.  It  was  also
         corroborated  by  his  aunt.   I  could  not   detect   any   major
         discrepancies between the evidence of the appellant's  brother  and
         aunt and that of the appellant in relation to  their  knowledge  of
         his homosexuality or bisexuality.  They  both  confirmed  that  the
         appellant had brought shame upon his parents who did  not  want  to
         see him.  They both confirmed however that they understood him  and
         had taken a different view.  His parents do not know that they, the
         aunt and the appellant's brother see him on  a  regular  basis  and
         that he lives with his aunt."

16. I find that the foregoing paragraph is a comment upon the evidence  but
    I see no clear findings made.

17. Mr Sellwood in his submissions said that the FtTJ had given  sufficient
    reasons for accepting the evidence provided by the Appellant's  brother
    and aunt.  I disagree.  On a proper reading of the decision,  what  the
    judge records amounts to  saying  that  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    bisexual  was  accepted  by  his  brother  and  aunt  because  he  (the
    Appellant) had told them so.  They confirmed  that  the  Appellant  had
    brought shame on his parents who did not want to see him.  However,  it
    is wholly unclear from the FtT's decision as to how they came  by  this
    knowledge; that is whether the Appellant had told them so, or  if  they
    had discussed the situation with the Appellant's parents directly.   In
    the absence of clear findings, I find force therefore with Miss Ahmad's
    submission that the FtTJ made an improper evaluation of this  evidence.



18. This in turn brings me to  [45].   Part  of  the  Appellant's  evidence
    concerning his sexuality  (evidence  that  was  presumably  brought  to
    reinforce his claim) is that in the past he had sexual relations with a
    man called "Joseph" whilst  in  prison  and  a  man  called  "Mark"  in
    Cardiff, had attended a Mardi Gras gay festival, and was attacked by  a
    prisoner at Morton Hall.  I can see no findings made by the FtTJ on the
    credibility or otherwise of this evidence.  The judge simply goes on in
    [46] to set out the Appellant's  explanation  for  not  disclosing  his
    sexuality to his parents at the time of his deportation hearing in 2014
    but later telling them when they wanted to arrange a new  marriage  for
    him.  In assessing this evidence the judge concludes "there is  nothing
    incredible about that."  I find this is simply insufficient to show the
    reasoning process which led to his conclusions.  I say this keeping  in
    mind that only brief reasons need to be  given  to  render  a  decision
    sustainable.  Even brief reasons however must show an  engagement  with
    the evidence put forward.

19. It follows therefore that I find the judge has not adequately explained
    why he accepted the core of the Appellant's account.   This  is  simply
    because I find that there is  insufficient  analysis  to  show  why  he
    accepted parts of the Appellant's evidence, and no analysis at  all  on
    other parts of the evidence.

20. I find this constitutes a material error in the decision, and one which
    is capable of affecting the whole of the decision.

21. For the sake of completeness I consider  it  right  to  deal  with  the
    grounds that the FtTJ failed to give due weight to the public  interest
    and failed to take into  account  the  "unduly  harsh"  principle  when
    considering the interests of the Appellant's children.

22. The Respondent criticises the decision of the FtTJ by saying that there
    is failure on the part of the judge to deal with the seriousness of the
    Appellant's offending and the best interests of the two children.   The
    Respondent points out that the judge's reasoning in [42]  is  deficient
    on these points and I find merit in that criticism.

23. When talking of the index offence it is hard to follow the FtTJ's logic
    on why he reached the conclusion he did when, after  setting  out  what
    the offence was not rather that what it was, he says  at  [42],  "I  do
    believe therefore that there is a private life that the  appellant  has
    in this country."

24. Likewise, so far as the best interests of his children are concerned, I
    find no evidence has been put  forward  to  show  why  the  Appellant's
    deportation would  be  unduly  harsh  on  his  children.   Mr  Sellwood
    submitted that the FtTJ dealt with the best interests point at  [38-40]
    and [42].  Once more he submitted that there  were  sufficient  reasons
    given for the judge's conclusions.  I disagree.  As far as  I  can  see
    what the judge recorded simply amounted to  saying  that  the  children
    could not leave the UK as they are British citizens and live with their
    mother.  She would not allow them to travel to Bangladesh to  see  him.
    That appeared to be the sum total of the judge's findings.   I  see  no
    meaningful analysis showing why he reached his conclusion in [42]  that
    the Appellant "should be given a chance  to  develop  his  relationship
    with his children" nor why he said at [43], "neither do I think in  the
    long run it would be in the best interest of  the  children"  (for  the
    Appellant to be deported).  This is  said  keeping  in  mind  that  the
    Appellant does not at present even have contact with his children.

25. I do not find it necessary in view of my findings above to look at  the
    Devaseelan point, nor whether the principles of HJ Iran  were  properly
    considered.  Those matters can be considered at a fresh  hearing.   The
    parties agreed that in the event I decided to set  aside  the  decision
    for legal error, which I do, then it  would  be  appropriate  for  this
    appeal to be remitted to the FtT for a fresh consideration.

26. I agree with the parties that the appropriate course in this matter  is
    to remit this appeal to be reheard in the FtT. This  is  on  the  basis
    that I am setting aside the FtT's decision in its entirety.  This means
    that the extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the re-making of
    the decision is extensive and it is therefore fair to remit the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an  error  of  law.  The
decision is set aside and remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge
Andonian) for a fresh decision to be made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     18 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
