
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04755/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2018                           |On 23 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                 ramzin [f]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Selwood of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas of The Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant, Ramzin [F], is a national of Sri Lanka born on 5  August
    1980.  He has stated he arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  11  October
    2009 with leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  expiring  on  4
    November 2013.  The sponsorship licence of the college he was attending
    was revoked and on 28 May 2012, his leave was curtailed but notice  was
    not served until 2 July 2013.  In the meantime,  on  28  June  2013  he
    claimed asylum on account of perceived political opinion as a supporter
    of the LTTE and his ethnicity, he is a Muslim Tamil.  He has no  family
    in the United Kingdom.

The Respondent's Original Decision

 2.  On  23  March  2018  the  Respondent  refused  his   application   for
    international surrogate protection on all grounds and also any claim he
    might have based on his private life in the United Kingdom.

 3. On 9 April 2018 the Appellant through his solicitors who have acted for
    him  throughout  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under  s.82   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds
    are brief and entirely formulaic or generic.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. By a decision promulgated on 21 September 2018 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal R R Hopkins dismissed the appeal on  refugee  grounds  and  on
    humanitarian protection grounds and allowed it on human rights  grounds
    by reference to Article 3 of the European Convention.

 5. The Appellant sought to appeal against dismissal of his  asylum  claim.
    On 18 October 2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bird  granted
    permission because it was arguable the Judge had erred  in  failing  to
    consider the past persecution of  the  Appellant  as  an  indicator  of
    future risk and properly to assess the expert country evidence and  the
    consequences of finding that the Appellant was on the "watch list" kept
    by the Sri Lankan authorities at Colombo Airport.

 6. The Respondent did not seek to appeal the decision of Judge Hopkins and
    on 5 October 2018 granted the Appellant discretionary leave.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 7. By letters of 19 December 2018, the Appellant's solicitors informed the
    Respondent and the Upper Tribunal of the grant of  discretionary  leave
    to the Appellant.  They acknowledged that the notification was for  the
    purposes of Rule 17A of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and that it was made substantially outside the limit of 30 days of
    the date on which notice of the grant of leave had  been  sent  to  the
    Appellant.   The  grant   of   leave   is   dated   10   October   2018
    (notwithstanding the letter enclosing it being dated  5  October  2018)
    and was received by the Appellant's solicitors on 15 October 2018.

 8. Mr Selwood accepted that the relevant part of Procedure  Rule  17A  was
    PR17A(3) which provides:

         "Where an appeal would otherwise fall to be  treated  as  abandoned
         pursuant to s.104 (4A) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002, but the Appellant wishes  to  pursue  their  appeal,  the
         Appellant must send or deliver a notice ... to the  Upper  Tribunal
         and the Respondent so that it is received within  30  days  of  the
         date on which the notice of the grant of leave ... was sent to  the
         Appellant."

    PR17A(5) also provides that the Upper Tribunal must not extend the time
    limits in paragraph (3).

 9. Mr Kotas had not seen the Appellant's solicitor's letter of 19 December
    2018 until the start of the hearing.

10. Mr Selwood sought an extension of time for the giving of  notice  under
    PR17A.  He referred to the circumstances of the delay.   The  Appellant
    had psychological difficulties which had been one of the main planks on
    which the Judge had  allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  3.   He  had
    accepted that the Appellant had been tortured and  that  more  recently
    the Sri Lankan authorities had made visits to his family home  and  the
    mosque which he and  his  family  attended.   The  Appellant  had  very
    limited English and his psychological condition was such that the First-
    tier Tribunal had not been able to attach weight to any  record  of  an
    interview of the Appellant by the Respondent.

11. The United Kingdom was a Contracting State to  the  Refugee  Convention
    and the foreword to the 1992 edition  of  the  UNHCR  Handbook  on  the
    Refugee Convention provided that "The assessment as to who is a refugee
    ... is incumbent upon the Contracting  State  in  whose  territory  the
    refugee applies for recognition of refugee  status"  although  I  noted
    this wording does not appear  in  the  foreword  to  the  current  2011
    edition.  It  was  the  obligation  of  the  Tribunal  to  oversee  the
    Contracting State complied with its obligations.  The grant  of  asylum
    to the Appellant would confer upon him additional rights  to  which  he
    was entitled including especially the right not to be refouled.

12. Mr Selwood then submitted that time should be extended  to  enable  the
    Appellant to pursue his asylum claim and not to do so would be contrary
    to European Union law.  He referred to Directive 2005/85/EC.   Articles
    20.1(a) and 20.2 were applicable.  Article 20 deals with  the  case  of
    implicit withdrawal or abandonment which might be assumed  "unless  the
    applicant demonstrates within a reasonable time  that  his/her  failure
    was due to circumstances beyond his control".   Article  20.2  provides
    that an applicant "who reports again to the competent authority after a
    decision to discontinue as referred to in paragraph 1 of  this  Article
    is taken, is entitled to request that his/her case be re-opened, unless
    the request is  examined  in  accordance  with  Articles  32  and  34."
    Article 32 deals with subsequent applications and Article 34 deals with
    Procedural Rules.  Mr Selwood referred me generally to Article 34 which
    imposes an obligation on Member States to "ensure that  applicants  for
    asylum whose application is subject to a  preliminary  examination  ...
    enjoy the guarantees provided for in Article 10(1)".  He accepted  that
    in relation to the present appeal this was  relevant  only  by  way  of
    analogy.

13. He then referred me to the primary legislation of  s.104  of  the  2002
    Act.  And the judgment in R (MM (Ghana)) v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ.  827.
    Paragraph 24 deals with the application of s.104(4) and the meaning  of
    "left the United Kingdom".  In the present case there is no  suggestion
    the Appellant has left the United Kingdom.  Paragraphs 31 and  32  also
    deal with what is meant by leaving the United  Kingdom.   He  concluded
    that not to permit the Appellant to pursue his appeal  against  refusal
    of refugee status would have severe consequences for him.  Time  should
    be extended.

Submissions for the Respondent

14. Mr Kotas submitted that the consequences of  preventing  the  Appellant
    pursuing his asylum appeal were not so severe.  The Appellant had  been
    given discretionary leave but this would deny him some benefits which a
    grant of refugee status would bestow but the non-availability of  these
    was not such as to amount to severe consequences.

15. The Appellant had instructed solicitors throughout.  The provisions  of
    both s.104 and PR17A did not admit the exercise of any discretion:  the
    application could not succeed.

Response for the Appellant

16. Mr Selwood accepted that the grant of  discretionary  leave  meant  the
    Appellant was now on a path to settlement but it was the ten year route
    which was longer and more arduous than the route to  settlement  for  a
    refugee.  The Appellant's solicitors had accepted that the  failure  to
    give notice in accordance with  PR17A  was  exclusively  due  to  their
    oversight and time should be extended.

Consideration of the Issue of the Validity of the Appeal  Before  the  Upper
Tribunal

17. I accept all that Mr Selwood said about the circumstances how  it  came
    about that the Appellant failed to  comply  with  the  requirements  of
    PR17A.  Out of caution, I should add that this does  not  amount  to  a
    finding of fact in relation to the recent  visits  to  the  Appellant's
    family home and mosque in Sri Lanka.

18. The obligations imposed by the Refugee Convention on Contracting States
    and the Directive on minimum standards 2005/85/EC  in  respect  of  the
    consideration and assessment of refugee claims apply as is  made  clear
    in the wording  of  Article  34  of  the  Directive  to  a  preliminary
    examination.   The  Appellant  has  not  only  received  a  preliminary
    examination of his refugee claim but has had the  benefit  of  judicial
    oversight of the decision reached following the preliminary examination
    of his claim.  There was no suggestion that the Respondent had  in  any
    way failed to comply with obligations in this respect under the Refugee
    Convention or the Directive.

19. I find little assistance in the present appeal from the judgment  in  R
    (MM) which dealt with the abandonment of an appeal by an applicant  who
    left the United Kingdom with the intention of returning at  some  later
    point in the course of his appeal.

20. The provisions of s.104(4A) are clearly definitive.   Sub-section  (4B)
    provides that when leave is granted the appeal will not be  treated  as
    abandoned if notice is given in accordance with  the  Procedure  Rules:
    s.104 uses  the  word  "shall"  which  has  mandatory  effect  and  the
    provisions of PR17A similarly are mandatory.

21. The impact of the effect of the requirements imposed by  s.104(4B)  and
    PR17A are not onerous but  I  accept  that  the  consequences  of  non-
    compliance are draconian and unlike  in  many  civil  cases  cannot  be
    appropriately  offset  by  financial  compensation  because  the  issue
    relates to status.

22. While I have sympathy for the Appellant who has lost the right which he
    had acquired to pursue his asylum claim and for his solicitors who have
    fairly and properly acknowledged their oversight, I do  not  find  that
    the Upper Tribunal is in a position to extend time beyond the limit set
    by PR17A which would be in direct contradiction of PR17A.

Afterword

23. I am grateful to Mr Selwood for his clear and forceful presentation  of
    the case for the Appellant  and  to  Mr  Kotas  for  agreeing  to  make
    submissions on the arguable error of law in respect of which permission
    to appeal had been granted; even if in the event it has turned  out  to
    be unnecessary.

Anonymity

24. There was no request for an anonymity direction and I see no reason for
    one to be made.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    Notice has not been given within the time limit specified by  Procedure
    Rule 17A which mandates that the Tribunal shall not extend the time for
    giving notice.  Accordingly, the appeal of the Appellant is  deemed  to
    have been abandoned by reason of s.104(4A) Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended.


Signed/Official   Crest                                                 Date
11. i. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

