
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/04199/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 25th August 2017                   |         On 11th September 2017       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     F M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  by  the
    Appellant, an Albanian young lady who has now had two appeals heard  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, the first one came before Judge  Andonian  and
    that was set aside in its entirety and remitted to be  reheard  afresh.
    It then came before another judge, Judge M A Khan to  be  heard  afresh
    and he heard it at Taylor House on 3rd February this year.

 2. The Appellant's claim essentially is that she was trafficked  and  that
    she would be re-trafficked or harmed by the perpetrators if returned to
    Albania.  The judge's Decision regrettably is so flawed that I am going
    to have to set it aside again.  The determination as a whole is riddled
    with unfortunate typing errors which sometimes change the sense of  the
    sentence.  However, more important are the errors in the findings.

 3. At paragraph 41 of the Decision the  judge  sets  out  various  matters
    including, he says, that the Secretary of State had accepted  that  the
    Appellant was trafficked.  The Secretary of State did not  accept  that
    she was trafficked.

 4. At paragraph 42 the judge says that given the Appellant's evidence that
    her father was a strict Muslim and she had been brought up as such  she
    would not have fallen for a Christian. That is entirely speculative and
    cannot be sustained.

 5. At paragraph 44 the judge says that there is a discrepancy  because  in
    interview the Appellant stated that a Kosovan  girl  had  given  her  a
    British passport whereas she later said that Pali gave it to her.   She
    did not say that at all; in fact she  had  always  been  consistent  in
    saying that Pali gave it to her.

 6. At paragraph 51 the  judge  says  that  the  Appellant  stated  in  her
    evidence that her family were not strict which is the  entire  opposite
    of what she said and indeed as the judge has previously recorded.

 7. Because those errors go to the credibility findings and credibility  is
    at the heart of the appeal the decision cannot stand and  must  be  set
    aside and regrettably for a second  time  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard at Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside in its entirety and the matter remitted to the  First-
tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 8th September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
