
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04421/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 23rd November 2018               |On 13th December 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     FI
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed by the Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born  in  1990.   He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge IF Taylor) to
    dismiss his protection appeal.

    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim made under the Refugee Convention.  Having
    had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity  Orders
    I therefore consider it appropriate to make an order in  the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Background

 3. The Appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  since  2009.  His  first
    claim for asylum came and went, with  the  end  result  of  a  negative
    determination containing a swingeing rejection of his credibility as  a
    witness, and his claim  to  be  at  risk  by  virtue  of  his  father's
    association with various political actors.   The 'fresh  claim'  giving
    rise to this appeal was made in 2015. The crux of his case was  a  fear
    of return to his native Kirkuk on the grounds that there was  there  an
    internal armed conflict giving rise to a real risk that the  Appellant,
    as an ordinary civilian, would be subjected to indiscriminate  violence
    within the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

 4. Protection was refused on the 18th April  2017.  The  Respondent  noted
    that the Appellant is from Chelan, Kirkuk, and  that  Kirkuk  had  been
    deemed to be a 'contested area' by the Upper Tribunal  in  AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).  If  that  country  guidance  was
    correct, the Appellant would have made out his claim to be at  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence in  his  home  area.  The  Respondent  was  not
    however satisfied that the  country  guidance  should  continue  to  be
    applied. Reliance was placed  on  the  Home  Office  document  entitled
    "Iraq: Security and Humanitarian Situation" published  in  March  2017.
    Specifically, the Respondent cited paragraph 2.3.21  of  that  document
    which  states  that  Daesh  has  suffered,  and  continues  to  suffer,
    significant territorial losses; at 2.3.24 and  2.3.25  it  states  that
    security incidents in the areas formerly controlled by Daesh had either
    remained constant or had steadily declined. The  Respondent  considered
    that these assertions constituted "strong reasons" to  depart  from  AA
    (Iraq)  and  refused  protection.    Since  the   Appellant   had   not
    established  any  risk  to  his  person  in  his  home  governate,  the
    Respondent did not go on to  examine  whether  there  was  an  internal
    flight alternative.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal directed itself to the guidance in SG (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940:
    "decision makers and Tribunal  judges  are  required  to  take  country
    guidance determinations into account and to follow them  unless  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence are adduced and justify their  not
    doing so".   The Tribunal records that it has taken into account all of
    the evidence before it, but that it has given particular  consideration
    to the Home Office March 2017 'Country Information and Guidance'  (CIG)
    cited in the refusal letter.  The Tribunal notes:

         "the basic thesis  of  the  respondent  is  that  where  Daesh  has
         suffered and continues to  suffer  significant  territorial  losses
         then in those areas where such losses have occurred  the  situation
         has improved significantly..."

    Accepting that thesis, the Tribunal finds no risk to the  Appellant  in
    Kirkuk.  The Tribunal addresses internal flight in the alternative, but
    finds no evidence to demonstrate that it would be unreasonable.  Having
    satisfied itself that  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  access  the
    appropriate documentation to make the journey and access services,  the
    appeal is dismissed.

    The Challenge

 6. The Appellant now has permission to appeal against that decision on the
    following grounds:

          i) The CIG was not of  itself  capable  of  constituting  'cogent
             evidence' such as to justify departure from country  guidance.
             The Appellant had engaged with the refusal letter and  adduced
             country  background  material  in  direct  conflict  with  the
             Respondent's CIG but the First-tier Tribunal fails  to  engage
             with any of it;

         ii) The Tribunal does not engage with the submissions made  as  to
             how the Appellant would be able to get to Kirkuk;

        iii) The issue of internal flight, considered in  the  alternative,
             was never relied upon by the Respondent. The Appellant had not
             therefore had an opportunity, in his case preparation, to deal
             with the point.

    Error of Law

 7. The parties made their submissions on whether the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal was flawed for error of law at a hearing before me on the
    18th June 2018. Mr Holmes identified two key areas of  complaint  about
    the approach taken in the determination to Article 15(c). In his  reply
    Mr McVeety took no serious issue with either.

 8. The first is that the Tribunal  nowhere  weighed  in  the  balance  the
    opposing evidence introduced by the Appellant. The refusal  letter  had
    set out the Secretary of State stall, and the Appellant has  responded.
    Submissions  were  made  to  rebut  the  conclusions  drawn  from   the
    information reproduced in the CIG. For instance, at 2.3.21 of  the  CIG
    the  Respondent  reported  that   Daesh   have   suffered   significant
    territorial losses; the Tribunal picks up this theme at  its  paragraph
    21. Mr Holmes pointed out to the First-tier Tribunal,  and  now  points
    out to me, that when the Upper Tribunal conducted its analysis  in  AA,
    Kirkuk was not under Daesh control:  section 1.3.3  of  the  CIG  dated
    August 2014 states that Kirkuk, a contested area, was under control  of
    Kurdish Peshmerga forces at  that  time.   In  light  of  that,  it  is
    difficult to see how the fact that Daesh has lost some other  territory
    could be determinative of  the  situation  in  Kirkuk.  None  of  those
    submissions  are  considered  in  the  determination.   None   of   the
    Appellant's evidence is weighed. That is an error of law.

 9. The Appellant's second complaint follows from the  first.  In  reaching
    its finding that it had before it cogent evidence  that  would  justify
    departure from the country guidance, the  Tribunal  nowhere  supplanted
    the reasoning in AA with its own. Having found  that  Daesh  have  lost
    territory and that the rate of security incidents in formerly contested
    areas were declining (itself a selective reading  of  the  Respondent's
    evidence)  the  Tribunal  concludes  from  this  that  Article  15  (c)
    conditions no longer prevail.   Article  15(c)  was  the  crux  of  the
    Appellant's case. It required some analysis of the actual evidence. The
    determination contains no evaluation of the current  situation  in  the
    Kirkuk governate. No mention is made, for  instance,  of  the  fighting
    taking place between the peshmerga and Shi'ite forces loyal to  Tehran,
    or to the stand-off  between  the  Iraqi  central  government  and  the
    Kurdish Regional Governate over the oil rich, and long-contested, city.
    The fact that Daesh had suffered  heavy  military  defeats  was  not  a
    complete answer to whether  this  civilian  would,  by  virtue  of  his
    presence alone, be at risk there.

10. For those reasons I found, by way of my written decision dated the  6th
    July 2018, that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be
    set aside.

    The Re-Made Decision

11. At the resumed hearing Mr McVeety indicated that the Respondent did not
    have any more country background  material  to  submit.   Nor  did  the
    Respondent intend to make any further submissions inviting me to depart
    from the findings in AA (Iraq).  As Mr McVeety realistically  conceded,
    the evidence already adduced did not  demonstrate  -  for  the  reasons
    discussed at my paragraph 8 above - that there were cogent  reasons  to
    depart from the country guidance. The Respondent therefore  invited  me
    to proceed on the basis that Article 15  (c)  conditions  continued  to
    prevail in Kirkuk (or rather it could not be demonstrated that they did
    not).  Mr Holmes, unsurprisingly, had no objection to this.

12. The Respondent's  case  now  turned  on  whether  the  Appellant  could
    reasonably be expected to avail himself of internal flight within Iraq,
    or more specifically to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR). Mr  Holmes  did
    object to this. He pointed out that the issue had not  been  raised  in
    the refusal letter, and that the Respondent was effectively moving  the
    goalposts.

13. I was not prepared to exclude the issue  of  internal  flight  from  my
    consideration of this claim.  Whether a  claimant  can  avoid  harm  by
    relocating within his country of origin is  an  integral  part  of  the
    protection assessment: see Article 8 of  the  Qualification  Directive.
    The Appellant has been on notice of this matter since at least the date
    of the 'error of law' hearing in June, and has indeed prepared for  the
    resumed hearing on the basis that internal flight is a matter in issue.
     I therefore invited submissions on whether it would be  reasonable  to
    expect the Applicant to relocate to the IKR in order to avoid the  risk
    of indiscriminate violence in Kirkuk. Relevant to that enquiry  is  the
    country guidance given in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq
    CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC).

14.  The  guidance  given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AAH  is  that  the
    reasonableness of internal flight is to be assessed with the  following
    factors in mind:

         Section C of Country Guidance annexed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is  supplemented  with  the
         following guidance:

          1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances. Factors to be considered include:

             i)   Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

             ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
                  is in an area held, or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?

             iii)      Are there male family members who would be able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that they could be of assistance. A woman without
                  a  male  relative  to   assist   with   the   process   of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all.

         Section E of Country Guidance annexed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  is  replaced  with  the
         following guidance:

          2. There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
             Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom  are
             to Baghdad.

          3. For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from
             Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable  and
             practical and can be made without a real risk of  P  suffering
             persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would
             any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.

          4. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
             IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.

          5. P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  valid
             passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including
             two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport. If P
             has neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a  real  risk
             of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such  time  as  the
             security personnel are able to verify P's identity. It is  not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.

          6. Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.   There   is   no   sponsorship
             requirement for Kurds.

          7. Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
             the security screening process must be assessed on a  case-by-
             case basis. Additional factors that may increase risk include:
             (i) coming from a family with a known association  with  ISIL,
             (ii) coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii)  being
             a single male of fighting age. P  is  likely  to  be  able  to
             evidence the fact of recent arrival from the UK,  which  would
             dispel any suggestion of having  arrived  directly  from  ISIL
             territory.

          8. If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
             require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances  P
             would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the  family
             so as to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would  not  be
             unduly harsh. It is nevertheless important for decision-makers
             to determine  the  extent  of  any  assistance  likely  to  be
             provided by P's family on a case by case basis.

          9. For those without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
             accommodation options are limited:

               i) Absent special circumstances it is not  reasonably  likely
                  that P will be able to gain access to one of  the  refugee
                  camps in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
                  overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64% of  IDPs  are
                  accommodated in private settings with  the  vast  majority
                  living with family members;

              ii) If P cannot live with a family  member,  apartments  in  a
                  modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent
                  at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;

             iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living
                  in  an  unfinished  or  abandoned   structure,   makeshift
                  shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government
                  building. It  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  P  to
                  relocate to the IKR if P will live in a  critical  housing
                  shelter without access to basic necessities such as  food,
                  clean water and clothing;

              iv) In considering whether P would be  able  to  access  basic
                  necessities, account must be taken of the fact that failed
                  asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the
                  Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could  give  P  access  to
                  �1500. Consideration should also be given to whether P can
                  obtain financial support from other sources  such  as  (a)
                  employment, (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the
                  availability of ad hoc charity or by being able to  access
                  PDS rations.

         10. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
             case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:

               i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to  secure
                  legitimate employment;

              ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR  is
                  70%;

             iii) P cannot work without a CSID;

              iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors in
                  securing employment. A returnee with family connections to
                  the region will have a significant advantage  in  that  he
                  would ordinarily be able to call upon  those  contacts  to
                  make introductions to prospective employers and  to  vouch
                  for him;

               v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at
                  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;

              vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with  ISIL,
                  that may deter prospective employers.

15. Mr Holmes called the Appellant to give brief evidence to speak to those
    issues. The Appellant confirmed his identity and affirmed that he would
    tell the truth. He began his testimony by  stating  that  he  has  been
    suffering from mental health problems for approximately four years now.
    He has been prescribed anti-depressant medication by  his  GP  and  has
    been diagnosed as suffering from anxiety. He suffers from regular black-
    outs, which he began by describing as epilepsy before conceding that in
    fact no positive diagnoses of epilepsy has been made. The first time it
    happened to him was in 2015.  He was  in  the  passenger  side  of  his
    friend's car. They were having a conversation as  normal  when  he  was
    suddenly overcome with a severe headache and dizziness - he  must  have
    passed out because the next thing he can recall is hearing  his  friend
    shouting and asking him if he was OK.  He woke up  drenched  in  sweat.
    He sought medical help and it has been investigated. He has  been  told
    that it is connected to him feeling stress and anxiety. Such  blackouts
    are now a frequent occurrence - sometimes as often as once a week.   He
    also suffers  from  migraine-type  headaches  and  finds  that  he  has
    problems remembering things.

16. I was referred to a letter dated 1st October 2018 from Dr R. Belton  of
    the Hawthorn Medical Centre which states that the  Appellant  has  been
    receiving regular treatment over the past 18 months for depression  and
    symptoms of post - traumatic  stress.  He  has  been  investigated  for
    recurrent blackouts and has been diagnosed with vertigo,  migraine  and
    syncope (passing out).

17. The Appellant was asked about whether he was in possession of any Iraqi
    identity documents. He said that he was not. He explained that when  he
    arrived in this country he  had  not  been  carrying  any  passport  or
    identity document but after he had arrived he had asked his brother  to
    send him his CSID, or a copy thereof, so that he could  prove  his  age
    and identity to the Home Office. The  Appellant  was  referred  to  the
    written record of his original asylum interview, conducted on the  19th
    February 2009, when he had told the officer that he  had  received  his
    Iraqi ID document from his brother and that he  had  given  it  to  his
    (then) representative who had forwarded it to the  Home  Office.    The
    Appellant confirmed that the transcript was accurate, save that it  was
    not  actually  his  card,  but  a  copy.   He  had  given  it  to   his
    representative and as far as he was concerned, they had sent it  in  to
    the Home Office.

18. At this point Mr McVeety indicated that the Home  Office  were  not  in
    possession of any identity documents relating to the Appellant, and  as
    far as he could see from the materials in front of him, never had been.
     The Appellant was asked whether he had kept a  copy  himself.  He  was
    unsure but said that all of the documents relating to his asylum  claim
    had been taken from him in a  theft.   After  his  first  asylum  claim
    failed he had spent some time  living  in  unsecure  accommodation  and
    sometime in 2014 a bag containing all of the documents had been  stolen
    from his room. He had reported this. He relied on a printed  screenshot
    from the Respondent's records showing that on the  24th  May  2014  the
    Home Office received a telephone call from Longsight Police Station  in
    Manchester. The police informed the officer who took the call that  the
    Appellant was in attendance at the police station stating that  all  of
    his Home Office paperwork had been stolen. The log further  shows  that
    on the 27th June 2014 an organisation called  'Asylum  Support  Housing
    Advice' contacted the Home Office on the Appellant's behalf to ask that
    he be issued with a new ARC because his had been stolen.  The Appellant
    relied  on  this  printout  as  contemporaneous  corroboration  of  his
    evidence that his documents, including his copy of the CSID,  had  been
    stolen.  Asked why none of this had featured in his evidence  thus  far
    the Appellant said that he had no cause  to  mention  a  card  that  no
    longer existed, or at least was not in his possession.  He had not been
    asked, and if he had been, he would have referred the questioner to the
    Home Office record now produced.

19. There then arose some discussion between Mr McVeety and Mr Holmes about
    whether there was any prospect of obtaining a copy of the CSID from the
    files of the Appellant's 2009  representatives.   Mr  Holmes  submitted
    that there was not. The Appellant had at that time been represented  by
    the Immigration Advisory Service (IAS) who had subsequently  gone  into
    administration. Some of their clients had  managed  to  retrieve  their
    files, or request that they be forwarded to  new  representatives,  but
    the Appellant had not. At the time that the IAS closed down in 2012  he
    was no longer in contact with them,  his  original  claim  having  been
    refused  and  his  case  closed.  He  was  therefore  unaware  of   the
    difficulties at the IAS or  the  importance  of  retrieving  his  file.
    Unfortunately the opportunity to do so has now passed,  since  all  the
    remaining materials held by the administrators were destroyed following
    an order by Chief Bankruptcy Registrar Stephen Baister made on the 27th
    February 2012.

20. The Appellant stated that he has never worked. He was 16 when  he  left
    Iraq and so has no experience of working in that country. He last spoke
    to his family there in 2014 and has  not  been  able  to  contact  them
    since. He confirmed that he has not contacted  the  Red  Cross  or  any
    similar organisation because he did not think that they would have  any
    chance of helping him.

21. As well as the Appellant's current evidence I was also  asked  to  have
    regard to his earlier written statements, interviews and by Mr McVeety,
    the fact that the First-tier Tribunal in 2009 had found  the  Appellant
    to be a wholly incredible  witness.  Mr  McVeety  also  questioned  the
    Appellant's claims to have 'lost' the copy of  his  CSID,  noting  that
    since that event allegedly occurred in  2014  the  Appellant  has  made
    witness statement in which he makes no mention of it.

22. My findings are as follows.

23. The Appellant will be returned to Iraq using a laissez-passer  obtained
    by the Home Office  from  the  Iraqi  Embassy  in  London.  Although  I
    understand  that  direct  flights  to  Erbil  have  resumed  since  the
    publication of AAH (Iraq), it is likely that  the  Appellant  would  be
    removed to Baghdad: he is not from the IKR so it unlikely that he would
    be 'pre-cleared' for landing there.

24. Upon his arrival in Baghdad  his  ability  to  prove  his  identity  by
    production of a CSID assumes great  significance.  Without  a  CSID  he
    cannot board an internal flight to Erbil. He would  have  to  make  the
    journey to the IKR by land. In order to do so  he  would  need  to  get
    through numerous checkpoints; he could routinely expect to  be  stopped
    and required to show his CSID at each.  The accepted  evidence  in  AAH
    was that a failure to provide a CSID, or to produce a male relative  to
    vouch for you - who is himself documented - will result  in  detention.
    The first question I must therefore answer is whether the Appellant  is
    in possession of his CSID or alternatively, the means to get one.

25. On the 20th January 2009 the Appellant told an immigration officer that
    his identity  card  was  with  his  brother  in  Iraq  [10.2  screening
    interview].   On the 19th February 2009  he  told  another  immigration
    officer that his brother had posted him  that  card  and  that  he  had
    handed it over to his  representatives  [Q1-6  asylum  interview].  The
    parties before me were in  agreement  that  the  Appellant  was  likely
    telling the truth to those officers, for the simple reason  that  there
    was no incentive for him to lie. Even back in  2009  there  would  have
    been an obvious advantage to any cynical claimant asserting that he was
    undocumented: even if the significance of the CSID  had  not  yet  been
    recognised by  the  Tribunal[1]  it  was  apparent  that  any  identity
    document assisted the Home Office in effecting removal.

26. What then happened to that card?  I find that it was never received  by
    the Home Office: there is no reference to it in the refusal letter  and
    it would appear that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  proceeded,  in  the
    Appellant's appeal in 2009, on the basis that he was not in  possession
    of a CSID or any other identification document.  As  to  why  it  never
    found its way to the Home Office,  three  possibilities  arise.  First,
    that it was sent and it was lost in the  post.  That  is  statistically
    unlikely, but always possible. Second, that  IAS  made  a  mistake  and
    failed to do what they had assured the  Appellant  they  would.  Again,
    that is a possibility but in my view not a likely one: as Mr Holmes and
    Mr McVeety agreed, the IAS were generally a competent organisation  who
    conscientiously represented the interests of their clients. It would be
    unusual for an IAS caseworker to have so markedly failed in his or  her
    responsibilities. The third possibility is this. That having made their
    own assessment of the CSID card the IAS decided that it should  not  be
    submitted to the Home Office because it  did  not  aid  their  client's
    case.   The Appellant was at that time in  an  age  dispute  with  Kent
    Social Services (and so the Home Office). He stated that he was  16  on
    arrival, whereas Kent believed him to be over 18.   The  Appellant  may
    well have been of the view that a document showing  him  to  have  been
    born in 1992 (his claimed year of birth) would have assisted  him,  and
    so the card was produced. It is a possibility that having assessed  the
    card themselves, the IAS were not satisfied that it was  a  genuine  or
    reliable document,  and  declined  to  rely  upon  it.  That  would  be
    consistent with Kent County Council's Merton compliant  age  assessment
    that the Appellant was not a minor was claimed; it would  also  explain
    why, by the date of the Appellant's appeal in April 2009, the  IAS  had
    withdrawn their representation.

27. Whatever the truth of the matter, the fact is that the Home Office does
    not now have that card, and that the last time that the  Appellant  can
    be said with certainty to have possessed it was February 2009  when  he
    attended his asylum interview.  Ordinarily one might expect a  copy  to
    be obtainable from the  former  representatives'  files,  but  for  the
    reasons explained by Mr Holmes (see paragraph 19 above) the  IAS  files
    have all now been destroyed.  That leaves the Appellant himself.  It is
    his case that his copy of the document was  stolen  sometime  in  early
    2014. Mr McVeety points out that this is all very convenient, that  the
    Appellant has previously been found willing to lie, and that he has not
    mentioned this theft in any earlier witness statements. Those  are  all
    good points. Against them is the document indicating that  between  the
    15th May and the 27th June 2014 the Respondent was informed,  first  by
    an officer at Longsight Police Station and then by a support worker  at
    'Asylum Support Housing Advice', that the Appellant had been victim  to
    a theft, and that all of the  documents  relevant  to  his  immigration
    status had been stolen.  I accept Mr  Holmes'  submission  that  it  is
    likely that in those years the Appellant was, as a failed asylum seeker
    with no right to work and  no  access  to  state  benefits,  living  in
    insecure accommodation where his possessions could have been  lost,  or
    were  vulnerable  to  crime.   In   light   of   this   contemporaneous
    corroboration of the claimed theft I am prepared to accept that if  the
    Appellant himself did ever have a copy of the missing  CSID,  it  would
    have been in the bag with the other documents that were taken  sometime
    in or around early May 2014.  I therefore conclude that  on  the  lower
    standard of proof, the Appellant has established  that  he  is  not  in
    possession of a CSID, either in copy or original form.

28. My next consideration must therefore be whether it is reasonably likely
    that the Appellant would be able to obtain a  CSID  either  before,  or
    after, he returns to Iraq.

29. I am not satisfied that there would be any realistic  prospect  of  the
    Appellant obtaining a CSID before he leaves the United Kingdom. In  AAH
    the unchallenged evidence of country expert Dr Fatah is  summarised  at
    paragraph 26:

         "If applying  through  a  consulate  abroad  the  requirements  are
         different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and checked on
         the website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden, Dr  Fatah  states  that
         the  authorities  will  require  the  applicant  to  first  make  a
         statement explaining why he needs a CSID and  attach  this  to  his
         application form, which must  countersigned  by  the  head  of  the
         applicant's family and stamped by the consulate or embassy; he must
         then produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the  country
         where he is applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq,
         an additional form completed by the head of the applicant's  family
         verifying that the contents of his application form were true, four
         colour copies of his INC, and 10 colour photographs. Crucially  the
         applicant must be able to produce something which can establish the
         location of his family's details in the civil register. This should
         be a CSID, an INC or  birth  certificate.  If  none  of  these  are
         available to the applicant he must supply the identity documents of
         his parents. This evidence again  accords  with  that  of  Landinfo
         (December 2017) who conclude that it can  be  difficult  to  obtain
         replacement ID documents from an embassy abroad for the  individual
         who is unable to verify his or her identity."

    At paragraph 105 Dr  Fatah  further  describes  the  embassy  staff  as
    'unhelpful'. In a case such as this, where the applicant has little  to
    go on and is unable (or unwilling) to provide  the  relevant  documents
    and details, the prospects of success are negligible.

30. As to whether the Appellant would be able to obtain a CSID once back in
    Iraq, the parties before me agreed that this would turn on  whether  he
    is in fact in contact with his family, in particular his brother.

31. I turn to the detail of the Appellant's evidence on this matter  below,
    but I preface my assessment by a general  finding  on  the  Appellant's
    credibility. I do so because I accept Mr McVeety's submission  that  it
    is important to assess the Appellant's evidence in the round.  In  2009
    the First-tier Tribunal  rejected  virtually  all  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence, accepting little more than his name, nationality  and  ethnic
    origins.  He was found to be willing to lie in order to gain status  in
    this country and I am satisfied that this remains the case today.    In
    evidence the Appellant told me  that  he  had  never  worked  in  Iraq,
    because he was a child when he left. Both of those things are  patently
    untrue. The Appellant's date of birth has long ago been  determined  to
    be 1990 rather than 1992; in dismissing the appeal in 2009  the  First-
    tier Tribunal found him to be "substantially older than  18".   In  his
    screening interview [at 2.11] when asked about his normal occupation he
    said that whilst he was in Kirkuk he was "selling and buying stuff like
    cloths etc".  If the Appellant's claim to have never attended school is
    true, it would appear to be manifestly unlikely that as a young man  he
    wouldn't have been expected to work and  bring  some  income  into  the
    household.  I am satisfied that he did not tell me the truth about  his
    lack of previous work experience.

32. I now turn to the evidence about family contact.

33. In his original screening interview the Appellant said that his  family
    in Iraq consisted of his brother (born in 1975), and three sisters aged
    between 25 and 18, all of whom were married.  He had  stayed  with  his
    elder sister in her marital home for a number of years before  he  left
    Iraq. She lived in a village outside of Kirkuk called Hawija.   In  his
    asylum interview he confirmed that he had  been  in  contact  with  his
    brother. At Q151 he explained that he had managed to speak  to  him  on
    one occasion; he had called the 'telephone office' in Kirkuk, and  they
    had called his brother to come to the telephone.  I  assume  that  this
    was the call in January 2009 when the Appellant asked  his  brother  to
    post him the CSID.

34. In May 2017 the Appellant gave  a  witness  statement  in  the  present
    proceedings. He states therein that he had not managed to speak to  any
    member of his family since 2014. Earlier that year he had spoken to his
    brother, his elder sister and her husband.  They had all been in Hawija
    at that time.  Although he had tried their  numbers  many,  many  times
    since he had not been able to establish a connection.  He  expressed  a
    fear about what would have happened to them,  since  Hawija  had  since
    fallen under ISIS control. He states that they all had his  number  yet
    he had heard nothing from them for over three years.   The  Appellant's
    most recent statement is dated 10th September 2018. He  reiterates  his
    evidence that he has not had any contact with his family since 2014. He
    has tried to use the numbers he had but none work. He has  asked  Kurds
    in Manchester who are from the same area as him  and  they  have  asked
    their contacts in  Kirkuk  if  anyone  has  heard  anything  about  the
    Appellant's brother and sisters but he has had no  results  from  these
    enquiries. No-one has heard of them.

35. Mr Holmes asked me to evaluate this evidence in light  of  the  country
    background material.  In AA (Article 15(c)) CG [2015] UKUT 00544  (IAC)
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department accepted that Kirkuk and
    its environs were 'contested' to the  extent  that  Article  15(c)  was
    engaged. That concession, and the conclusions in that case, was largely
    based on evidence covering the year leading to the hearing date in  May
    2015.   Mr Holmes relies on this to demonstrate that it  is  reasonably
    likely that the Appellant's family may have fled their  home,  or  have
    been injured or even killed, sometime in or around spring 2014.  I note
    the Appellant's evidence that  his  sister's  home  village  of  Hawija
    (where he himself was living immediately prior to  leaving  Iraq)  came
    under ISIS control during that period. This evidence was not challenged
    by Mr McVeety but for the  sake  of  completeness  I  record  that  the
    village was taken by ISIS in early June 2014[2].  By the date  that  AA
    was published (April 2015) the governate had been  retaken  by  Kurdish
    peshmerga, but as the evidence  in  AAH  demonstrates,  conditions  for
    Kurdish families in and around Kirkuk remain precarious. The Government
    of Iraq re-took Kirkuk from Kurdish forces in October  2017  and  there
    were reports of government troops, aided by Shi'ite militias such as al-
    Hashd al-Shaabi and the PMF attacking Kurdish - Sunni -  homes  with  a
    view to driving out the population of non-Arab, non-Shi'a, Iraqis. News
    reports cited in AAH indicated that as many as 100,000 Kurds  fled  the
    area in October 2017 alone.

36. I have considered the evidence in the round, and have done  so  bearing
    in mind that it is to the Appellant's advantage  to  deny  any  contact
    with his brother. The Appellant has been found to be  someone  prepared
    to lie, and that he has done so before me.   I have noted Mr  McVeety's
    point that the Appellant has made no effort to contact  his  family  by
    means of approaching the Red Cross or Red  Crescent.   Against  this  I
    must  weigh  the  following.  First,  the  Appellant's  admission,  and
    consistent evidence, that he was able  to  maintain  contact  with  his
    brother for five years between 2009 and 2014 - a period when  it  would
    similarly have been to his advantage to deny any contact.  Second,  the
    fact that his evidence has consistently been that contact ceased in the
    early part of 2014. This chronology coincides with his sister's village
    being seized by ISIS and conditions on the ground becoming so dangerous
    for ordinary civilians that the Secretary of State  recognised  Article
    15(c) to be engaged. Third, that conditions  in  the  Kirkuk  governate
    have remained difficult and uncertain even after the  defeat  of  ISIS,
    with huge numbers of Kurdish families  being  displaced.  Applying  the
    lower standard of proof I am satisfied  that  it  would  be  reasonably
    likely that families such as this  one  would  lose  contact  with  one
    another. I note the Appellant's evidence that he did not  approach  the
    Red Cross or similar because he did not see  how  they  could  possibly
    help, deciding instead to make efforts through the community. Whilst  I
    am unable to make any finding about what might  have  happened  to  the
    Appellant's brother and sisters, I am satisfied that the Appellant  has
    lost contact with his family as he claims.

37. I return to the circumstances of the  Appellant's  notional  return  to
    Baghdad. He has no CSID and no family to contact. He has no-one to whom
    he could turn in the city itself. He  may  be  able  to  talk  his  way
    through the checkpoints on the  airport  perimeter  by  producing  Home
    Office documents and his ticket, and explaining that he has  just  been
    returned. He would, if he so applied, be in possession of up  to  �1500
    with which he could pay for a taxi, and presumably use for bribes.   He
    would however have to cross many, many such checkpoints all the way  to
    Erbil, a  distance  of  some  400km.    The  default  position  of  the
    troops/police/militia manning such checkpoints would  be  to  detain  a
    traveller not in  possession  of  a  CSID  until  such  time  that  the
    individual could satisfy them of his identity, either by the production
    of the CSID or other identity document such as a passport,  or  by  the
    attendance of a documented male relative who would be able to vouch for
    the individual concerned.  In AAH Dr Fatah assured  the  Tribunal  that
    the conditions faced by such detainees were "nothing scary" but it is a
    fact that the undocumented traveller with no one to call is in  a  very
    difficult position, since he has no means of securing his release. Even
    if, for instance, one commander took a bribe to release him,  he  would
    face the whole ordeal again at the  next  checkpoint.  In  AAH  it  was
    accepted that this was not a safe, or reasonable, means of accessing an
    internal flight alternative: see paragraph 5 of  the  headnote.    Such
    repeated, and likely prolonged, detentions would particularly difficult
    for an individual such as the Appellant, who  has  been  diagnosed  and
    treated for stress and anxiety related conditions.

38. In the event that the Secretary of  State  manages  to  arrange  direct
    removals to Erbil in the future, I make findings in the alternative  on
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to live in Erbil  or
    elsewhere in the IKR. Having regard to the relevant factors  identified
    in  AAH  I  find  as  follows.   The  Appellant  is  likely  to  remain
    undocumented.  He has no family or connections in the IKR  to  whom  he
    could turn for support or references.  He is not going to  be  able  to
    access a refugee/IDP camp in the region because they are all  full  and
    already overcrowded.    He will  not  be  able  to  rent  an  apartment
    without a CSID.  It is very likely therefore that  the  Appellant  will
    have to resort to living in a 'critical shelter arrangement'. This  may
    involve squatting in an unfinished or abandoned building,  constructing
    his own shelter (ie cardboard/corrugated iron/tarpaulin), staying in  a
    mosque or church or taking shelter in one of the  government  buildings
    requisitioned for the purpose of housing  IDPs.   Whether  such  living
    arrangements would fall to the level of 'undue harshness'  will  depend
    on  whether  the  Appellant  is  able  to  provide  for  himself  basic
    necessities such as clothing and regular food, and whether he  is  able
    to access clean water. His ability to do so will depend on  whether  he
    is able to secure a regular income.  As far as I have been  made  aware
    the Appellant has no one in this country or elsewhere who would be able
    to support him by way of remittances.  Without a CSID he would  not  be
    able to obtain employment.  He has no family to whom he  can  turn.  In
    those circumstances his circumstances are  likely  to  be  destitution.
    This would be unduly harsh, and  it  follows  that  I  must  allow  the
    appeal.

    Decisions

39. The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

40. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           6th December 2018

                                                     -----------------------
[1] The earliest reference I can find to the CSID and its importance is MK
(documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00126 (IAC), published in
April 2012

[2] https://middleeastmonitor.com/20140611-isis-takes-control-of-kirkuk

