
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04663/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Justice/Field House                   |                                      |
|On 12 January 2017 and 6 July 2017    |On 10 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     RY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel (12 January 2017)
     Ms J Norman, Counsel (6 July 2017)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer (12
January 2017)
     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer (6 July 2017)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge N M K Lawrence) dismissing his appeal against  the
    respondent's decision of 25 April 2016  refusing  his  application  for
    asylum.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born on [ ] 1980.   He  was  born
    in Crimea and is Russian by ethnicity.  He  claimed  that  he  did  not
    support either the Ukrainians or the  Russians  but  being  of  Russian
    ethnicity, he would be persecuted in Ukraine.  He also claimed that  he
    would be forced to enlist in the military and if he refused,  he  would
    be imprisoned and the conditions  would  be  in  breach  of  his  human
    rights.  He believed in the Keylontic Science religion and feared  that
    he  may  be  institutionalised  because  of  practising  his  religion.
    Finally, he relied on article 8 as he was  in  a  relationship  with  a
    national of Belarus who had lived in the UK for nine years.

3.   The appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  on  3  November  2000  with  entry
    clearance as a student until 3 May 2001.  His  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student was extended on a number of occasions until 30  November  2009.
    On 26 November 2009 he made an application for further leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 student but this was refused  and  an  appeal  subsequently
    dismissed.  He then applied for leave to remain outside the Rules which
    was refused on 7 November 2013.  He made an  application  for  judicial
    review in January 2014 which was refused in October 2014 and then on 15
    October 2014 he claimed asylum, his application  being  refused  on  15
    April 2015 and the decision certified.

4.   Further  judicial  review  proceedings  were  then  issued  and  on  17
    September 2015 they were settled by  consent  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent would reconsider the asylum decision and grant an in-country
    right of  appeal  if  adverse.   The  decision  to  refuse  asylum  was
    confirmed on 25 April 2016 for the reasons  set  out  in  the  detailed
    reasons for refusal at Annex A of the decision letter.  The  respondent
    accepted the appellant's identity and nationality but was not satisfied
    that Russians from Crimea would face discrimination in other  parts  of
    Ukraine. His claim to  be  a  follower  of  Keylontic  Science  with  a
    consequential risk of discrimination in Ukraine was not accepted.   The
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution or treatment  contrary  to  article  3  from  the  risk  of
    conscription into the Ukrainian armed forces.  The  appellant  was  not
    able to meet the requirements of article 8 within the Rules  and  there
    were no exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of  leave  outside
    the Rules.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  claimed
    that the Ukrainian  Embassy  in  London  had  refused  to  confirm  his
    Ukrainian  nationality  but  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was stateless.  When he had first applied for a visa to enter
    the UK, he had provided  his  Ukrainian  passport  and  that  had  been
    verified.  The letters he had  submitted  from  the  Ukrainian  Embassy
    simply indicated that it could not confirm whether he was or was not  a
    citizen without the original valid passport.

6.   The appellant had argued that as he  looked  Russian,  in  the  current
    climate following the annexation of Crimea by the  Russian  Federation,
    he might face persecution on the grounds of his Russian ethnicity.  The
    judge commented that there was no expert  report  to  substantiate  the
    claim that  the  appellant  looked  Russian  and,  in  any  event,  the
    background  information  demonstrated  that,  rather  than  persecuting
    Ukrainians of Russian ethnicity, the Ukrainian government  had  put  in
    place measures to invite those who wished to leave Crimea and  live  in
    Ukraine.  The respondent's Country Information Guidance  (CIG)  January
    2016 accepted that people displaced from Crimea  to  Ukraine  may  face
    difficulties but not insurmountable ones.

7.   The appellant had claimed that, should he  be  returned,  he  would  be
    conscripted into the military.  He  did  not  wish  to  be  so  and  in
    consequence he would be imprisoned.  On the evidence  produced  at  the
    hearing, the judge found that the punishment imposed for draft  evasion
    had not been imprisonment, although it was an option available  to  the
    courts.  The norm appeared to be probation or fines.  He found that the
    appellant had to  show  not  only  that  imprisonment  for  evasion  of
    military service was provided for by statute but  also  that  the  risk
    that he would be imprisoned was real and  not  just  theoretical.   The
    judge found that he had not discharged this onus.  He had been referred
    to AC (Ukraine) [2105] NZIPT 800749-52, a decision of 25 June  2015  of
    the  New  Zealand  Immigration   and   Protection   Tribunal   and   to
    PA/02186/2015, a decision of the First-tier Tribunal issued on 15 April
    2016 where both Tribunals  had  found  that  in  the  current  military
    conflict the applicant in each appeal would be at risk  but  the  judge
    said that there was no current military conflict facing  the  appellant
    and those decisions were not applicable to the instant appeal.

8.   The judge considered  the  appellant's  evidence  about  the  Keylontic
    Science religion but commented that he was  entirely  vague  about  the
    religion, was unable to articulate its teachings or structured practice
    and, in any event, there was  no  cogent  evidence  that  he  would  be
    persecuted in Ukraine for practising it.  So far  as  his  relationship
    with his partner from Belarus was concerned,  she  was  not  a  settled
    person in the UK.  There had been no investigation as to  whether  they
    could continue their relationship in Belarus or in Ukraine.   He  noted
    that the appellant's partner needed a  sign  language  interpreter  but
    said that that did not by itself  amount  to  compelling  circumstances
    that required a consideration of the application outside the Rules.  He
    accepted that the appellant must have established some form of  private
    life in the UK since 2000 but there was no evidence that  he  satisfied
    any part of para 276ADE(1) of the Rules and he was not  satisfied  that
    he had  demonstrated  on  balance  that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to him integrating in Ukraine.  For these reasons the  appeal
    was dismissed.




The Grounds and Submissions

9.   The grounds raise five  issues  which  can  briefly  be  summarised  as
    follows.  The first ground argues that  the  judge  failed  to  make  a
    number of relevant findings and in particular whether the appellant was
    eligible for conscription, could be required to engage in acts contrary
    to international law, would be imprisoned for draft evasion and, if so,
    whether this would contravene article 3.   The  judge  had  found  that
    there was no current military  conflict  in  Ukraine  but  this  was  a
    finding which was not open to him on the evidence.  He  had  failed  to
    consider whether the appellant would be at real risk of being  required
    to  engage  in  conduct  contrary   to   international   standards   if
    conscripted.  The second ground argues that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    approach to  article  3  wrongly  relying  on  PS  (prison  conditions;
    military service) Ukraine CG [2006] UKIAT 00016 and the CIG 2014 on the
    risk of imprisonment for draft offenders.  It  was  submitted  that  PS
    (Ukraine) was no longer authoritative on penalties  for  draft  evasion
    and that the CIG 2014 was out of date.  It had been argued on behalf of
    the appellant that there was a real  risk  of  imprisonment  for  draft
    evasion or even for simply encouraging it but the judge had not engaged
    with this submission.

10.  The third ground argues that the judge adopted  an  erroneous  approach
    to the standard of proof failing to apply the lower standard as set out
    in Sivakumaran [1988] 1 AC 958.  There was evidence that the  Ukrainian
    military had  been  implicated  in  acts  that  violated  international
    humanitarian law and might amount to war crimes and this was sufficient
    for there to be a real risk  that  the  appellant  might  find  himself
    required to be involved in such acts.  The fourth  ground  argues  that
    the judge erred in rejecting the New Zealand decision in  AC  (Ukraine)
    and the decision in  PA/02186/2015  and  that  both  cases  dealt  with
    exactly the issues advanced in the present appeal, the position  facing
    a Ukrainian national of Russian ethnicity who  would  be  eligible  for
    conscription on return.  Finally, the  fifth  ground  argues  that  the
    judge failed to consider the article 8 appeal fully.  It had  not  been
    argued that the need of the appellant's partner  for  a  sign  language
    interpreter amounted to compelling circumstances but  that  she  was  a
    person from Belarus with a disability who could not realistically  live
    in Ukraine.  It was argued that disability rights in both  Belarus  and
    Ukraine lagged far behind the UK.  The judge had  therefore  failed  to
    make relevant findings in relation to article 8.

11.  In her submissions Ms Fisher adopted  the  grounds.   She  argued  that
    there had been a lack of necessary findings on the  issue  relating  to
    military service including whether the appellant would  be  subject  to
    conscription.  The judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  there  was  no
    military conflict in Ukraine.  He had failed to take proper account  of
    the persuasive decision from  New  Zealand.   She  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal might well have concluded that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    eligible for conscription but that issue had not been dealt with.   The
    issue of whether he would be at risk of imprisonment had  been  glossed
    over.  Further, the judge had failed to make findings about  article  3
    and whether, if the appellant was at risk of imprisonment,  that  would
    lead to a breach of that article.  She also submitted that the  judge's
    approach to  the  letter  from  the  Ukrainian  Embassy  reflected  the
    inadequate approach he had taken to the issues he had to resolve.

12.  She submitted that, similarly, when considering  article  8  the  judge
    had failed to take all relevant matters into account  or  to  make  the
    findings necessary to carry out  a  full  article  8  assessment.   She
    referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Kamara  v  Secretary
    of State [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and in  particular  the  consideration  at
    [14] of the concept of being integrated into the  country  of  proposed
    return.  The judge had made no findings of fact on  that  issue  or  on
    other issues relevant to article  8  and  the  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
    analysis had not been carried out.

13.  Mr Duffy submitted that the judge had dealt with the issue of  risk  to
    the appellant at [15] - [16] and had been  entitled  to  find  that  he
    would not be at real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  on  return.
    There had been no adequate evidence to suggest  that  the  conflict  in
    Ukraine would lead to a risk of a breach of article 3 or article  15(c)
    so far as the appellant was concerned.  He accepted that article 8  had
    not been dealt with in a detailed way but the burden of  proof  was  on
    the appellant.  No evidence had been produced that he and  his  partner
    could not live in either of their home countries.  It was not  for  the
    Tribunal, so he argued, to search about for reasons when  a  claim  was
    not supported by adequate evidence.

Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in Law

14.  In ground 1 it is  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  relevant
    findings on the issue of whether the appellant would be conscripted and
    what the penalties would be in the event  of  draft  evasion.   In  the
    decision letter the respondent  relied  on  the  CIG  Ukraine  Military
    Service November 2015 which stated that the decree reinstating military
    prescription was for males between the ages of 18 and 25 and  therefore
    it was considered that the appellant was over the age of  conscription.
    However, the judge took into  account  the  CIG  September  2016  which
    showed that conscription was reintroduced in 2014  and  was  compulsory
    for those aged 18 to 60 and to 65 for officers  and  was  for  eighteen
    months [15].  The judge therefore accepted that the appellant would  be
    liable for conscription and the grounds are wrong when they assert that
    the judge made no finding on this issue.

15.  The judge went on to  consider  whether  the  appellant's  rights  were
    likely to be violated should he seek to  evade  military  service.   He
    noted that by statute draft evasion  was  punishable  by  up  to  three
    years' imprisonment but that in practice the  courts  issued  fines  or
    suspended sentences in most cases.  He found that  on  the  information
    provided it appeared that punishment for draft  evasion  had  not  been
    imprisonment although it was an option available to the courts and that
    the norm appeared to be probation or fines.  He also noted that  in  PS
    (Ukraine) at [139] the UKAIT had found that whilst there was  a  remote
    risk of punishment of imprisonment for draft evasion, it was not a real
    risk.

16.  However, the judge assessed  risk  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
    current military conflict in Ukraine  and  that  for  this  reason  the
    appellant's situation could be distinguished from the position  of  the
    applicants in AC (Ukraine) and PA/02186/2015 but this  failed  to  take
    into account the background evidence about the ongoing conflict between
    the Ukranian authorities and the separatist movement in the Donetsk and
    Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine set out in the  background  evidence
    in the appellant's documents produced at the hearing  (see  by  way  of
    example the reports at 138 - 175).  There was also evidence before  the
    Tribunal capable of supporting the argument  that  both  sides  in  the
    conflict  were  resorting  to  activities  contrary  to   international
    humanitarian standards (see the reports at 181 - 189 of the bundle) but
    the judge failed to make any findings on whether there was a real  risk
    that the appellant,  if  conscripted,  would  be  required  to  act  in
    contravention of such standards.

17.  Ground 2 argues that the judge erred in his approach to  article  3  in
    the context of a real risk of imprisonment, that PS  (Ukraine)  was  no
    longer authoritative on the penalties for draft evasion as it  predated
    the current conflict and that the CIG relying on 2014  information  was
    out of date.  Although the judge took into account the  later  CIG,  he
    failed to make findings on the background evidence adduced on behalf of
    the appellant that the situation had changed for the worse.   Ground  3
    argues that the judge adopted an erroneous approach to the standard  of
    proof but this ground adds nothing to the other grounds.

18.  In ground 4 it is argued that the judge  failed  to  consider  relevant
    supporting evidence, wrongly rejecting both the New Zealand decision in
    AC (Ukraine) and PA/02186/2015.  I am satisfied  that  this  ground  is
    made out. The findings and conclusions in AC (Ukraine)  were  carefully
    reasoned and, although each appeal will generally  depend  on  its  own
    individual facts, the judge failed to give sustainable reasons for  not
    regarding this decision as relevant to the appellant's circumstances.

19.  Ground 5 argues  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  article  8  in
    accordance with the law. It is submitted  that  he  failed  to  make  a
    finding as to whether there was family life or whether  article  8  was
    engaged; he conflated the engagement of the Rules with  the  engagement
    of article 8 outside the Rules; he failed  to  deal  with  any  of  the
    appellant's or  his  partner's  evidence  about  disability  rights  in
    Belarus or Ukraine, any of their evidence about their mutual dependency
    in the light of her disability or with the evidence about  whether  his
    partner could reasonably live alone in Ukraine  without  support  as  a
    disabled person while he was doing military service if  conscripted  or
    went through a possible criminal prosecution if he refused.

20.  It was not argued that the appellant could  bring  himself  within  the
    Rules so far as family life is concerned. The judge's comment that  the
    fact that the appellant's partner needed a  sign  language  interpreter
    did not mean that that fact alone amounted to compelling  circumstances
    appears to be a response to the request for such an interpreter in  the
    letter dated 30 September 2016 from  the  appellant's  solicitor.   The
    judge's comment is right so far as it goes but as the grounds argue, he
    did need to deal more fully with the issues arising under article 8 set
    out in ground 5 and, in particular, there has been no consideration  of
    the evidence from the appellant's partner in her witness  statement  or
    of the issues addressed by the respondent in paras 181  -  189  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter.

21.  In summary, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
    assessment of both the protection and the  human  rights  appeals  such
    that the decision should be set aside.  My preliminary  view  was  that
    the appeal should be retained in the  Upper  Tribunal  rather  than  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-made  but
    before making a decision on that I gave the parties an  opportunity  of
    making submissions on how the appeal should proceed  and  what  further
    directions should be made.

22.  Further submissions were made in writing  by  the  appellant  that  the
    appeal should be relisted as a country guidance case on  the  issue  of
    draft evasion and prison conditions in Ukraine but in the light of  the
    fact that there has been a recent country guidance  decision  on  these
    issues, VB and Another (draft evaders and prison conditions) Ukraine CG
    [2017] UKUT 00079, this appeal was not considered suitable for  listing
    for country guidance.  Both  parties  were  given  permission  to  file
    further documentary evidence in so far as it related to draft  evasion,
    prison conditions and article 8 not already  covered  in  the  evidence
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant  has  submitted   a
    consolidated bundle of documents ("CB") indexed and paginated 1  -  406
    and a further skeleton argument dated 24 May 2017.  The respondent  has
    filed the Country Policy and Information  notes  for  Ukraine  on  both
    military service and prison conditions dated  April  2017  and  further
    written submissions dated 23 May 2017.

23.  The appeal was originally relisted for hearing on 24 May 2017  but  had
    to be  adjourned  to  give  the  respondent  a  proper  opportunity  of
    considering an  expert  report  from  Professor  Mark  Galeotti  which,
    although dated 5 March 2017 was, most unfortunately, not served on  the
    respondent until very shortly before the hearing on 24 May  2017.   The
    appellant has not sought to adduce further oral evidence but  did  seek
    on the morning of the hearing  to  produce  a  Canadian  Refugee  Board
    report dated 1 December 2015 on  military  conscription  and  exemption
    from military service in Ukraine.  I was not prepared  to  adjourn  the
    hearing again but, bearing in mind the issues arising in  international
    protection cases, I gave permission  to  the  appellant  to  file  this
    document with any further submissions by 13 July 2017  with  permission
    to the respondent to file any further representations in  reply  by  27
    July 2017.  The document has been filed and further written submissions
    have been received from both parties.

Further Submissions

24.  Ms Norman submitted that the  appellant  was  a  "de  facto"  Ukrainian
    national as he had never lived outside Crimea  in  "mainland"  Ukraine.
    Following the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014, he had not  taken
    Russian nationality.  He could not be returned to Crimea as he was  not
    a Russian passport holder.  He feared return to Ukraine  on  the  basis
    that he was a Russian speaker, had never  lived  in  mainland  Ukraine,
    belonged to a minority religion, was against the  Ukrainian  government
    and feared mobilisation.

25.  The appellant had entered the UK in November 2000  and  had  successive
    grants of leave as a student until December 2010 when  his  application
    as a Tier 4 student was rejected and an appeal dismissed.  He had  made
    strenuous efforts to regularise his status  from  2011  and  2014.   In
    March 2014 Russia annexed Crimea and in October  2014  he  applied  for
    asylum.  His claim was sur place in that the situation in  Ukraine  had
    escalated since he had been in the UK.  If conscripted, he would refuse
    to fight in the current conflict.

26.  Ms Norman submitted that the appellant was  eligible  for  conscription
    and that on this issue Professor Galeotti's report should be  preferred
    to  the  information  set  out  in  the   respondent's   decision.   If
    conscripted, so she argued, the conflict in Ukraine had now reached the
    stage  that  the  Ukrainian  military  was  committing   human   rights
    violations in the course of  the  conflict  as  documented  by  Amnesty
    International and the OHCHR.  She referred to and relied on the of  the
    New Zealand decision in AC  (Ukraine).   She  submitted  that,  if  the
    appellant had to perform military service, there was a real  risk  that
    it would involve acts, with which he may  be  associated,  contrary  to
    basic rules of human conduct  as  defined  by  international  law:  see
    Krotov v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ  69
    at [29 ff].  She supported  this  submission  with  references  to  the
    background information and in particular to the  Amnesty  International
    Report "Breaking  Bodies:  Torture  and  Summary  Killings  in  Eastern
    Ukraine" (CB 149-182) and the U.S. State Department Report  on  Country
    Human Rights Practices for Ukraine, April 2016.

27.  She accepted that following the country  guidance  in  VB  and  Another
    (Ukraine) that the appellant may struggle to establish a real  risk  of
    imprisonment for draft evasion but she argued that he had established a
    real risk of detention at port having left Ukraine knowing that he  was
    eligible for mobilisation but having then  ignored  the  summons.   The
    appellant's Russian ethnicity, whilst not constituting  an  independent
    basis for asylum, was of considerable  importance  when  assessing  his
    political views, his reasons for refusing  to  engage  in  anti-Russian
    military activity and the likely attitude of the authorities  to  those
    factors.

28.  Ms Norman further submitted that  the  appellant  should  also  succeed
    under article 8 grounds.  It was accepted that  he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM as his partner had discretionary leave  and
    not indefinite leave to remain but her disabilities meant that she  was
    unusually dependent on him and would be unable to go to Ukraine due  to
    her disabilities.  The appellant was unable to get a Ukrainian passport
    and so he could not move to Belarus.  In these  circumstances,  removal
    would be disproportionate and he should be granted leave in  line  with
    his partner.

29.  Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant could not bring  himself  within
    the country guidance in VB and  Another  (Ukraine)  and  there  was  no
    evidence that the Ukrainian authorities were seeking him or would treat
    him as a deserter.  The appellant had failed to show  that  he  was  at
    real risk of conscription in the light of the fact that he was  now  37
    years old.  Even if he was conscripted and  failed  to  serve,  in  all
    likelihood he would be punished by a fine.  The COI policy  summary  on
    military service indicated that the  upper  age  limit  for  compulsory
    military service was 27.  In summary it  was  very  unlikely  that  the
    appellant would face conscription.

30.  He further submitted that there was insufficient  evidence  to  support
    the proposition that anyone conscripted  was  at  real  risk  of  being
    associated with war crimes.   Whilst  the  appellant  might  face  some
    discrimination on account of his ethnicity, that would  not  amount  to
    persecution.   As  far  as  his  relationship  with  his  partner   was
    concerned, any application under the Rules would fail on the basis that
    she did not meet the eligibility requirements in E-LTRP.1.2.  Following
    the expiry of her last student leave in January 2016  she  was  granted
    six months leave outside the Rules in  order  to  obtain  a  CAS  which
    according to her witness statement she was unable to do.  There were no
    exceptional circumstances which would warrant consideration outside the
    Rules.

The report of Professor Galeotti

31.  Professor Galeotti has set out his qualifications in [7] - [11] of  his
    report (CB387-396).  The main focus of his research since 1991 has been
    post-Soviet and transnational crime, policing  and  security.   He  has
    carried out research in Ukraine and  other  post-Soviet  countries  and
    across Europe and the USA.  He is  head  of  his  department  at  Keele
    University and was the founder and director of  the  Organised  Russian
    and Eurasian  Crime  Research  Unit.   He  has  also  been  a  visiting
    professor at Charles University (Prague)  and  MGIMO  (Moscow)  and  in
    2016/2017 is a visiting fellow with the  European  Council  on  Foreign
    Relations.   He  is  now  a  senior  researcher  at  the  Institute  of
    International Relations, Prague and head of  its  Centre  for  European
    Security having until 2016 been clinical professor of global affairs at
    New  York  University.   He  has  been  seconded  to  the   Foreign   &
    Commonwealth Office in an advisory  capacity  and  has  given  evidence
    before the House  of  Commons  Foreign  Affairs  Select  Committee  and
    advised the European Commission, the  US  House  of  Congress  and  the
    Canadian  and  Latvian  Parliaments.   He  has  travelled  on  numerous
    occasions to Ukraine since his first visit in 1991,  most  recently  in
    December 2016, and has written extensively on it.   He  has  maintained
    professional  and  personal  links  with  police,  officials   of   the
    judiciary, journalists, academics and others in and  from  Ukraine.   I
    also note that he has been cited  in  the  Home  Office's  current  CIG
    Guidance Note, Version 2.0 of May 2016.

32.   In  the  light  of  this  background  and  taking  into  account   his
    publications and articles identified  at  [11],  I  am  satisfied  that
    Professor Galeotti is well-qualified to give an expert opinion  on  the
    appellant's position.  He was asked firstly whether the appellant would
    be eligible for conscription if returned to Ukraine.  His conclusion is
    that the appellant is undoubtedly eligible for mobilisation as an able-
    bodied man within the age ranges with  no  grounds  for  exemption  for
    conscientious objection.  He notes that having  abandoned  conscription
    in 2013,  it  was  reinstated  by  the  Ukranian  authorities  in  2014
    following the Russian annexation of  Crimea  and  subsequent  incursion
    into Ukraine's south-eastern Donbass region.   Initially,  it  was  for
    young men of 18 to 25, then 20 to 27.  The appellant  did  not  do  his
    national service before he left Ukraine in 2000 when it  was  still  in
    effect and presumably was granted deferment  on  the  basis  of  higher
    education, a standard basis for such deferment.

33.  According to Professor Galeotti, a draft deferment is not the  same  as
    an exemption and the appellant would be considered eligible for service
    in the reserves as a  junior  officer  in  case  of  mobilisation.  The
    appellant did not meet any of the exemptions and  would  be  considered
    available for mobilisation.  This was  generally  taken  lightly  as  a
    theoretical rather than likely occurrence as such mobilisations had not
    happened until the outbreak of undeclared  war  with  Russia  in  2014.
    Since then the Ukrainian state had held successive mobilisation  rounds
    which have extended beyond the usual draft pool and  which  would  have
    covered the appellant's age group and circumstances.  There  have  been
    seven such waves of mobilisation, initially only  those  with  military
    training were chosen but  the  requirements  became  increasingly  less
    stringent  and  by  2015  the  appellant  would  have  been  considered
    eligible.  The seventh wave in 2016 sought to impress another 20,000  -
    25,000 troops up to the age of 47.

34.  Professor Galeotti says that there was  no  retrospective  amnesty  for
    those who ought to have presented themselves to military  commissariats
    (draft boards) and that it is possible that the  appellant  is  already
    considered a draft evader but, even if  not,  he  would  be  considered
    eligible for  mobilisation  on  return.   The  right  to  conscientious
    objection is set out in the Ukrainian Constitution  and  the  appellant
    would not be considered eligible  on  the  basis  of  religious  belief
    because he does not fall within the  list  of  religious  organisations
    whose doctrine prohibits the use of weapons.

35.   Professor  Galeotti  then  considered  the  likelihood,   should   the
    appellant refuse to comply with military drafting,  that  he  would  be
    forced to comply and by  what  means.   It  is  his  opinion  that  the
    appellant would face the option  of  complying  or  facing  prosecution
    which could plausibly lead to a prison sentence of  up  to  five  years
    potentially in especially  poor  conditions.   He  confirms  that  some
    380,000 young men reached conscription age in  Ukraine  every  year  of
    whom around 76,000 actually served.  The majority either did  not  meet
    the medical standards of service or the minimum education  requirements
    or else they were  exempted  on  various  grounds.   A  War  Resisters'
    International Ukraine report quoted a Defence Ministry official to  the
    effect that there were some 50,000 draft dodgers every  year  and  that
    48,624 were prosecuted over an eight year period, suggesting that  each
    had actually a one in eight change of being prosecuted.   However,  the
    government now takes an increasingly dim view of  draft  dodging.   The
    undeclared  war  with  Russia  continues,  stepping  up   arrests   and
    prosecutions.  He  refers  to  the  fact  that  in  February  2015  the
    authorities arrested a Russian blogger, charging him with  treason  for
    issuing a call  to  boycott  military  mobilisation  and  he  was  then
    sentenced to three and a half years' imprisonment.  As of August  2015,
    reportedly some 400 draft dodgers were already in prison.

36.  So far as whether the appellant's mobilisation in Ukraine  would  carry
    a  real  risk  of  being  compelled  to  engage  in  acts  contrary  to
    international law, Professor Galeotti says that it is possible,  albeit
    unlikely.  He notes that a Human Rights Watch Report  has  warned  that
    government forces, pro-government paramilitaries and  insurgents  alike
    have acted in ways that violate international human rights law but this
    is relatively uncommon.  However, that said, if the appellant did  find
    himself in that  situation  he  would  face  a  real  risk  of  serious
    punishment were he to refuse to carry out such orders.

37.  Professor Galeotti then considered what other issues were  relevant  to
    the appeal and in this context it is his opinion that  it  is  unlikely
    that a draft dodger could re-enter Ukraine without being detained or at
    least identified on arrival, especially one without a  valid  passport.
    Ukraine's land and sea airports have been developed to modern standards
    of entry and immigration control and he refers to  country  advice  frm
    the Australian Refugee Review Tribunal  which  has  noted  that  "if  a
    person has broken the law by evading the draft their return to  Ukraine
    is likely to attract the attention of the authorities - particularly if
    they enter Ukraine through official channels".  Professor Galeotti adds
    that this is all the more true of a Ukrainian without a valid passport.

The Country Guidance in VB and Another (Ukraine)

38.  The country guidance in VB and Another (Ukraine), as summarised in  the
    italicised head note, is as follows:

         "1.  At the current time it is not reasonably likely that  a  draft
             evader avoiding conscription or mobilisation in Ukraine  would
             face criminal or  administrative  proceedings  for  that  act,
             although if a draft evader did  face  prosecution  proceedings
             the Criminal Code of Ukraine does provide,  in  articles  335,
             336 and 409, for a prison sentence for such  an  offence.   It
             would be a matter for any Tribunal to consider, in  the  light
             of developing evidence, whether there were aggravating matters
             which might lead to an imposition of  an  immediate  custodial
             sentence, rather than  a  suspended  sentence  or  the  matter
             proceeding as an  administrative  offence  and  a  fine  being
             sought by a prosecutor.


         2.   There is a real risk of anyone being returned to Ukraine as  a
             convicted criminal sentenced to a term of imprisonment in that
             country being detained on arrival, although  anyone  convicted
             in absentia would probably be entitled thereafter to a retrial
             in accordance with article 412 of the Criminal Procedure  Code
             of Ukraine.


         3.   There is a real risk that  the  conditions  of  detention  and
             imprisonment in Ukraine would subject a person returned to  be
             detained or imprisoned to a breach of article 3 ECHR."


The Decision in AC (Ukraine)

39.  The appellant relies on New Zealand  decision  in  AC  (Ukraine).  This
    concerned an ethnic Russian born in Ukraine when it  was  part  of  the
    Soviet Union, who claimed to be in fear of returning to Ukraine because
    he would be required to serve  in  the  Ukrainian  military  which  was
    committing war crimes against his own  ethnic  Russian  people.   After
    analysing the evidence and reminding itself that the standard of  proof
    in refugee claims was one which did not require it to be satisfied that
    the appellant would be persecuted or  that  it  was  even  probable  or
    likely to happen, the Tribunal accepted that the applicant would either
    be forced to undertake military service  in  which  there  was  a  real
    chance of being compelled to participate in military action  where  the
    military engages in internationally condemned acts or his objection  to
    such service would result in him being prosecuted and imprisoned for  a
    number of years and, given the illegitimacy under international law  of
    the nature of the military action in question,  both  would  constitute
    "being persecuted" as understood in refugee law.

Country Background Information

40.  The country background information submitted by  the  appellant  is  at
    CB149-296 and 397-404.  The  appellant  relies  in  particular  on  the
    Amnesty Breaking  Bodies:  Torture  and  Summary  Killings  in  Eastern
    Ukraine  report  (CB149-182),   which   records   that   the   evidence
    overwhelmingly indicates that both the Ukrainian  forces  and  pro-Kyiv
    militia on the one  side  and  separatist  forces  on  the  other  have
    committed the war crime of torture of people in their custody.

41.  The U.S. State Department Report on Country Human Rights Practices  for
    Ukraine published in April 2016 records as follows:

         "The HRMMU reported a 'persistent pattern' of  physical  abuse  and
         torture by government forces.  Throughout the year the HRMMU and AI
         interviewed individuals who claimed to have been tortured,  beaten,
         and  subjected  to  mock  executions  during  the  course  of   the
         'antiterrorist operation.'   A  December  HRMMU  report  documented
         'recurrent  allegations'  of   mistreatment   during   arrest   and
         interrogations  by  the  SBU,  including  interviews  with  several
         individuals detained on suspicion of taking part in terrorist acts.
          SBU authorities beat them  heavily,  restrained  them  in  painful
         poses for long periods, and subjected them to suffocation while  in
         custody."


    The Human Rights Watch Report "You Don't Exist" of July 2016  (CB  199-
    230) records that both the Ukrainian government authorities and Russia-
    backed separatists in eastern Ukraine have held civilians in  prolonged
    arbitrary  detention  without  any  contact  with  the  outside  world,
    including their lawyers or families and that  most  of  those  detained
    suffered torture or other forms of ill-treatment, several being  denied
    needed medical attention for the injuries they sustained in  detention.
    This report documents arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances  and
    torture by both Ukrainian forces and Russian-backed separatists.


The Country Policy and Information Note on Military Service

42.  The respondent's CPI note on military service April  2017  confirms  at
    5.4.1 that conscription was reinstated for males between the ages of 18
    and 25 and that in January 2015 the upper limit was raised from  25  to
    27.  It also confirmed there have been various waves of mobilisation as
    set out in 5.2.2  -  5.2.7.   In  September  2016  a  seventh  wave  of
    mobilisation began.  Para 5.2.7 records that the Ukraine Interfax  News
    Agency stated:

         "According to the decree of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine No.
         684 dated September 22 [2016], which is released  on  the  official
         website of the government, 7,908 people will be sent to  the  armed
         forces of Ukraine, 5,000 people to the  National  Guard  and  1,000
         people to the state special transport  service  out  of  the  total
         number of conscripts.  ...  At the same  time,  army  discharge  of
         those who have served fixed  term  of  time  military  service  has
         started.  A total number of those who must be released in October -
         December of 2016 is 8,315 people."


43.  The issue of draft evasion is dealt with at 9.2.  At  9.2.5  the  UNHCR
    said that in January 2015 an analysis of some of the cases conducted in
    August 2014 was reported to have shown that all  persons  found  guilty
    received administrative fines, community service or suspended sentences
    but in September 2015 the UNHCR said that whilst conscription practices
    vary from region to region, the government is reported to have  stepped
    up  prosecution  of  those  suspected  of  evading   conscription   and
    mobilisation, with reports of coercive measures being used  in  certain
    areas.  A further report of September  2015  noted  that  according  to
    statistics from the Ukrainian courts from 1 July 2014 to  1  July  2015
    there were 661 criminal cases recorded against draft  and  mobilisation
    evaders whereas in November 2015 Global Research reported  that  "about
    7,000 criminal cases were opened against men who were eligible for  the
    draft but evaded their mobilisation orders".



Assessment of the Appellant's Claim

44.  The first issue when considering the appellant's claim in  relation  to
    military service is whether he is eligible  for  conscription.   It  is
    clear that the upper age for conscription is now 27 but the  fact  that
    the appellant is now over the age of 27 does not mean that he will  not
    be liable for mobilisation.  As Professor Galeotti makes clear in  [12]
    - [16] of his report, as the appellant did not do his national  service
    before he left he was presumably granted a deferment on  the  basis  of
    his higher education.  The appellant has confirmed in his  most  recent
    statement at CB407 that his service was deferred on the basis  that  he
    would be eligible for service in the reserves in case of  mobilisation.
    In any event, if his military service was  not  deferred  the  position
    would be that the appellant would have evaded the draft.  I also accept
    that the appellant would have been eligible from 2015 for the sixth and
    seventh wave of mobilisation and I accept, as Professor Galeotti  says,
    that it is possible that the appellant is already  considered  a  draft
    evader but even if not, he would be eligible for mobilisation on return
    to Ukraine.  The report from the CIRB dated 1 December  2015  submitted
    following the hearing provides  some  support  for  this  view  and  is
    consistent with Professor Galeotti's opinion.

45.  The evidence set out in the CPI note  of  April  2017  shows  that  the
    effect of the recent mobilisation waves has been limited.  In the sixth
    wave in July - August 2015 the Ukrainian military managed to  get  just
    over 60% of the intended draftees as reported by the  Defence  Ministry
    and these included 8.5% volunteers.   It  is  also  recorded  that  the
    military complained that its officers often had problems  with  getting
    the summonses to potential draftees who moved  to  another  address  or
    simply refused to open their doors.  Of those who did get their summons
    over half chose to ignore it and ran.   The  fact  that  there  may  be
    problems in enforcing mobilisation does not detract from the fact  that
    the appellant would be eligible on return and I am therefore  satisfied
    that there is a reasonable degree  of  likelihood  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk of being mobilised.

46.  It is clear that  the  appellant  does  not  fall  within  any  of  the
    exemption  categories  or  qualify  for  exemption   on   conscientious
    objection grounds. To the extent that the appellant sought to  rely  on
    being a follower of Keylontic Science, that claim was rejected  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal for reasons properly open to it and in  any  event,
    it does not fall within the list of recognised religious  organisations
    recognised by the Ukrainian authorities as giving rise to a  claim  for
    conscientious objection.

47.  It is argued on behalf of the appellant that mobilisation  would  bring
    a real risk that he would be required to engage in acts contrary to the
    basic rules of human  conduct.   I  have  been  referred  to  Krotov  v
    Secretary of State, which confirms that prosecution or  punishment  for
    refusal to take part in  military  service  and  conflict  which  would
    involve acts, with which he may be associated, contrary to basic  rules
    of human conduct as defined by international law would be  persecutory.
    A similar provision appears in article  9(2)(e)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive 2004/83/EC that "prosecution or  punishment  for  refusal  to
    perform military service  in  a  conflict,  where  performing  military
    service would include  crimes  or  acts  falling  under  the  exclusion
    clauses as  set  out  in  article  12(2)"  can  amount  to  an  act  of
    persecution.  There is certainly evidence in  the  background  material
    that both sides in the current conflict in Ukraine have acted in breach
    of international law.  Professor Galeotti says that it is  "impossible,
    albeit unlikely" that the appellant would be engaged or associated with
    such activities.  He says at [25]:

         "In this context, Human Rights Watch  has  warned  that  government
         forces, pro-government paramilitaries  and  insurgents  alike  have
         acted in ways that violate international humanitarian  law  or  the
         laws of war and may amount to war  crimes  especially  by  shelling
         populated areas.  However, this is relatively uncommon."

48.  In his conclusions at [36] Professor Galeotti  described  the  risk  of
    the  appellant  being  compelled  to  engage  in   acts   contrary   to
    international law as "unlikely, but not impossible".  I have taken into
    account the decision in AC (Ukraine) but, in  the  light  of  Professor
    Galeotti's opinion, I am not satisfied that the evidence is  such  that
    the appellant is able to show that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  being
    required to take part in or of being associated with such acts.  On the
    issue generally of the consequences of being a draft evader,  there  is
    no sufficient basis in the evidence before me to justify departing from
    the country guidance in VB and Another (Ukraine) that  a  draft  evader
    without any other extenuating circumstances is not reasonably likely to
    face imprisonment as opposed to a suspended  sentence  or  being  dealt
    with administratively by a fine.

49.  However, it is further argued on behalf of the appellant that there  is
    a real risk that he  would  be  detained  on  arrival  if  returned  to
    Ukraine.  I accept that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that
    when the appellant left Ukraine in 2000, he was granted a deferment  of
    military service on the basis of higher  education.   At  [14]  of  his
    report Professor Galeotti says that there is no  retrospective  amnesty
    for those who ought to have presented themselves to  draft  boards  and
    that it is possible that the appellant is already  considered  a  draft
    evader  but,  even  if  not,  he  would  be  considered  eligible   for
    mobilisation on return to Ukraine.  He also confirms that in  the  past
    avoiding national service was  a  widespread  problem  but  most  draft
    evaders were not prosecuted but that situation  has  changed  with  the
    undeclared war on Russia and, as Professor Galeotti puts  it  at  [22],
    the government now takes an increasingly dim view of draft dodging  and
    as the undeclared war with Russia continues, is stepping up arrests and
    prosecutions.

50.  He goes on to consider at [28] whether a draft  dodger  could  re-enter
    Ukraine without being detained or at least identified on arrival and he
    cites the Australian Refugee Review Tribunal's view that, if  a  person
    has broken the law by evading the draft, their  return  to  Ukraine  is
    likely to attract the attention of the authorities  -  particularly  if
    they enter through official channels, Professor  Galeotti  adding  that
    this is all the more true of a Ukrainian without a valid passport.   In
    his conclusions, he puts it more succinctly saying the appellant  could
    not  re-enter  Ukraine  without  coming  to  the   attention   of   the
    authorities, nor could he evade them  through  internal  relocation  as
    there is still a national  registration  system  even  though  the  old
    propyska system has been abolished.

51.  In light of the current situation in Ukraine in  relation  to  military
    service and in  particular  Professor  Galeotti's  evidence  about  the
    authorities stepping up arrests and prosecutions, I am  satisfied  that
    there is at least a reasonable degree of likelihood that the  appellant
    would be at risk of being detained as a draft evader and the fact  that
    he is of Russian ethnic origin and has strong views about the situation
    in Ukraine could only aggravate his position on return.  There has been
    no challenge to the  country  guidance  confirmed  in  VB  and  Another
    (Ukraine) that there is a real risk that the  conditions  of  detention
    and  imprisonment  in  Ukraine  would  subject  a  person  detained  or
    imprisoned to a breach of article 3.

52.  In conclusion, whilst I am not satisfied that the appellant is able  to
    show that there is a real risk of persecution for a  Convention  reason
    on return to Ukraine, I am satisfied that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
    detention in  conditions  which  would  breach  article  3.   In  these
    circumstances, I need not deal with the claim under para 276ADE of  the
    Rules or with the appeal on article 8 grounds.

Decision


53.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  the  decision  has  been  set
    aside.  I re-make the decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds but allowing it under article 3.  The anonymity order  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal remains in force until further order




Signed                                  Date: 10 August 2017
         H J E Latter

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter









