
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04838/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2019                   |On 28 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                CHOUDHRY [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Moriarty, instructed by Elaahi solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on  3  June  1984  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 28 March 2018 to refuse him  international
    protection and his  claim  on  human  rights  grounds.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  15  May  2019,  dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. I notified both representatives  that  I  intended  to  set  aside  the
    decision and return this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  shall,
    therefore, be brief giving my  reasons.  The  account  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal which is  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal prepared by  Ms  Daykin  of  counsel  (who
    appeared for the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal hearing) has  not
    been disputed. I accept that,  on  the  morning  of  the  hearing,  the
    presenting officer produced for the first time in the current appeal  a
    previous decision concerning the appellant who had been  found  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  to  have  entered  a  'sham'   or   marriage   of
    convenience. I accept that it  was  agreed  at  the  hearing  that  the
    appellant would not  seek  an  adjournment  on  account  of  this  late
    production of  evidence  by  the  respondent  provided  the  presenting
    officer did not refer to specific findings  of  fact  in  the  previous
    decision, in particular the findings concerning the 'sham' marriage. It
    appears that, at the outset of  the  hearing,  the  presenting  officer
    sought only to rely upon the fact that a previous  Tribunal  had  found
    that the appellant  was  not  a  credible  witness.  Contrary  to  that
    apparent agreement, the judge proceeded to  reject  evidence  that  the
    appellant's wife had left him on  account  of  his  homosexuality.  The
    clear implication in  the  judge's  reasoning  at  [16e]  is  that  the
    appellant's 'wife' was his spouse in name only, their marriage being  a
    'sham'. I accept the appellant's  assertion  that,  had  the  appellant
    known that the judge was likely to  make  more  extensive  use  of  the
    previous decision than the parties had agreed  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing, then the appellant would  have  applied  for  an  adjournment.
    Whether or not such an application may have been granted by the  judge,
    I accept that the appellant has effectively been denied a fair hearing.

 3. Secondly, I agree with the appellant that the judge has made  virtually
    no reference to the medical evidence concerning the appellant's  mental
    health condition. At [13], the judge accepted the reports from the  two
    doctors as independent evidence but did not accept  their  opinions  as
    regards the appellant's claimed sexuality. Otherwise, he  says  nothing
    more regarding their evidence. However, the reports present  a  picture
    of an individual who is seriously psychologically unwell. The judge has
    failed to have proper regard to the medical evidence  when  considering
    how the appellant may reintegrate in Pakistani society. I  accept  also
    that at there was evidence in the reports that the appellant may be  at
    risk of committing suicide, a risk which  exists  irrespective  of  any
    credibility findings which the judge might reach.  That  risk  has  not
    been assessed by the judge. Finally, I accept  that  the  judge  should
    have made clear in the decision why the appellant would not  give  oral
    evidence at the hearing. As the grounds point out, the medical evidence
    indicated that the appellant was not fit to give evidence  or,  indeed,
    conduct litigation before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. In the light of what I say above, I set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. The appeal will be returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    that  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision  following  a  hearing.   The
    representatives  of  the  appellant  should,  if   they   consider   it
    appropriate, take steps to appoint a litigation friend  notwithstanding
    the practical difficulties which may be involved. If the appellant will
    give evidence at  the  next  hearing  and  needs  an  interpreter,  his
    representatives shall notify the  First-tier  Tribunal  immediately  on
    receipt of this decision.



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.


Signed                              Date 2 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

