

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04050/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                        |Decision &Reasons   Promulgated|
|On 15th January 2019                        |On 4th February 2019           |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     ST
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr D Coleman    (Counsel)
For the Respondent:  Mr C Avery      (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal (Judge  Monson )("FtT") promulgated
    on 17.5.2018  in which the appellant's appeal against  refusal  of  her
    protection and human rights claim  was dismissed.

Background
2.    The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone and her date  of  birth  is
    6.1.1981.   She claimed that she faced a risk  of  persecution  at  the
    hands of her ex husband's family and/or that she faced very significant
    obstacles on return.   She had  been  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a
    dependent of her husband in the UK. They separated in 2012.  She feared
    return to Sierra Leone because of the Ebola outbreak, and  because  her
    daughters were settled in the UK.  The father of  the  children  was  a
    national from Nigeria and he had no status in the UK.

FtT decision
3.    The FtT found the appellant's main claim to be in fear  of  family  in
    Sierra Leone to be lacking in credibility [22].  She made no  reference
    to these fears in her witness  statement  dated  1.4.2015  nor  in  the
    substantive interview, despite the  fact  that  she  had  been  legally
    represented since 2011.  The FtT found that her further  claim,  raised
    in her appeal grounds, that she  feared  that  her  daughter  would  be
    subjected to FGM and rape, was unfounded [25-26].  The FtT  found  that
    the appellant could return to Sierra Leone with her children  and  that
    their  father  would  also  be  able  to  enter  that  country  without
    difficulty.  The FtT considered the issue of FGM at [25] and found that
    whilst WHO statistics showed that 88 % of women between the ages of 15-
    49 had suffered FGM, it had not been suggested that the  appellant  had
    under gone FGM.  The FtT proceeded to dismiss the claim on  that  basis
    concluding that there was no  evidence  that  the  appellant  moved  in
    circles where FGM was practised and the risk for her daughter  did  not
    meet Article 3. In considering  whether  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration the FtT  focused  on  Section  55  [34]  and
    considered where the best interests of the children lay. The FtT  found
    that the appellant could return to Sierra Leone with her  children  and
    that their father would also be able  to  enter  that  country  without
    difficulty.

Grounds of appeal
4.  In grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the FtT erred by  failing
    to give adequate weight to the appellant's asylum claim  that  she  was
    subjected to domestic violence and rape during the civil war, and  that
    at the time she was 15 years old (ground 1).

5.   The  FtT  failed  to  consider  the  welfare  of  the  child  from  the
    perspective that she was vulnerable to FGM given the traditions of  her
    country (ground 2).

Permission to appeal
6.  Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  on  ground  2
    only, by UTJ Coker who took the view that it was arguable that the  FtT
    gave only a cursory consideration of the  risk  of  FGM  faced  by  the
    appellant's daughter in assessing her best interests.

Submissions
7.  At the hearing before me Mr Coleman, representing the appellant,  argued
    that the position was that the appellant had in fact been subjected  to
    FGM at the age of 7 years.  Although she had not given evidence to  the
    FtT that this was the case. Her evidence focused on her fears  for  her
    daughter.  The FtT ought to have been aware of this  fact  in  reaching
    its decision and which was material. The FtT Judge  was  male  and  had
    based his decision by reference to the statistics only and which showed
    that there was a risk of FGM on the balance of  probabilities,  in  any
    event.  It was not open to the FtT to have found that the appellant had
    not suffered FGM given the background evidence.  The FtT failed to give
    anxious scrutiny to this issue.

8.  In response Mr Avery contended that  the  FtT  was  only  able  to  make
    findings on the evidence adduced before it.  There was no evidence from
    the appellant that she had suffered FGM.  The case had been argued with
    reference to the statistics which had not  been  properly  sourced  and
    were somewhat thin evidentially.  The FtT had properly made findings on
    the evidence before the Tribunal, which had not included any  statement
    by the appellant that she had suffered FGM.

9.  Mr Coleman responded that the statistics were  from  the  WHO.  The  FtT
    proceeded on an assumption that the appellant  had  not  suffered  FGM,
    which was wrong.



Discussion and conclusion
10.  I find no material error of law in this decision and reasons, which  is
    thorough and clearly reasoned. The FtT considered the evidence that was
    adduced as to the risk of FGM posed to the appellant's daughter.   This
    consisted of a Guardian article dated 29.9.2016  which  suggested  that
    post the Ebola virus the official ban on FGM was  no  longer  enforced.
    The second document was a WHO report dated 2001  which  looked  at  the
    sexual violence during the civil war.  There was no evidence  given  by
    the appellant in any of her statements, interviews or orally  that  she
    had been a victim of FGM.  The  appellant  had  the  benefit  of  legal
    representation since 2011 and could have requested a  female  court  if
    she had concerns about the nature of her evidence.  The  appellant  has
    given no proper reason for why she did not raised  this  sooner  or  at
    all.

11.  Having considered the bundle for the first tier hearing,  the  skeleton
    argument and the decision itself,  it is manifestly  clear  that  there
    was no evidence adduced that the appellant suffered FGM.  The  FtT  was
    under no obligation to question the appellant further  on  this  matter
    given her  claim  and  having  regard  to  the  fact  she  was  legally
    represented.

12.   The statistic relied on that 88% of women  in  Sierra  Leone  suffered
    FGM was not considered in any context or time frame.  In any event I am
    satisfied that it did not (without more) amount to evidence  sufficient
    to establish a real risk of FGM. Indeed there had  been  no  claim  for
    asylum made on that ground  for  the  appellant's  daughter.   The  FtT
    referred to the statistics and then went on to find correctly  that  it
    was not suggested that  the  appellant  underwent  FGM.   That  was  an
    accurate reflection of the evidence.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtT
    properly considered the evidence adduced as to  risk  of  FGM  for  the
    child on return to Sierra Leone under the Article 3 claim and  rejected
    it.  The FtT then considered all matters relevant  to  where  the  best
    interests of the child lay at [34] and it was not necessary  to  repeat
    the issues pertinent to FGM.  It is of note that even  the  grounds  of
    application for permission made no reference to  the  appellant  having
    undergone FGM and put  the  case  in  terms  that  the  child  "may  be
    subjected to FGM".  There was no evidence to support any claim that the
    fear was well founded.

 Decision
13.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



                               Signed                     Date 21.1.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date 21.1.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








