
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04710/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a Hearing       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2020                          |                              |
|                                              |On 23 September 2020          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    M L A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hutchinson promulgated on 19 December 2019.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe whose case is that he is at risk
    of persecution on return for association with his  maternal  uncle  who
    has been arrested and murdered in Zimbabwe.  The appellant's case is he
    is at risk because of his uncle's activities.

 3. The respondent did not accept that the appellant's uncle is politically
    active in Zimbabwe, nor did she accept that the appellant had  received
    any threat or mistreatment  in  Zimbabwe.   The  respondent  also  drew
    inferences adverse to the appellant of his failure to claim  asylum  in
    the Netherlands en route to the United Kingdom or on arrival in  London
    or Belfast.

 4. The appellant appeared in person at the hearing before Judge Hutchinson
    in  Belfast.   He  was  not  legally  represented.   The   respondent's
    Presenting Officer was present by a video link.

 5. The appellant gave evidence and was cross-examined.   The  judge  noted
    [11] that the appellant had said in his  interview  that  although  his
    uncle had received threats, nothing physical had happened  and  he  had
    never been arrested.  He noted also that the  appellant  had  [10]  now
    produced an article from "Byo 24 News" dated 5 November 2018 before  he
    had left Zimbabwe on 7 December 2018 referring to the uncle and that he
    had been arrested.  The judge noted [12] that this discrepancy, that is
    the appellant not knowing  in  March  2019  that  his  uncle  had  been
    arrested prior to 5 November 2018 required explanation, noted  that  he
    said "by then I didn't have the article.  I didn't know  the  news  was
    about him.  I only know now".

 6. The judge set  out  at  [12]  to  [15]  why  she  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's explanations for not knowing what had happened to his uncle
    and the contradictions in that explanation.

 7.  The  judge  considered  [16]  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was
    diminished by his failure to mention that his  uncle  was  one  of  the
    members of the "Mthwakazi Liberation Front" at interview.

 8. The judge also drew  inferences  adverse  to  the  appellant  from  his
    account of how he learned of his  uncle's  death  [18]  to  [21]  given
    inconsistencies in the affidavit which mentioned it.

 9. The judge found that:-

      i) the appellant had not shown he was related to the man  said  to  be
         his uncle;

     ii) the claimed uncle had been murdered as claimed;

    iii) even if that was so that there was a  risk  to  him  on  return  to
         Zimbabwe [23];

     iv) even if the appellant's uncle were a target he identifies as  Shona
         (not Ndebele as the uncle is);

      v) there was no  evidence  that  might  support  a  finding  that  the
         authorities would be in a position to identify him as an associated
         threat [26] given that he lived in a  different  township,  has  no
         political involvement himself and was not targeted and had not been
         in contact with the uncle for a long time;

     vi) the appellant's evidence of how he was no longer in  possession  of
         his passport was not credible [28] and he did not therefore provide
         an explanation as to why he could not obtain his passport if indeed
         it was being held against the payment of  a  balance  so  he  could
         avoid a risk at the airport on return [29];

    vii) the appellant's credibility was damaged pursuant to  Section  8  of
         the 2004 Act [30];

   viii)  having had regard to CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe
         [2013] UKUT 59, the appellant was not at risk.

10. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  his
    refusal was based on him not being able to say that his uncle  belonged
    to "Mthwakazi" which he had in fact mentioned in his interview as shown
    in the voice recording; that Mthwakazi is not really a political  party
    but "human rights" and that  if  he  had  been  asked  about  political
    parties he would not be able to say Mthwakazi because it is not  really
    a political party.  He said that he had not said that Mthwakazi and his
    uncle spoke against the government.

11. On 4 June 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted permission stating:-

         "The appellant asserts that the central account of  dismissing  his
         appeal - his failure to mention the term Mthwakazi at his interview
         is an unfounded error of fact.  Permission is granted because it is
         arguable  that  such  an  error,  if  made  out,  would   establish
         unfairness material to the outcome of the appeal.

         The appellant, who was unrepresented,  should  be  aware  that  the
         Tribunal will not consider new  documents  he  has  submitted  when
         considering  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
         contains an error of law.  Should the decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal be set aside, it remains open to the appellant to make  an
         application to submit the documents to the Tribunal at that  stage.
         The appellant may provide the Secretary of  State  with  copies  of
         those documents at any time".

12. Judge Bruce also made directions in this case stating:

     1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the light of the  present
        need to take precautions against the spread  of  Covid-19,  and  the
        overriding objective expressed in the  Procedure  Rules[1],  I  have
        reached the provisional  view,   that  it  would  in  this  case  be
        appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

        a)  whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
           involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

        b) whether that decision should be set aside.

     2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:

         i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of  the
            assertion of an error of law, and on the question  whether  the
            First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set aside if error  of
            law is found, to be filed and served on all  other  parties  no
            later than 14 days after this notice is sent out (the  date  of
            sending is on the covering letter or covering email);

        ii) Any other party may file and serve submissions in response,  no
            later than 21 days after this notice is sent out;

       iii) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph (ii) above
            the party who sought permission to appeal may file and serve  a
            reply no later than 28 days after this notice is sent out.

        iv) All submissions  that  rely  on  any  document  not  previously
            provided to all  other  parties  in  electronic  form  must  be
            accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.

     3. Any party who considers that  despite  the  foregoing  directions  a
        hearing is necessary to consider the questions set out in  paragraph
        1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons  for  that  view  no
        later than 21 days after this notice is sent out and  they  will  be
        taken into account by the Tribunal.  The directions in  paragraph  2
        above must be complied with in every case.

     4. If this Tribunal decides to set aside the decision of the First-tier
        Tribunal for error of law, further  directions  will  accompany  the
        notice of that decision.

     5. Documents and submissions filed in response to these directions  may
        be    sent    by,    or     attached     to,     an     email     to
        FieldHouseCorrespondence@Justice.gov.uk   using    the    Tribunal's
        reference number (found at the  top  of  these  directions)  as  the
        subject line.  Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.  This  address  is
        not generally available for the filing of documents.  Service on the
        Secretary of State may be to UTdirections@homeoffice.gov.uk  and  to
        the original appellant, in the absence of any contrary  instruction,
        by use of any address apparent from the service of these directions.


13. The appellant did not provide any submissions, nor has  he  provided  a
    response to the respondent's submissions dated 24 July 2020.

14. The appellant has made no objection to this  matter  being  dealt  with
    without a hearing.  I note that he is acting in  person  but  there  is
    nothing to indicate that he is not capable of communicating in English.
     His asylum interview was conducted in English and there  was  no  need
    for an interpreter at the hearing.  Further, he was able to  draft  his
    own grounds of appeal and to attach documents thereto.

15. The respondent does not object to this matter being dealt with  on  the
    papers.

16. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Given that no objection to this course of
    action has been raised, and bearing in mind the overriding objective in
    Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,  I
    am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of this case where no
    objection to a decision being made in the absence of a hearing that  it
    would be right to do so.  I find no merit in the grounds of appeal.

17. The challenge to the findings is limited to a specific charge that  the
    appellant had in fact mentioned Mthwakazi in his interview.

18. What is said in the asylum record is as follows:-

         "Q174    Has your uncle been involved with any political  party  in
                  Zimbabwe?

              I don't know if he is involved like voting  or  when  you  say
                  involved (IO - Is your uncle a  member  of  any  political
                  party in Zimbabwe?) No, just the  one  he  is  wanting  to
                  establish not any other.

         Q175 So he is not involved with any established party in Zimbabwe?

                  It is only what he wants to start it is not yet it is just
                           a skeleton".

19. What the appellant says  referring  to  his  voice  interview  is  that
    "Mthwakazi and my uncle SN spoke against the government".  He  goes  on
    to say that Mthwakazi is  not  really  a  political  party  but  "human
    rights".  If he asked me about political parties I want to be  able  to
    say Mthwakazi because it is not really a political party.

20. I note also that  in  his  preliminary  information  questionnaire  the
    appellant said Mthwakazi stands for the Ndebele people in Zimbabwe  and
    fights for the rights of people [page 3] and also that  his  uncle  was
    part of the Mthwakazi group [page 4].

21. I accept there appears to be an error on  the  part  of  the  judge  in
    regard to the finding that the appellant had not said at interview that
    his uncle was a member of the Mthwakazi Liberation Front.   That  said,
    his evidence appears to be equivocal.  It is odd to say "my  uncle  and
    Mthwakazi" if in fact he was a  member.   In  reviewing  the  interview
    record I note that at Q91 the appellant said that he  was  assisted  by
    the Mthwakazi crew which is not a political group but  they  stand  for
    the rights of the people of the village; that the people who worked for
    it [Q95] were connected to his uncle [Q96] that  he  did  say  that  he
    feared for his life because of the work his uncle  does  [Q161]  as  he
    testifies against the authorities [Q162].

22. I have also considered what the appellant said with regard to his uncle
    from Q194 to Q202.   In  short,  the  appellant  accepted  his  uncle's
    political involvement was only in the township where he lives  but  did
    not mention that anything had happened to him [Q198].

23. The appellant was also asked about his uncle's political involvement.

24. While it may be that the judge misunderstood the evidence, the findings
    with respect to this point are limited in that the  judge  states  only
    that his credibility is reduced and that  he  could  not  rely  on  the
    article as claimed.  The judge had already given at [10] other  reasons
    for not accepting the article.  These are not challenged.  Among  these
    explanations are that there was no adequate explanation as to  why  the
    appellant had not produced the article earlier.  Finally,  it  was  not
    credible that he would have produced it only in response to the refusal
    letter given that it was published as early as 2018.

25. More importantly, there is no challenge to the inferences fairly  drawn
    regarding the inconsistencies in the explanation as to why he  had  not
    mentioned that his uncle had been arrested if in fact  that  had  taken
    place before  he  had  left  Zimbabwe  and  well  before  he  had  been
    interviewed.  The judge was clearly entitled to draw inferences adverse
    to the appellant that he had changed his explanations [12] in  that  he
    had said first that he did not have the article and had not  known  the
    news about him, changing his explanation it was put  to  him  that  the
    appellant had always been in contact with his family  since  coming  to
    the UK was that he had not been in contact with him for  a  long  time,
    then confirming that it was four months before March 2019 and [13] that
    it was unclear why the appellant  would  have  known  about  the  uncle
    testifying against the government but not of a  claimed  arrest  around
    the same time.

26. The judge was manifestly entitled to conclude that the explanation  for
    the contradictions that  this  was  "just  an  update"  to  reduce  his
    credibility and indeed was entitled to conclude that the explanation of
    his interview lasting for six hours when it did not and that he had not
    made any complaint at the time is not explaining his inability to  give
    truthful evidence.  The judge was  also  entitled  to  draw  inferences
    adverse to the  appellant  from  his  account  about  his  uncle  being
    murdered.  She was entitled to conclude that it was not  credible  that
    the appellant would not have asked about how his uncle was  killed  and
    would not have asked his family [20] and from his inability to  explain
    how he and his uncle's home were so certain the uncle had been murdered
    when he did not know the cause of death and the affidavit  referred  to
    an "decomposing body".

27. The judge was also entitled to draw inferences adverse to the appellant
    from inconsistencies and changes in his account as to how he  had  lost
    his passport [28].  In interview he had said that he had lost  it  with
    his baggage after he entered the United Kingdom.  In  cross-examination
    he said that it had been taken by the agent whilst there was a  balance
    remaining for  his being smuggled to the  United  Kingdom  and  he  was
    unable to explain how the passport, which  he  had  confirmed  in  oral
    evidence he had in his hand and showed Immigration in the UK came to be
    taken by the agents stating that "they might have taken it from me".

28. In the context of these unchallenged findings and clear inconsistencies
    and  discrepancies,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant was not telling the truth.   The  sole  point  challenged  is
    minor and when the determination is read as a whole the error is not in
    any way material.

29. It is telling that the appellant has not sought to challenge the cogent
    reasons given by the judge for concluding that she was unable to accept
    any of his claims as to what he stated had happened and  why  he  could
    not return [31] and at [14] that "I am satisfied he is willing  to  say
    whatever he feels to be most advantageous to his asylum claim, with  no
    regard for the truth".

30. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error  of  law  as
    claimed. Bearing in mind that the appellant is not represented, I  have
    considered the decision  carefully,  but  conclude  that  it  does  not
    disclose any evident errors. I therefore uphold it.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 September 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

