
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04292/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House           Decision & Reasons Promulgated             | |
|On 19.03.2018                                                             | |
|On 26.03.2018                                                             | |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               AA (BANGLADESH)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr S. Chelvan, Counsel instructed by
Chancery Solicitors
For the Respondent:             Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge NMK Lawrence sitting at Hatton Cross  on  23
    June 2017) dismissing his protection and human  rights  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him as  a
    political refugee, or, in the alternative, to grant him leave to remain
    on private life grounds under Rule 276ADE (1)(vi).



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 21 December 2017 UTJ Southern granted permission to appeal  for  the
    following reasons:

         The grounds raise a number of complaints including that  the  judge
         did not  consider  adequately  the  documentary  evidence  and  the
         submissions based upon them. The judge has made  comprehensive  and
         robust adverse credibility findings but in so  doing  he  said,  at
         para 31, that the oral evidence was contradictory and  inconsistent
         and:

             "Since I find the  oral  evidence  is  wanting,  in  the  most
             fundamental way. I find  the  documentary  evidence  does  not
             point me in the opposite direction, towards credibility."

         There may be a discussion to be had about the impact of  the  full-
         stop that punctuates that phrase but, if correctly understood,  the
         judge has reached a firm finding on credibility on the basis of his
         view of the  oral  evidence  alone  and  then  has  considered  the
         documentary evidence in  the  light  of  that  adverse  credibility
         finding, then it may  be  arguable  that  he  failed  to  make  his
         findings on the basis of the evidence as a whole.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Everett conceded that the decision was  erroneous  and  unsafe,
    and agreed with Mr Chelvan that the appeal should be remitted for a  de
    novo hearing. The representatives also agreed the directions which  are
    given below.

Discussion

 4. The stance taken by Ms Everett was not determinative  of  the  question
    whether an error of law was made out. I had to be  satisfied  that  her
    concession was justified. I was so satisfied because the  Judge  failed
    to engage with a DVR concerning FIR No. 22  dated  28.01.16  which  was
    relied on by the respondent as proving that not only were  FIR  No.  22
    and an associated Charge Sheet both non-genuine documents, but so  were
    other (unidentified) court documents.

 5. I infer that  the  reason  why  the  Judge  did  not  engage  with  the
    respondent's positive case on forged/false documents was because he had
    refused at the outset of the hearing an application by Counsel  for  an
    adjournment so that the disputed documents could be authenticated by Dr
    Hoque. At [31] the Judge records Counsel as submitting in closing  that
    if the adjournment had been granted, "an  expert's  report  could  have
    been obtained to authenticate the documents." Since he had not  allowed
    the appellant further time to obtain expert evidence which rebutted the
    DVR, the Judge may have decided to ignore the DVR in order to  avoid  a
    subsequent complaint of procedural unfairness.

 6. Unfortunately, this engendered the scenario identified by UTJ Southern.
    The Judge  appears  to  admit  that  he  has  reached  a  firm  adverse
    credibility finding on the oral evidence alone, and that  he  has  then
    simply discounted all of the documentary evidence in the light  of  his
    conclusion on the oral evidence. In order to ensure a fair  hearing  on
    the totality of the available evidence, the Judge needed to be seen  to
    assess to what extent, if any,  the  police  and  court  documents  had
    internal credibility and independent probative value before reaching an
    overall conclusion on credibility.

 7. There are other grounds of appeal, but the ground singled  out  by  UTJ
    Southern has the most merit and I find that this ground  is  made  out.
    The upshot is that the decision on the protection claim is unsafe,  and
    must be set aside and remade. Since the protection claim requires to be
    heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal,  and  since  the  alternative
    Article 8 claim will need to be assessed at the date  of  the  hearing,
    the representatives were in agreement that there should be  a  complete
    re-hearing on all issues, with none of the findings of fact made by the
    previous Judge being preserved.

 8. The background to the agreed directions is that Mr Chelvan, who did not
    appear below, raised in his skeleton argument two issues about the DVR,
    one of which "troubled" Ms Everett and has caused her to set  in  train
    an inquiry directed to the British High Commission (BHC) in Bangladesh.
    The two issues are:

          a)  Whether  the  BHC   complied   with   a   general   duty   of
             confidentiality owed to the appellant when visiting the police
             station to verify the FIR and Charge Sheet or whether the  BHC
             had revealed to the police officer that the appellant had made
             a protection claim in the  UK  based  upon  his  accepted  BNP
             membership, and had thus engendered a possible protection risk
             for the appellant - see VT (Article 22 Procedures Directive  -
             confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 00368 (IAC);

          b) The rank of the police officer,  and/or  the  steps  taken  to
             ascertain his reliability on the issue  of  the  alleged  non-
             existence of the FIR and Charge Sheet.

 9. It was the VT point which troubled  Ms  Everett,  as  she  was  not  in
    possession of any specific evidence to show  that  confidentiality  had
    been preserved. However, on the basis  of  preliminary  inquiries,  she
    said that she was confident that the  BHC  would  be  able  to  provide
    evidence to show that the duty of confidence had not been breached.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and it must be remade.

Directions

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a
    de novo hearing (Judge NMK Lawrence not compatible).

12. The appeal shall not be listed before 90 days have  elapsed  since  the
    hearing at Field House on 19.03.18.

13. Within 42 days from 19.03.18, the respondent shall serve on the  First-
    tier Tribunal and on the appellant's solicitors a detailed note on  the
    procedures involved in the production of the DVR dated 28 December 2016
    at Annex L, in the light of the guidance given by the  Tribunal  in  VT
    (Article 22 Procedures Directive - confidentiality)  Sri  Lanka  [2017]
    UKUT 00368 (IAC).

14. The appellant shall be at liberty to file a written response within  42
    days of receipt of the note and/or within 42 days after the time  limit
    for the service of the note has expired.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date:  22 March 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


