

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: PA/04061/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons promulgated      |
|on 24 July 2017                        |on 25 July 2017                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SUM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Bandegani instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Gaskell promulgated on 23 January 2017 in which the Judge dismissed
        the appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.



Error of law


     2. The appellant is a minor, having been born on 1 January 2000, and a
        citizen of Afghanistan. At the date of hearing he was 16  years  of
        age.
     3. The appellant appeared before the  Judge  without  the  benefit  of
        legal representation but  accompanied  by  his  foster  parent  and
        social worker [2].
     4. The Judge noted the appellant had been  represented  until  7  June
        2016 at which point his previous solicitors withdrew as a result of
        funding issues. The Judge noted [3] there was no appellants  bundle
        and no witness statement.  The appellant gave oral evidence.
     5. The Judge, in a decision of some 42 paragraphs starts the  findings
        of fact from [34].
     6. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but granted  on
        a renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 6 June 2007
        in the following terms:


        "It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge,  addressing  only  two   brief
        paragraphs to credibility in an 11 page Decision and Reasons,  when
        the Appellant was 16 years of age and unrepresented at the  hearing
        failed to apply anxious scrutiny to the appeal and gave  inadequate
        reasoning."


     7. It was submitted by Mr Bandegani, on the applicant's  behalf,  that
        the procedure adopted by the Judge was unfair. The appellant was 16
        years of age, had no representative, was barely literate with  only
        two months schooling and no support from any advocate. There was no
        bundle and no witness statement and no country  information  before
        the Judge.  It was submitted that had the Secretary State submitted
        appropriate country material the Judge would  have  seen  that  the
        appellant's village and district are  in  a  contested  area  which
        would arguably make relocation unreasonable.
     8. Although a number of minors appear before the  First-tier  Tribunal
        unrepresented, in this case there is a  particularly  weak  Reasons
        for Refusal  letter.  The  Judge  noted  the  appellant's  age  and
        immigration history but what was required was for there to be  very
        careful consideration of the appeal,  the  anxious  scrutiny  point
        noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin.
     9. In this appeal the Judge may have been advised to  have  noted  the
        UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing  the   International
        Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan, dated 19 April
        2016, in particular are pages 44 to 47 and 81 to 86 and to have had
        regard, in addition to the case law set out in the decision, to the
        United Nations in Afghanistan - Population Movement Bulletin  dated
        14 April 2016 which are highly relevant to the appellant's account,
        ongoing risk of persecution, and issue of internal relocation.
    10. Whilst it appears the Judge was  not  assisted  by  the  respondent
        failing to provide country material to the Tribunal these documents
        are in the public domain.  This is a matter which, on balance, is a
        decision that is unsafe and in the interests of fairness  shall  be
        set aside.
    11. Notwithstanding earlier difficulties  in  relation  to  funding  Mr
        Bandegani advises that Wilson solicitors are now  representing  the
        appellant.
    12. I find the Judge erred in law in a manner material to the  decision
        to dismiss the appeal. The findings  of  the  Judge  shall  be  set
        aside. The appeal shall be remitted to Taylor House to be heard  by
        a judge  other  than  Judge  Gaskell.  Extensive  fact  finding  is
        required in relation to all pertinent issues.


Decision

    13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to be  heard
        by a judge other than Judge Gaskell sitting at Taylor  House  on  a
        date to be fixed in light of the operational requirements  of  that
        hearing centre.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 24 July 2017












