
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04127/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2017                            |On 2 February 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                   p p r k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin of Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case, Mr PPRK, was born on 16 January 1986 and is
    a citizen of Sri Lanka.   The appellant first entered the UK with valid
    entry clearance as  a  student  valid  from  10  September  2009.   The
    appellant applied for asylum on 6 July 2015.  In a  decision  dated  10
    December 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's claim  for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection.  The appellant's human  rights  claim  was
    also dismissed.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  25  October
    2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Nicholls   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed with permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    grounds that the judge made a fundamental  error  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's links with an organisation which  supported  LTTE  activity
    and the appellant's detention and interrogation about  two  named  men,
    which was accepted as credible by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   The
    appellant claims that he had links with two men, K, a union person  who
    arranged for deliveries to the LTTE and R, who had  also  been  helping
    the LTTE and who fled to India.  In his interview the appellant  stated
    that he had been questioned about both men while detained in Sri Lanka.
     The judge considered this at [14] of  his  decision  and  reasons  and
    firstly referred to them both as being members of SEWA Lanka when  only
    R was.  The judge then went on to state that "there is no  confirmation
    that the appellant had any real  dealings  with  either  of  these  two
    people... there is no indication that the Sri Lankan  authorities  know
    of any connections between the appellant and these two people".  It was
    submitted that this was a factual error.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    authorities  were  aware  of  the  connection  which  is  why  the  CID
    questioned  the  appellant  about  these  individuals  as  set  out  at
    questions 63 and 64 of his asylum interview.

 3. It was submitted that this was a material error as K and R  are  listed
    as prohibited people in an official list produced by the appellant (and
    Mr Martin referred me to that list in the appellant's bundle which  was
    an extract from the Gazette of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
    Lanka dated 21 March 2014 at  pages  49  to  87  of  the  bundle).   In
    particular, the names of the men in question are listed at pages 68 and
    85.

 4. It was submitted by Mr Martin that given the judge's acceptance of  the
    appellant's detention and interrogation that it must be accepted he was
    questioned about these two  wanted  individuals.   As  they  are  still
    wanted then the judge erred in his approach.  It was further  submitted
    that the  judge  failed  to  properly  assess  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant's mother and the Human Rights Commission.  This  showed  that
    there was ongoing  adverse  interest  in  the  appellant  and  this  is
    consistent with the interest in the other two men  that  the  appellant
    was linked to.

Error of Law Discussion

 5. The respondent in the Rule 24 Notice dated 20 December  2016  submitted
    that the determination included explicit reference to GJ & Others (post-
    civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC).   Mr
    Armstrong maintained that there was no error and that the decision  was
    sustainable.

 6. Mr Martin took me to the Gazette document which was relied on at  pages
    68 and 85 of the appellant's bundle.  Whilst he conceded  that  it  did
    not say, in terms, that these individuals  were  wanted,  he  indicated
    that this document had not been disputed and the judge did not  dispute
    it in his decision.  Mr Martin referred me  to  the  beginning  of  the
    document which indicated that it was  the  Gazette  of  the  Democratic
    Socialist Republic of  Sri  Lanka  and  therefore  a  document  of  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka.  The first entries in the document  were  the
    LTTE and the second entry was the Tamil Rehabilitation Organisation and
    other Tamil organisations were listed.  It was Mr Martin's  contention,
    which was not disputed, that this 2014 document  indicated  that  these
    were individuals who the Sri Lankan authorities had an ongoing interest
    in.

 7. At paragraph [14] of the decision and reasons the judge found:

         "The  Appellant  claims  that  the  Sri  Lankan   authorities   are
         interested in two more senior members of the foundation whose names
         have appeared on the list in The Gazette.  There is no confirmation
         that the Appellant had any  real  dealings  with  either  of  those
         people and, it is notable, the witness Mr  S  made  no  mention  of
         them.  There is no indication that the Sri Lankan authorities  know
         of any connection between the Appellant and these two people,  much
         less that it would form the basis of enquiries or perceptions  that
         he had become a person working to destabilise Sri  Lanka.   I  find
         that the Appellant has not  shown  a  real  likelihood  that  there
         exists a reason why he would be perceived as a  person  threatening
         the Sri Lankan state by that association."

 8. Mr Martin submitted that this did  not  sit  well  with  the  evidence,
    including at C11 and C14 of the  respondent's  bundle  which  were  the
    appellant's answers at asylum interview at questions  63  and  104  and
    105, where he was asked about Mr R and Mr K.

 9. Whilst the judge's decision might have been structured more clearly,  I
    do not share Mr Martin's contention that the judge  made  an  error  in
    relation to the evidence before him in stating that:

         "There is no indication that the Sri Lankan authorities know of any
         connection between the appellant and these two  people,  much  less
         that it would form the basis of enquiries or  perceptions  that  he
         had become a person working to destabilise Sri Lanka."

10. The judge set out the evidence before him in some  considerable  detail
    at paragraph 7(a) through to (m) which spans four and a half  pages  of
    the decision and reasons.

    At 7(c) the judge sets out the appellant's evidence including that:

         "He was interrogated and asked about the people who worked  for  S.
         including a man called R, who was a vice-chairman in  the  Vavuniya
         area.  The Appellant said he was asked where  the  LTTE  hid  their
         weapons and money, about his contacts in  the  LTTE  and  incidents
         that had occurred in the Vavuniya area."

11. The judge then went on at 7(f) to  refer  further  to  the  appellant's
    evidence including at interview and question 104  where  the  appellant
    stated that the security forces came to his  family  home  in  February
    2015 and claimed that two people he had worked with in the organisation
    S. were wanted by the police and that because of perceived links with R
    the appellant was wanted for  investigation.   The  judge  went  on  to
    consider that in his witness statement the appellant explained  further
    in relation to S. and R and that the appellant had  known  that  R  had
    helped the LTTE and had fled to India.

12. The judge at [12] accepted the credibility of the  appellant's  account
    in relation to his work in Sri Lanka, his supplying of medical supplies
    to a contact in the LTTE and  the  likelihood  that  he  was  arrested,
    detained and interrogated about that work.  The judge concluded that it
    is "both credible that the appellant was released after  payment  of  a
    bribe and likely that there would be no interest in him created by such
    a release".

13. At [13] the judge went on to find that

         "Taken at its highest, for a period of  time  from  early  2005  to
         early 2009, almost four years, it is accepted  that  the  appellant
         worked for a non-governmental organisation through whom  he  bought
         medical supplies, some of which he passed to a contact in the LTTE.
          For almost all of that time there was a period  of  ceasefire  and
         the provision of humanitarian assistance of that kind is not likely
         to raise any real suspicions about the  appellant's  activities  or
         his connections with the LTTE.  I accept that in early 2009 he  may
         well have been perceived as a person with  useful  information  but
         those events are now well over seven years ago,  the  structure  of
         the LTTE in Sri Lanka has been destroyed and there is  no  evidence
         that this appellant has taken  any  action  outside  Sri  Lanka  to
         involve himself in political activities."

14. I am satisfied considering the judge's decision as a  whole,  that  the
    judge was aware and took into  account  that  the  appellant  had  been
    questioned in relation to the two individuals including as is  set  out
    at 7(c) in relation to R.  Whilst the judge erred in referring  to  the
    second individual, Mr K as being a member of  S.,  that  error  is  not
    material.  As the judge duly took into account the  appellant's  claims
    that "the Sri Lankan authorities are  interested  in  two  more  senior
    members" the fact that Mr K had a different role  is  not  material  to
    that consideration as there was no dispute that  both  individuals  are
    named in the Gazette as considered by the judge  at  [14]  and  already
    discussed by the judge at 7(j).

15. The judge was aware therefore that the appellant was  questioned  about
    these two individuals and it was the judge's findings, which were  open
    to him on the evidence, that there was no  indication  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities know of any current (my emphasis)  connection  between  the
    appellant and these people (and indeed the judge placed weight  on  the
    fact that the further witness at the appellant's appeal made no mention
    of these individuals) or that if the appellant  were  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka now it would form the basis of enquiries or perceptions  that  he
    had become a person working to destabilise Sri Lanka.  It is clear  the
    judge had in mind the relevant principles, including the  relevance  of
    past persecution as an indicator of future risk,  but  for  the  cogent
    reasons he gave the judge was not satisfied that this  appellant  would
    be at risk on return

16. The judge considered and  discounted  that  the  appellant  could  fall
    within paragraph 7(a) of the head note of GJ  and  Others  (post  civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), which provides:

         "7(a)    Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
              the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because  they
              are, or are perceived to have a significant role in  relation
              to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the Diaspora  and/or
              a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka."

17. Mr Martin contended that the appellant fell within 7(d):

         "7(d)    A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop'  list
              accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against
              whom there is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
              Individuals whose name appears  on  a  'stop'  list  will  be
              stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate Sri
              Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant."

18. The judge specifically discounted this at  [16]  of  his  decision  and
    reasons in finding that "there is no evidence which  suggests  that  he
    might be on a stop or watch list".

19. I have also taken into consideration that the judge, whilst he accepted
    that the appellant had been questioned  in  2009,  did  not  accept  as
    reasonable his explanation for not claiming asylum  until  he  did  and
    considered this as damaging to his credibility.  The judge  noted  that
    the appellant will have received advice from lawyers including that  he
    conducted an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal in late  2013.   The
    judge took into consideration, at page 88 of  the  appellant's  bundle,
    the statement the appellant submitted for his 2013 appeal which gave no
    hint of any background or worries about returning to Sri Lanka.

20. Although Mr Martin submitted that the judge's findings in  relation  to
    the claimed continuing interest in the appellant were not  sustainable,
    this is not the case;  The judge found at [15] that the  appellant  had
    provided no evidence to confirm any continuing interest by  Sri  Lankan
    security officers:

         "Other than a letter at pages 24 and 25 of the bundle which  it  is
         claimed were sent by  his  mother  and  mentions  a  visit  by  CID
         officers on 20 February 2015, following which she went to  complain
         to the Sri Lankan Human  Rights  Commission.   Although  there  are
         documents that deal with the raising of funds to secure the release
         of the appellant, there is also a letter on the  notepaper  of  the
         Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka dated 25 February  2015  which
         refers to a complaint dated 24 February 2015 which  was  registered
         and was  receiving  attention  (Bundle,  page  48).   There  is  no
         subsequent report,  document  or  indication  of  outcome  of  that
         complaint.  There is no evidence to suggest that any form of formal
         enquiries or proceedings were being taken  against  the  appellant,
         all of which would have been available from the relevant courts  on
         proper application."

21. The judge went on to find at [16] of  his  decision  and  reasons  that
    "bearing in mind the very low level of the appellant's involvement with
    the LTTE during, mainly, the ceasefire" that he was not satisfied  that
    the evidence showed that  any  subsequent  enquiries  by  CID  officers
    disclosed an adverse interest in the appellant which  would  mean  that
    there was a real likelihood that he would be detained on arrival.

22. The judge made  this  finding  in  light  of  his  previous  favourable
    findings that the appellant had been involved in the manner he  claimed
    and that he had been detained and questioned.  However the  judge  gave
    considerable weight to the lack of any evidence to suggest  that  there
    were any formal  enquiries  or  proceedings  being  taken  against  the
    appellant which would have been available from the relevant  courts  on
    application.  The findings that the  judge  made  therefore,  that  the
    evidence did not show that "any subsequent enquiries  by  CID  officers
    disclosed an adverse interest", were well reasoned  and  he  reached  a
    conclusion that was open to him on the evidence.

23. Mr Martin submitted that the judge's findings at paragraph [15] did not
    amount to a rejection of the letter  from  the  appellant's  mother  at
    pages 24 and 25 of this bundle (with subsequent translation).  However,
    the judge considered the possibility of enquiries by CID  officers,  in
    the context of this letter, but was satisfied that in light of all  the
    evidence including the "very low level of the appellant's  involvement"
    and that it was mainly during the  ceasefire  and  that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest any formal enquiries  or  proceedings  against  the
    appellant, that there was no evidence which would mean there was a real
    likelihood he would be detained or that he was on  a  stop  list.   The
    fact that CID may have come and enquired about the appellant  in  2015,
    as specifically considered by the judge,  was  not  sufficient  in  his
    findings to bring the appellant within the risk categories disclosed in
    GJ and Others.

24. As already noted, these findings, that the appellant is not at risk  on
    return, were also made in the context of the  judge  not  accepting  as
    reasonable the appellant's application for only claiming asylum when he
    was informed of the visit by security officers in 2015 because  he  had
    only then began to consider his position and take advice.

25. The  judge's  decision  contained  cogent  reasoning  and  contains  no
    material error.



Notice of Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


