
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04865/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 MAY  2019                      |On 05 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 KARWAN [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Mawaha, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 6 June 1993 and is a male citizen of Iran. By
    a decision dated 7 March 2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  his
    application for international protection. By a decision promulgated  on
    19 December 2018, the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  his  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside. My reasons for reaching a decision are as  follows.  First,  the
    decision contains factual errors which is likely  have  influenced  the
    judge's assessment of the credibility of the  appellant's  account.  At
    [7], the judge states that:

         "The question of whether  a  person  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution... must be looked at in the round in the light  of  all
         the relevant circumstances and judged against the situation  as  at
         the time of the hearing of the appeal particularly and although, as
         in  this  case,  there  is  a  considerable  history   of   similar
         application, adverse decisions and unsuccessful appeal..."

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  3  October  2017.  The
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was his first  challenge  to  the
    only refusal of his claim for protection. It is  simply  not  the  case
    that there has  been  a  'considerable  history'  of  previous  adverse
    decisions and unsuccessful appeals. I consider that it is  likely  that
    the judge's approach to the credibility of the appellant as  a  witness
    has been influenced by this misunderstanding of the facts.

 4. Secondly, the appellant relied upon an expert report from Dr Kakhki. In
    his assessment of the report, the judge has fallen  into  an  error  of
    methodology. He states at [15] the expert 'opines  upon  the  level  of
    risk the appellant might face if returned to Iran subjected him  coming
    up to proof on the facts he seeks to rely upon.' Later,  at  [23],  the
    judge remarks that the report of the expert 'expresses  opinion  as  to
    risk dependent on an appellant coming up to  proof  of  his  assertions
    which is not happened in this case. I am not bound by or  persuaded  by
    [the expert's] report impressive and learn it though  it  be.'  As  Mrs
    Mawaha, who appeared for the appellant, pointed out, the expert  report
    offers helpful background information regarding country  conditions  in
    Iran which are not conditional upon the appellant's account being found
    credible but which the judge has ignored solely because he  found  that
    the appellant had  not  'come  up  to  proof.'  The  judge's  rejection
    entirely of the report and its contents for  the  reason  he  is  given
    amounts to an error of law.

 5. Thirdly, the judge failed to have regard to parts  of  the  appellant's
    account which the Secretary of State had accepted as true and  accurate
    in the refusal letter. At [53] of that letter, the  respondent  accepts
    the   appellant's   nationality   and   his   'smuggling   activities.'
    Notwithstanding that acceptance of part of the account,  the  judge  at
    [17] mischaracterises the respondent's  case  before  the  Tribunal  by
    wrongly asserting that respondent did not  accept  that  appellant  had
    been 'a smuggler in the border region.'

 6. Fourthly, in  his  analysis  of  the  appellant's  account,  the  judge
    unreasonably finds against the appellant in part because he was  unable
    to produce corroborative evidence of parts of  his  account.  I  accept
    that it was reasonable for the judge to note that the appellant had not
    produced evidence from PJAK  representatives  in  Iran  or  the  United
    Kingdom to endorse his claim to be a supporter of that organisation but
    the judge did err at [20.4] when he indicates that the  credibility  of
    the account is diminished because there was 'no supporting evidence  to
    show that [the appellant] had been ambushed whilst portering PJAK goods
    and his accompanying cousin wounded and arrested.' The judge  makes  no
    attempt to specify what 'supporting evidence' he expects to be produced
    of this event which, by its nature, is unlikely to have  been  reported
    in the media whilst those who witnessed it are unlikely to  be  willing
    or able to provide evidence in court proceedings in the United Kingdom.



 7. In the light of what I have said above, I find that the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set aside. The errors go to the  core  of
    the Tribunal's analysis of credibility; in the circumstances,  it  will
    be necessary to return the appeal to a differently  constituted  First-
    tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 19 December 2018
    is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The decision is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Drake) for that Tribunal
    to remake the decision at or following a hearing.


Signed                              Date 30 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

