
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04420/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 14th November 2018  On 3 May 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  MR Q M C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Respondent



Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr. A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr S Ell, Counsel, instructed by V and T Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The Secretary of State is appealing the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge JJ Maxwell who allowed the appeal at 1st instance. For
      convenience I will continue to refer hereinafter to the parties as
      they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a national of the People's Republic of China, born in
      May 1983. He unsuccessfully claimed protection. He claimed to have
      left his home country in 2004, arriving in the United Kingdom in 2007.

   3. The following year he met another Chinese national who was seeking
      protection. She subsequently gave birth to a child who is not the
      appellants. She then moved to Manchester and the appellant maintained
      contact, joining her in 2009. It was at that point a relationship
      developed between them and in December 2009 she gave birth to their
      daughter and in February 2017 their son. The appellant said he treated
      all 3 children as his own. Their son was born with a cardiac condition
      requiring major surgery which was carried out days after birth. His
      condition is stable but he will require ongoing monitoring.

The First tier Tribunal

   4. The judge did not find the claim for protection established. The judge
      then considered article 8 and allowed the appeal on this basis.

   5. The appellant's partner had been granted indefinite leave to remain.
      The children are British nationals and reliance was placed upon
      section 117B(6) the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It
      was argued it would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave.



   6. The judge had regard to MA (Pakistan) and others [2016] EWCA Civ 705
      where this provision was considered. The judge also referred to the
      case of MT and ET (child's best interests; extempore pilot) Nigeria
      [2018] UKUT 00088. There, a poor parental immigration history,
      including an unfounded asylum claim, was not considered a sufficiently
      powerful reason to justify refusal of leave because of the children.

   7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell referred to the respondent's policy
      published in February 2018 which provides that it is not reasonable to
      expect British children to leave with the parent facing removal. Where
      the child does not have a remaining parent with whom they can live, EX
      1 (a) was likely to apply. The policy goes on to state that it may be
      appropriate to refuse leave to a parent where their conduct gives rise
      to public interest considerations of such weight as to justify their
      removal and where the British child could remain with another parent
      or alternative carer. The considerations included an applicant who had
      committed significant or persistent criminal offences.

   8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell at paragraph 46 referred to the
      health issues facing the youngest child and concluded it was not
      reasonable to expect that child to leave the United Kingdom. The judge
      also considered it unreasonable to split the siblings.

   9. An issue at hearing was whether there was a parental relationship
      between the appellant and the children. The judge noted that the
      appellant and his partner had lived apart for most of the claimed
      period of their relationship. The explanation given was that they
      could not live together because this would affect his partner's
      benefit. This consideration changed after 2016 when she was granted
      indefinite leave to remain and the appellant had lodged his claim for
      protection. Various references about the relationship were submitted.

  10. The judge concluded that the relationship had existed over the years,
      albeit at some distance and that it was akin to marriage. The judge
      referred to the appellant having attended the birth of his youngest
      child and was satisfied he had a relationship with all of the
      children.

The Upper Tribunal

  11. The respondent was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      on the basis it was arguable the article 8 assessment was flawed. It
      was submitted in the application that family life had not been
      established. It was contended the judge erred in finding a genuine
      parental relationship in the absence of birth certificates. It was
      suggested the children could remain here with their mother and she
      could support an application for entry clearance by the appellant or
      alternatively, the appellant can support them from China.

  12. The grounds contend the judge did not had regard to the public
      interest factors set out in section 117B. It was argued that the judge
      had not taken into account the fact the appellant and his partner had
      lived separately for most of the period of their relationship. It was
      pointed out that the appellant's claim to have been supported by his
      partner and friends was rejected by the judge who found he came here
      as an economic migrant. It was contended that the judge focused only
      upon section 117B(6) and failed to address all the other factors in
      section 117B, including financial matters and the appellant's ability
      to speak English.

  13. At hearing Mr. A McVeety acknowledge that on reflection the challenge
      was not the strongest, having regard to the specifics of the decision
      and the position of the children. Mr S Ell, Counsel, relied upon the
      rule 24 response.

  14. I do not find the challenge well founded. The 1st ground is that the
      judge failed to have regard to the public interest factors outlined in
      section 117B. In this regard reliance was placed upon Dube (ss117A-
      117D) [2015] 00090 which refers to the statutory obligation on judges
      to have regard to the provisions in the legislation. I fail to see how
      it can be suggested the judge did not have regard to the factors when
      reference is made at paragraph 41 and 46 of the decision. The judge,
      in the circumstance, correctly focused upon section 117B(6). I find no
      material error demonstrated in the judge's reasoning as to the
      application of this provision.

  15. The respondent refers to the fact the appellant and his partner had
      been living separately and contends that the judge ignored this. This
      clearly is not the case because the judge goes into detail about the
      relationship at paragraph 48. The judge made the finding it was only
      in the post protection claim period that they lived together. They had
      given an explanation for this which the judge accepted. The judge
      expands upon the relationship between the appellant and his partner
      and the children and at paragraph 49 onwards evaluated the evidence.
      The judge did indicate awareness of the other statutory
      considerations. At paragraph 51 for instance, the judge records that
      the appellant has virtually no English.

  16. I have the benefit now of the decision of the Supreme Court in KO
      (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 which had not been promulgated at the time of
      the First-tier Tribunal. The judgement gives further guidance on
      section 117B(6) and the judge's decision is consistent with this. At
      paragraph 15 the Supreme Court said that the provisions are intended
      to be consistent with the general principles relating to the best
      interests of children, including the principle of the child must not
      be blamed for matters which they are not responsible, such of the
      conduct of their parent. The subsection is freestanding. At paragraph
      18 the court made the point that the parents behaviour may become
      indirectly material if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to
      remain here.

  17. In summary, the judge dealt with the relationship between the
      appellant and the children and his partner. The judge found it was not
      in the best interests of the children to leave. This was because of
      the youngest child's health and it was not reasonable to break up the
      children. The judge fond the existence of a genuine relationship
      within the family unit. In light of these clear findings the judge was
      correct to find the appellant was entitled to rely upon section
      117B(6). I find no material error of law established in the decision.
      Rather the challenge really amounts to a disagreement with the
      findings. Those findings were open to the judge and have been
      adequately explained.

Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge JJ Maxwell. Consequently, that decision allowing the appeal
on article 8 grounds shall stand. There has been no challenge to the
dismissal of the asylum claim.


Francis J Farrelly                                             Date: 30
April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

