
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/04949/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |    Decision & Reason          |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 9 January 2018                          |    On 25 January 2018         |



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     jNN
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, instructed by Rashid and Rashid Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 24  October  2017,  I  granted  the  appellant  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal against the decision and reasons statement of  FtT
    Judge Samimi, promulgated on 10 August 2017.

 2. The appeal process began  when  the  respondent  appealed  against  the
    decision of 5 May 2016 refusing her protection claim.   The  respondent
    appealed on the grounds that the decision was contrary to  the  refugee
    convention and unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 3. Judge Samimi decided the appellant is not a  refugee  from  Nigeria  or
    otherwise in need of international protection.  There is  no  challenge
    to that decision.   Judge Samimi decided the expulsion of the appellant
    would  be  unlawful  under  s.6  of  the  1998  Act  because   it   was
    disproportionate under  article  8  ECHR.   It  is  that  decision  the
    appellant Secretary of State challenges.

 4. During the hearing on 9 January  2018,  I  reminded  the  parties  that
    although I had granted permission  because  I  believed  there  was  an
    arguable legal error that did not mean I accepted  there  was  such  an
    error.   The  test  on  appeal  is  significantly  different.   Neither
    representative had any objection to me hearing the appeal.

 5. The Secretary of State's argument was that Judge Samimi had  failed  to
    adequately assess the public interest factors  when  carrying  out  the
    necessary balancing exercise to decide the article 8 issue.   Ms  Aboni
    reinforced that view, suggesting that at [33] the judge merely set  out
    the personal factors of the respondent and had no consideration for the
    public interest.  She pointed out that at [34] the judge failed to take
    into account the facts the respondent is not  financially  independent,
    and  that  her  status  in  the  UK  has  been  precarious  throughout.
    According to Ms Aboni, it was unclear how Judge Samimi had reached  her
    decision.

 6. Mr Shilladay argued that it was clear to any reader why  the  Secretary
    of State had lost.  This was an exceptional and  compelling  case;  the
    judge found the respondent had  suffered  abuse  in  Nigeria  from  her
    father and this made her particularly vulnerable.  The judge found  the
    respondent  continued  to  have  family  life  with  her   mother   and
    stepfather; clear and unassailable findings  had  been  made  on  those
    issues, bearing in mind the guidance in Ghising.  Mr  Shilladay  argued
    this was a case where the Secretary of State  understood  why  she  had
    lost but did not like it.

 7. Ms Aboni had nothing to add.

 8. Having heard the arguments, I am satisfied there is no legal  error  in
    the decision.  On close examination it is clear that Judge  Samimi  had
    all relevant  issues  in  mind  when  she  carried  out  the  necessary
    balancing act.  This was a case where the personal  circumstances  were
    particularly strong, having reached the threshold of  compelling.   The
    only justification for expulsion being in the public interest was  that
    the respondent did not meet the requirements of the immigration  rules.
    Ms Aboni could not expand those reasons in the Upper Tribunal  hearing,
    particularly as the burden of proof lay on the Secretary  of  State  to
    justify the expulsion decision.  She could not raise new  arguments  at
    this late stage.  It is obvious in this case that the compelling nature
    of the respondent's circumstances would outweigh the need  to  maintain
    effective immigration controls.

 9. For these reasons, and as I announced at the hearing, I find  there  is
    no legal error.



Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons of Judge Samimi and  her
decision is upheld.

Signed                                       Date

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the parties or any other person
from disclosing or publishing any matter likely to lead members of the
public to identify the appellant.  The appellant can be referred to as
"JNN".

Signed                                       Date

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

