
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04045/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2019                   |On 11 February 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                TAJIK BORHAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Barber promulgated 8  May  2018  in  which  the  Judge
       dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human  rights
       grounds.

Background


    2. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, claimed to have been born in
       the year 2000. The appellant claimed asylum  in  2015  following  his
       being encountered in the back of  a  lorry.  An  age  assessment  was
       undertaken by Leicestershire County Council on 29 June 2015 in  which
       the appellant was found to be an adult.

    3. The Judge notes that taking the claimed year of birth as 2000, at the
       date of the screening interview the  appellant  would  have  been  15
       years of age and a minor throughout. The Judge notes  a  further  age
       assessment was carried out by Leicestershire County Council on 12 May
       2016 which the Judge  finds  to  be  Merton  compliant.  The  Judge's
       conclusion is that he does not accept the appellant is as young as he
       claims for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision  under  challenge;
       including noting the appellant giving his oral evidence where he  was
       questioned closely about  his  age  by  the  Presenting  Officer.  In
       relation to age, at [21] the Judge finds:

           "21.   Taking all of the evidence in the round, I found as  fact
                that the Appellant at the date of the hearing before me  was
                an adult and I considered his evidence in that  light.  This
                means that none of  the  additional  safeguards  or  factors
                appropriate to the assessment of children in relation  to  a
                claim to asylum and in relation to  their  evidence  at  the
                hearing is relevant. I  accept  Ms  Khan's  submission  that
                there should be no bright line between  being  a  child  and
                becoming an adult but on my assessment of  the  evidence,  I
                think  the  Appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  he   is
                reasonably likely to have been born in 2000 and that in fact
                he was born in 1995. This would make him 22  or  23  at  the
                date of the hearing and an adult throughout."

    4. Having assessed the merits the Judge found the  appellant's  evidence
       to be implausible, generally contradictory in a significant way,  and
       wholly unreliable. The Judge  did  not  accept  any  account  of  the
       appellant's life in Afghanistan or  events  that  are  said  to  have
       occurred other than the fact he is an Afghan national who managed  to
       leave Afghanistan with the assistance of an agent and make his way to
       the United Kingdom. The Judge does not accept that the appellant  has
       ever had an encounter with the Taliban, finds it likely the appellant
       still has his family in Afghanistan,  and  rejected  the  appellant's
       account of what happened to him in Afghanistan as lacking credibility
       [26].  The Judge finds the appellant to be making his  case  up  [27]
       and was not satisfied that he had established substantial grounds for
       showing he  faced  a  real  risk  or  even  a  reasonable  degree  of
       likelihood that he will suffer persecution or some other form of ill-
       treatment if he were to be returned to  Afghanistan.  Thereafter  the
       Judge considers the issue of humanitarian protection and articles  2,
       3 and 8 ECHR, setting out the reasons in the decision  for  rejecting
       the appellant's claim to be entitled to a grant of leave on any  such
       basis.

    5. The appellant applied for permission to  appeal  claiming  the  Judge
       placed undue weight on the appellant's age which coloured the rest of
       the decision.  Permission to appeal was granted by another  judge  of
       the First-Tier Tribunal in the following terms:

           "1.    The appellant claiming to  have  been  born  in  2000,  a
                national of Afghanistan, applied for permission  to  appeal,
                in time, concerning  the  decision  of  First-tier  Judge  P
                Barber promulgated on 08/05/2018 (the  Decision)  dismissing
                the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
                rights grounds.

           2. Permission to appeal is granted for the following reasons:

                 i) the appellant though previously legally  represented  at
                    his hearing no longer has legal representation. Although
                    the appellant had  the  benefit  of  permission  grounds
                    being drafted on his behalf, notwithstanding the grounds
                    furnished appearing thoroughgoing  in  detail,  as  they
                    have been  drafted  by  a  volunteer  at  the  Doncaster
                    Conservative Club, stated to be a  support  service  for
                    asylum seekers and refugees,  the  volunteer  describing
                    themselves as a retired teacher, there was treated  that
                    effectively the grounds  were  settled  in  person,  and
                    therefore that the Decision had to be read with  special
                    care with reference to whether there were  any  arguably
                    manifest Robinson error or errors of law;

                ii) in large part the grounds submitted centred on the  part
                    of the Decision dealing with age assessment, which later
                    assessment  forms  the  greater  part  of  the  judicial
                    assessment, from the very commencement of  the  Decision
                    (paras  1  -  21),  with  findings   reached   accepting
                    official/county council social workers age assessment of
                    01/01/1995, in stark contrast to the appellant's claimed
                    age, and with those damaging findings on  the  issue  of
                    age assessment arguably providing  a  preliminary  motor
                    for the damaging  findings  reached  ultimately  in  the
                    claim for international protection;

               iii) oddly there was an absence in  the  Decision  concerning
                    the basis of the appellant's claim, the reasons for  the
                    respondent's refusal, and  the  history  of  the  appeal
                    itself, latterly of materiality, the  appeal  have  been
                    remitted by the Upper Tribunal Judge C Lane to the First-
                    Tier Tribunal for fresh hearing, in decision promulgated
                    on 02/06/2017, Judge Lane having found errors of law  in
                    respect of the standard of proof applied by the original
                    Judge, the balance of probabilities, to  the  matter  of
                    age assessment, when correctly following  Rawofi  [2012]
                    UKUT 00197, the standard was reasonable likelihood,  and
                    that there had been perpetrated a procedural  unfairness
                    with findings reached on matters of which the  appellant
                    and/or their representatives had not had the opportunity
                    to  explain  finding,  that  there  had   been   applied
                    "standards of 21st Century Britain  to  the  economy  of
                    Afghanistan" (para 4), latterly inter alia a matter also
                    found  by  Upper  Tribunal  J  Perkins   when   granting
                    permission to appeal  on  15/03/17,  that  the  original
                    Judge had inter alia "wrongly imposed  Western  European
                    values in his assessment  of  the  work  experience  the
                    Appellant might have had in Afghanistan...." (para 2);

                iv) arguably the Judge fell into material error alike in the
                    Decision, though ostensibly adopting  Rawofi  (para  4),
                    there appears disclosed rather the  application  of  the
                    probability standard in the age assessment (para 9);

                 v) equally arguably a falling into  error,  there  appeared
                    disclosed in the Judge purporting to apply  in  the  age
                    assessment analysis  their  own  "general  knowledge  of
                    teenagers  and  the  way  they  grow"  (para  5),  which
                    arguably  there  was   correctly   identified   in   the
                    permission grounds it's  subjective  basis  allied  with
                    arguably valid concern as to the basis of that knowledge
                    and of which environments and/or parts of the  world  it
                    related;

                vi) in large part  there  appears  disclosed  a  Eurocentric
                    and/or developed worldview providing a lens of  analysis
                    of an appeal of someone claiming  to  be  a  very  young
                    person  from  a  country  known   to   be   economically
                    challenged and one of the least developed compounded  by
                    many years of civil war/conflict, giving  rise  arguably
                    to a flawed judicial assessment;

               vii) the original Judge fell into  error  when  ignoring  the
                    evidence of a Ms B Thurley.  The  grounds  dealing  with
                    this part of the Decision  of  Judge  Barber  appear  of
                    equally arguable force: "I  happened  to  be  a  retired
                    teacher-a  profession  that  is  often  slated  by   the
                    government, parents, industry and anyone else struggling
                    to understand young people. It seems the judiciary needs
                    to be added to the list. Again I  am  disappointed  that
                    the years of experience and  training  of  Mrs  Thurley,
                    Tajik's teacher, has been dismissed as irrelevant....",

              viii) There appeared arguably overall  a  lack  of  objective,
                    adequate  reasoning,  and  application  of  the  correct
                    principles of law in an appeal concerning  international
                    protection.

           3. Arguable material error (s) of law disclosed."

    6. There is no rule 24 reply filed on behalf of the Secretary of State.

Error of law


    7. In Rawofi (age assessment - standard of proof) [2012] UKUT 00197(IAC)
       it was held that where age is disputed in the context  of  an  asylum
       appeal  (in  contrast  to   age   assessment   in   judicial   review
       proceedings), the burden is on the  appellant  and  the  standard  of
       proof is as laid down  in  R  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department Ex parte Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958 and R  (Karanakaran)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA Civ 11. In the
       judgement at [13] Lord Justice McFarlane found:

           "13.   In our view this court is bound by the  decision  of  the
                Court of Appeal in the case of Karanakaran and behind  that,
                the  decision  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  the  case   of
                Sivakumaran. The approach taken in asylum cases  before  the
                Immigration and  Asylum  Tribunals  is  established  as  the
                reasonable degree of likelihood and it seems to us  that  it
                is just not open to this Tribunal to identify and  hive  off
                the topic of age and say that this now should be the subject
                of a different standard of  proof,  namely  the  balance  of
                probabilities."

    8. The Judge sets out  the  correct  standard  of  proof  of  reasonable
       likelihood at [4] and neither the grounds nor  Ms  Khans  submissions
       establish that having done so the  Judge  failed  to  apply  it.  The
       finding at [9],  relied  upon  in  support  of  the  submission  that
       arguable error could have been made, that the appellant was  probably
       older than he claims to be, does not establish that the Judge applied
       a balance of probabilities test to the evidence.

    9. Ms Khan was asked to identify any other aspect of the  decision  that
       support the contention the Judge  applied  the  wrong  standard.  The
       Tribunal was referred to [3] in which the Judge finds:

           "3.     A  further   age   assessment   was   carried   out   by
                Leicestershire County Council on 12  May  2016  ("assessment
                B"). I'm satisfied that,  that  report  is  entirely  Merton
                compliant. It sets out the circumstances of  the  assessment
                and arrives at a reasoned and well argued assessment of age.
                The first paragraph of that report provides  an  account  of
                the circumstances of assessment A and the way it was carried
                out. In particular assessment B states  that  the  appellant
                was interviewed for the purposes of assessment  A  over  two
                sessions and there is some  reasons  to  find  from  reading
                assessment B, that assessment  A  would  also  have  been  a
                Merton  compliant  assessment.  There  is  also  mention  of
                assessment A (and no indication that it  was  not  a  Merton
                compliant assessment) in the age assessment carried  out  by
                Angeline Seymour ("assessment C"). Assessment C  also  makes
                mention of the times over which assessment A was carried out
                which correspond to the  times  set  out  in  assessment  B.
                Accordingly, whilst  I  place  very  little  weight  on  it,
                assessment A should not be discounted out of hand and whilst
                I accept a report should follow the guidelines in the Merton
                judgement to have much in the way of weight, I do not  think
                that I should place no weight on the report. Insofar  as  it
                is unnecessary to give it any weight  at  all,  I  therefore
                place  it  very  slightly  in  the   balance   against   the
                appellant."

   10. Ms Khan submitted that the use of the word "in the  balance"  by  the
       Judge in the above paragraph  indicated  the  Judge  was  applying  a
       balance of  probabilities  test  and  therefore  applying  the  civil
       standard not that which should have been applied, that of 'reasonable
       likelihood'. Such submission  has  no  arguable  merit.  A  balancing
       exercise is required whether the civil  standard  or  the  reasonable
       likelihood  test  applies  to  ascertain  whether   the   appropriate
       threshold has been crossed. In [3]  the  Judge  was  not  necessarily
       establishing whether the  threshold  had  been  crossed  or  not  but
       explaining why the Judge placed the weight he did upon assessment  A.
       Whether the appropriate standard in a  case  is  on  the  balance  of
       probabilities, 50-50, or  lower  standard  which  may  be  70-30,  or
       however it may be phrased, the Judge is still required to balance the
       evidence. No arguable legal error is made out in the  submission.  It
       is also of note that the Judge having decided what weight  should  be
       attached to this  aspect  of  the  evidence  then  sets  out  in  the
       following paragraph, [4], the threshold against which the evidence as
       a whole is to be assessed. As noted at [21], set out above, the Judge
       applied the correct standard of reasonable  likelihood  in  assessing
       the evidence.

   11. The Judge is criticised in the grounds for purporting to apply within
       the age assessment analysis his own general  knowledge  of  teenagers
       and the way they grow up at [5]. Relevant cases on this point include
       Secretary of State for the Home Department v Abdi [1994] Imm  AR  402
       in which Steyn LJ at  page  420  accepted  that  an  Adjudicator  was
       entitled to rely on matters within his own knowledge,  provided  such
       matters were disclosed to the parties so as to  afford  them  a  fair
       opportunity to deal with them.  That was also the view in HA and TD v
       SSHD [2010] CSIH 28.  In AA(Sudan) [2004] UKIAT 00152 the Adjudicator
       did not believe the appellant's account that he was tortured after he
       found out that  organs  were  being  removed  from  patients  in  the
       hospital, where he worked, because of his evidence  about  how  those
       organs were dealt with. The Adjudicator took the  view  that  it  was
       common knowledge that organs needed to be moved within  hours  rather
       than the days or weeks the appellant had referred  to.  The  Tribunal
       found that the Adjudicator was entitled to apply standards of  common
       knowledge on this issue, as that knowledge would be available to  any
       moderately educated  person  (and  was  in  any  event  confirmed  by
       subsequent evidence before the Tribunal).

   12. In  the  Court  of  Session  case  of  Hasisbi  [2007]  CSOH  83  the
       Adjudicator had consulted an atlas  after  the  hearing  and  reached
       certain conclusions about the Appellant's journey from Iran to the UK
       based on the distances  involved.  Lady  Smith  held  that  facts  of
       geography were within judicial knowledge and it  could  not  be  said
       that it was not open to an Adjudicator, by reference to an  atlas  or
       otherwise, to rely  on  the  geographical  distances  involved  in  a
       journey.  Since in this case, any explanation by the Appellant  would
       inevitably have involved an inconsistency in his evidence, there  was
       nothing which obliged the Adjudicator to put it to the Appellant.

   13. More recently, in AM (fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC), it
       was held that if  a  judge  is  cognisant  of  something  conceivably
       material which does not form part of either party's case,  this  must
       be brought to the attention of the parties at the  earliest  possible
       stage, which duty could in principle extend beyond the hearing date.

   14. It is necessary to consider [5] in detail in which the Judge writes:

           "Of the two assessments (assessment B and assessment C) my  view
           is that the assessment  carried  out  by  Leicestershire  Social
           Services on 12 May 2016 is  to  be  preferred.  At  page  11  of
           assessment B, there is mention of the fact that  the  Appellant,
           who was purporting to be 15, had gained no "height or torso  for
           nearly a year, if [the Appellant] was 15, it is expected that he
           would gain a level of height in the year." This is not mentioned
           in assessment C and I think it  is  a  very  salient  point.  It
           strikes  me,  taking  into  account  my  general  knowledge   of
           teenagers and the way they grow, that it is implausible he would
           not have grown in nearly  a  year.  This  relates  well  to  the
           section of assessment B at the top of  page  3  where  there  is
           reference  to  him  being  "fully   developed"   with   relevant
           psychological and clinical signs for  that  assessment,  whereas
           report C does not properly explain the relevance of some of  the
           physiological features, for example on page 7  of  assessment  C
           there is reference to lines on his forehead: "I noted that  [the
           Appellant] had some wrinkles to his forehead,  other  than  that
           his skin did not look aged." This  confirms  the  Appellant  has
           wrinkles this does not explain the reason why wrinkles were  not
           a mark of his skin being aged. Whereas assessment B  deals  with
           the  wrinkles  as  follows:  "[the  Appellant's]  skin  was  not
           appearing weathered does have signs of ageing that would not  be
           expected in a child, in that he has lines on his face, which  is
           more characteristic of adults."  I  thought  that  assessment  B
           provides a much better consideration of those lines and that was
           mentioned  in  assessment  C,  the  lines  are  not  given   any
           relevance."

   15. The Judge's comment does not relate to an issue of which the  parties
       had no  notice  as  the  issue  of  age  assessment  and  information
       contained within the reports was clearly known to both the  appellant
       and respondent's representatives. The question to  be  considered  is
       not whether the Judge committed a procedural irregularity, which I do
       not find has been made out, but whether the Judge  erred  in  law  in
       preferring assessment B over assessment C as  the  determinative  age
       assessment relating to the appellant's  actual  age.  The  Judge  was
       required to consider all relevant evidence and clearly did so.  I  do
       not find it made out that in preferring assessment B  the  Judge  has
       been shown to have erred in law in a manner material to the  decision
       to dismiss the appeal.

   16. The Judge was clearly aware of the basis of  the  appellant's  claim,
       reasons for refusal and history of the appeal itself and  it  is  not
       legal error for the Judge not to have set out  in  the  body  of  the
       determination what had gone before. The procedural  history  of  this
       matter  does  include  decisions  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins
       granting permission to appeal on an earlier occasion and the decision
       of Upper Tribunal Judge C Lane promulgated on 2 June 2017 in which it
       was found another judge the First-Tier Tribunal had applied the wrong
       standard of proof to the evidence in a previous decision,  such  that
       that decision should be set aside.  The  Judge  in  this  appeal  was
       considering matters afresh and was required to make his own  findings
       of fact based upon the evidence made  available.  The  Judge  clearly
       considered the evidence with the required degree of anxious  scrutiny
       and noted the appellant's claim to international protection was based
       on an alleged real risk on return for the reasons set out at [19]  in
       which the Judge writes "...His  account  is  that  when  the  Taliban
       arrived at their house and started shooting his  family,  he  escaped
       through a window with his younger brother. Regardless of  whether  he
       was 6 or 10 at this time, his evidence is that he then went  and  hid
       with his younger brother and that they waited for a long  time  while
       before he went back (alone) to the house to find that his parents had
       died at the hands of the Taliban. His evidence is that he  then  left
       his brother in hiding and did not go back to him and instead caught a
       taxi to some other location. He has given no plausible reason why  he
       would do such a thing. In the asylum interview he seems  to  indicate
       that he was worried he might get  killed  if  he  went  back  to  his
       brother (although he states that he then went to get a  taxi  on  the
       road) whereas in the hearing, he told me that he did not go  back  as
       he was "in grief and did not know what to do"....

   17. The Judge is also criticised in relation to the evidence given by the
       appellants teacher. At [20] the Judge writes:

           "20.   Finally, one of the  Appellant's  teachers,  Ms  Thurley,
                with 14 years experience of working with 16  -  18-year-olds
                gave evidence about the Appellant and his assessment of  his
                age. She had previously written a letter at page 31  of  the
                Appellants bundle. However, as experienced as she may be,  I
                placed very little weight on her  letter  or  evidence.  The
                letter and what she told me at the hearing  was  in  no  way
                Merton compliant. She was teaching the Appellant in a  large
                class of students (although at times she said it  was  small
                and she did have one-to-one experiences of teaching him) and
                taught him in the morning for up to a year  and  when  asked
                about why  she  formed  the  impression  that  his  age  was
                adolescence she stated that  his  "behaviour  did  not  seem
                different to the other people I work with. Very  little  eye
                contact and shy. He would not ask for help  and  would  just
                sit there." That answer gave me very little  assurance  that
                her assessment  of  his  age  was  based  on  objective  and
                professional factors which might go anyway to casting  doubt
                on the accuracy of assessment B or in raising any basis  for
                questioning the very  considerable  inconsistencies  in  the
                Appellants evidence about dates and times. Whilst  I  accept
                that Ms Thurley was trying to be helpful in writing a letter
                in support, it makes no difference to my view on his  age  -
                or indeed his credibility. I think that Mr Thurley is  wrong
                and that she has misjudged his age."

   18.  This  is  not  an  unwarranted  attack  by  the   Judge   upon   the
       professionalism of the author of the letter but  the  Judge  weighing
       the evidence  from  this  source  against  other  evidence  that  was
       available to him, and not to Ms Thurley,  regarding  the  appellant's
       age. The Judge accepts Ms Thurley's experience and  interaction  with
       the appellant, but this is only one piece of the 'evidential jigsaw'.
       The Judge gives adequate reasons in support of the findings made  and
       no arguable legal error is made out in the weight the Judge chose  to
       give to this evidence.

   19. Whilst the Judge granting permission took it upon herself to identify
       what she considered to be arguable legal errors an examination of the
       material in some detail does not establish that the Judge  made  such
       errors or that any error made is material  to  the  decision  of  the
       Judge in relation to the appellant's age sufficient to warrant it  be
       found that the age assessment is infected by  material  legal  error.
       Pleading such errors by cherry-picking individual  words  or  phrases
       and attempting to build a case around the same,  without  considering
       the decision as a whole, does not assist the appellant.

   20. It is not made out the Judge having identified the appellant's age as
       an  adult  erred  in  the  assessment  of  the  credibility  of   the
       appellant's claim or the assessment of risk on return or human rights
       aspects.

   21. I do not find it made out that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  a  manner
       material to the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient warrant the
       Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.



Decision

   22. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

   23. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31 January 2019

