
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/04607/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |               Decision & Reasons        |
|                                   |Promulgated                              |
|On 7 December 2017                 |               On 4 January 2018         |
|                                   |                                         |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     VV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, instructed By Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, VV, is a male citizen of Sri Lanka and was born in 1983.
     The appellant claimed asylum in January 2015 but his  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by a decision dated 3 February  2015.
    He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M A Khan) which dismissed
    his appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7  September  2017.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. We find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal falls  to  be  set
    aside.  We have  reached  that  decision  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, this appellant has made two previous appeals to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The initial decision had been set aside by the  President  of
    the First-tier Tribunal following the judgment in the Court  of  Appeal
    in Detention Action [2015] EWCA Civ 840. Judge Khan at [29]  considered
    that the decision of the previous Tribunal had a "baring (sic)  on  the
    appellant's credibility".  Judge Khan recorded that  the  decision  had
    been set aside by the President  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  he
    stated   that,   "credibility   findings   by   Judge   Howard   remain
    unchallenged." The  matter  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain on 28 January 2016.  In his decision dated 5 April  2016  Judge
    Hussain at paragraph 9 reinstates Judge Howard's findings and the  same
    are reproduced here".  Judge Khan then proceeded to set out a number of
    paragraphs  which  contain  Judge  Howard's   findings   of   fact   as
    "reinstated" by Judge Hussain.

 3. Judge Khan's approach is problematic.  So far as we and the parties are
    aware, none of the findings of fact in either  the  decision  of  Judge
    Howard or Judge Hussain survived the setting aside of their  decisions.
    It is not clear  to  us  upon  what  basis  Judge  Khan  considered  it
    appropriate to rely on those previous findings of fact.   Matters  were
    further complicated by Judge Khan's statement at [44]:

         The appellant has already been found to be an untruthful witness by
         Judge Howard and he has continued to  add  evidence  in  his  fresh
         claim and has exaggerated his claim in order to prolong his stay in
         the UK.

 4. Whilst Judge Khan has made findings of fact on the "fresh" evidence  of
    the appellant, it is also apparent that he has placed reliance upon the
    findings of the previous  Tribunals  which  had  been  set  aside.   Ms
    Everett, who appeared for the Secretary of State, acknowledged that  it
    was difficult, if not impossible, to determine  to  what  extent  Judge
    Khan had relied upon  the  previous  (vitiated)  findings  of  fact  in
    concluding that the appellant's appeal should  be  dismissed.   In  our
    opinion, Judge Khan fell into legal error by placing any reliance  upon
    the previous findings of the earlier Tribunals.   He  should,  instead,
    have conducted an assessment of the evidence de novo.

 5. In the circumstances, we set aside Judge Khan's  decision.   Given  the
    nature of the legal error, there was no alternative but for there to be
    a new fact-finding exercise which is better conducted in the First-tier
    Tribunal to which the appeal is now returned.



Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  7
    September 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.
     The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge M A Khan)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 3 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




