
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04521/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 1 November 2019                     |On 7 November 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                    H K A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M J Azmi of Counsel, instructed by the Central
                  England Law Centre
For the Respondent:  Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge French promulgated on 31 July 2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 2 May 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1999, who
    arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum, whilst  a  minor,  in
    2016.  Prior to determination of his  protection  claim,  there  was  a
    positive conclusive grounds decision that  the  Appellant  had  been  a
    victim of modern slavery for a period of 7 to 8 months in Turkey, where
    he was  compelled  to  work  in  a  factory;  during  his  travel  from
    Afghanistan, ultimately to the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    claim to be at risk on return from the Taliban, having been  wanted  by
    them at the age of 12 or 13, was inconsistent and not credible.  It was
    not accepted that the Appellant was of any interest to the Taliban,  he
    was from a government-controlled area, he had family in Afghanistan and
    the option of internally relocating.  In relation to human rights,  the
    Appellant had not established family life in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    would not face any significant obstacles to reintegration on his return
    to Afghanistan.  The Appellant did not meet the high  threshold  for  a
    grant of leave to remain on medical grounds.  There were no exceptional
    circumstances identified to warrant a grant of leave to remain and  the
    Appellant was no longer an unaccompanied asylum seeking child,  but  an
    adult.

 4. Judge French dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 31  July
    2019 on all grounds.  The Appellant's  account  was  found  to  include
    major inconsistencies and was implausible and it appears that the First-
    tier Tribunal found as damaging the Appellant's credibility his failure
    to claim asylum in the 5 to 6 month period that he was in France before
    coming to the  United  Kingdom.   In  relation  to  human  rights,  the
    Appellant's return to  Afghanistan  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for private  life,  he  spoke  a
    language commonly spoken in Afghanistan and had family there,  contrary
    to not having established a private life in the United Kingdom.



The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on two main grounds.  First, that the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to take  into  account  the
    Appellant's age at the time of  events  which  he  claims  occurred  in
    Afghanistan, when he was around 12 or 13 years of age and that  he  was
    still a minor, who had been the victim of modern slavery on his journey
    from Afghanistan to the United Kingdom; such that this should not  form
    the basis of any adverse credibility  findings  about  passage  through
    safe third countries.  The Appellant was not  educated  in  Afghanistan
    and claims to have mental health  problems,  which  were  detailed  and
    letter from his  GP  dated  12  July  2019.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    referred briefly to the  medical  evidence,  but  failed  to  make  any
    allowance for the  Appellant's  age,  history  or  mental  health  when
    reaching adverse credibility findings  and  ultimately  dismissing  the
    Appellant's asylum claim.  Further, the First-tier  Tribunal  fails  to
    identify the major inconsistencies in the Appellant's claim  that  were
    relied upon and the findings made on plausibility failed  to  have  any
    reference to context or the objective evidence.

 6. Secondly, in relation to internal relocation, the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal  extends  to  one  line  only  and  failed  to  give  any
    consideration to the Appellant's particular circumstances.   Linked  to
    this issue, when considering whether there  would  be  any  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration in Afghanistan,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to have any regard  to
    the Appellant's personal circumstances,  traumatic  experiences  during
    his  journey,  his  mental  health  and  the  impact  of  all  of   the
    circumstances on his ability to reintegrate.

 7. At the appeal hearing, Mr Tarlow on behalf of the  Respondent  did  not
    oppose a finding that there was a material error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal for the reasons identified by Mr  Azmi,  set
    out above.



Findings and reasons

 1. As properly and appropriately accepted  by  Mr  Tarlow  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, I find a material error of law by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in its assessment of  the  Appellant's  credibility,  as  well  as  its
    assessment of the prospects of internal relocation  and  whether  there
    are any very significant obstacles to reintegration in Afghanistan.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is relatively brief  given  the
    nature of the issues raised in the appeal, with findings  extending  to
    only five paragraphs.  The first of those paragraphs deals  essentially
    with the submissions made on behalf of  the  Appellant,  including  the
    issue of whether inconsistencies in the Appellant's account were due to
    his youth and/or mental health problems.  The Appellant's  age  is  not
    expressly dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal at all, there being  no
    recognition of the Appellant's age or background when  considering  the
    credibility of his claim or whether inconsistencies were accounted  for
    by his age at the time that events occurred and  at  the  time  of  his
    claim for asylum when he was still a  minor.   In  relation  to  mental
    health, the First-tier Tribunal simply state that  there  has  been  no
    formal diagnosis of a mental health condition nor care  from  a  mental
    health specialist, without any express consideration  or  rejection  of
    the evidence in the letter from the Appellant's GP.  Although there may
    be reasons why that evidence carried little weight, it was  simply  not
    dealt with nor any findings made on it at all.   Both  age  and  mental
    health  are  matters  which  should  expressly  be  considered  in  the
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility in accordance with the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note to of 2010  and  Practice  Direction,  First
    Tier  and  Upper  Tribunal,  "Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive
    Witnesses"; however this is not referred to at all  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Although in the reasons for refusal letter, the Respondent did not make
    any adverse credibility findings against the  Appellant  on  the  basis
    that he had failed to claim asylum in a safe third country prior to his
    arrival in the United Kingdom, in paragraph 6 of the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, there appears to be such  a  finding  against  the
    Appellant for failing to claim asylum in Bulgaria, Hungary  or  France.
    Aside from being contrary to the Respondent's position, the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to make a proper assessment  of  whether  there  was  a
    "reasonable opportunity "to make asylum claim in a third country and if
    so, the  weight  to  be  attached  to  such  failure,  as  required  in
    accordance with the decision in
    KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 914.

 4. In paragraph 7 of the decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    there were major inconsistencies in the various  accounts  provided  by
    the Appellant, however not a single inconsistency is identified  within
    the body of the decision.  Further, the decision fails  to  record  the
    Appellant's evidence or account even in summary.  The remainder of  the
    paragraph relies on much of the Appellant's  claim  being  implausible,
    with only two examples being given, first that the Taliban  would  have
    searched for the Appellant in his uncle's house and would  have  killed
    him rather than given a warning to his mother, and secondly that it was
    implausible that the Appellant would not have had  the  opportunity  to
    claim  asylum  in  France.   The  reason  for  the  first  finding   on
    plausibility is expanded upon  in  paragraph  9  of  the  decision  but
    without reference to the background evidence.

 5. In relation to human rights, the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    Appellant had not established a private life  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    that he failed to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that he would not be deprived of a family life if
    he went back to Afghanistan, where he had family, where  he  spoke  the
    language and had spent the majority  of  his  life.   In  circumstances
    where the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom with the support  of
    social services from his entry as a minor in 2016, there is a  lack  of
    reasons from the First-tier Tribunal to support the finding that he had
    not established any private life at all for the purposes of  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.  Further, there  is  little
    more than a bare assessment of the Appellant's circumstances,  with  no
    reference to his age or mental health as to his ability to  reintegrate
    in Afghanistan; and no detailed assessment of the  option  of  internal
    relocation.

 6. For all of these reasons, the  grounds  of  appeal  identified  by  the
    Appellant establish material errors of law by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it is necessary to set aside the decision.  Given the  nature
    of the errors which focus on credibility findings, it is appropriate to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal (Birmingham hearing centre) to be heard de  novo  before
a Judge except Judge French.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]         Date         4th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

