
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04184/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2019                    |On 24th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Agetina [B]
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr P Blackwood (Counsel)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This was an error of law hearing. The appellant in this matter  is  the
    Secretary of State. I will refer to the parties  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Claimant.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  a
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  PJM  Hollingworth)  (FtT)
    promulgated on 7th February 2019, in which the Claimant's human  rights
    appeal was allowed.

2.   The appeal on protection grounds had previously  been  dismissed  by  a
    different Tribunal and following an error of  law  decision  the  Upper
    Tribunal directed that the human rights claim was remitted to  the  FtT
    for new fact finding which was the purpose of the appeal hearing before
    FTJ Hollingworth. Devaseelan principles applied.

Background
3.   The Claimant is a citizen of Albania. She has a relationship  with  her
    partner Mr [L]. They have one child and at the time of the hearing  the
    Claimant was pregnant with their second child.  Mr [L]  is  an  Albania
    citizen but he entered the UK when he was  17  years  old  having  left
    Albania when he was aged  13  years.   The  FtT  considered  Article  8
    outside of the Rules and found that he had established a strong private
    life that outweighed the public interest in immigration control for the
    removal of the Claimant and her child with whom there was  family  life
    in the UK.

Grounds of appeal
4.   In grounds of appeal the Secretary of State argued that the  FtT  erred
    by failing to properly apply section 117B(5) Nationality Immigration  &
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) ("2002  Act"),  in  respect  of  Mr  [L]'s
    private life.  It was argued that insufficient weight was  attached  to
    the fact that it had been established when his  status  was  precarious
    and insufficient reasons were given for the decision.

5.   It was further argued  that  the  FtT  failed  to  have  regard  to  EV
    (Philippines) & ors [2014] EWCA Civ  874    and  KO  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2018] UKSC 53 in the assessment of where the  best  interests  of  the
    child lay.  The FtT had not assessed this having regard  to  the  "real
    world". The Claimant had no legal basis to remain in the UK, Mr [L] had
    lawful leave but his status was un-determined as he was waiting for his
    application for further leave to be decided, and the child was  neither
    a British citizen nor qualified child.

Permission to appeal
6.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted  by  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachey on all grounds.

Rule 24 response

7.   The Claimant produced a detailed response.

Submissions
8.   At the hearing before me Mr  Lindsay,  representing  the  Secretary  of
    State, argued that the main ground  was  the  FtT's  failure  to  apply
    section 117B(5).  It was not disputed by the Secretary of State that on
    the facts the appeal could be allowed. But the FtT  had  not  explained
    adequately why the appeal was allowed in terms  of  compelling  reasons
    that outweighed the public interest factors under section 117B(5).  The
    FtT failed  to  take  into  account  the  primary  legislation  in  the
    proportionality exercise.  There was no reason given for why the family
    could not return together to Albania.  Mr [L] would be able to work and
    support the family and he had family connections in  Albania  where  he
    visited yearly.  The best interests of the child would be  equally  met
    in Albania.

9.   In response Mr Blackwood for the Claimant contended that  the  FtT  had
    considered section 117B factors and  the  issue  of  precariousness  at
    [21].  He relied on the detailed Rule 24 response and argued  that  the
    challenge amounted to a disagreement with the outcome.  The history  of
    the proceedings was relevant to the extent that the FtT was required to
    determine only the  Article  8  issues  (it  being  accepted  that  the
    Claimant's family life with her partner  could  lead  to  a  successful
    appeal) and the adverse credibility findings in respect of the Claimant
    made by the previous Tribunal had been maintained [10].

10.  Mr Blackwood emphasised that need to find an error of law following  UT
    (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095.  The  FtT  had  found  a  very
    strong private life existed for Mr [L] and that finding was open to the
    FtT on the evidence. The FtT gave reasons in support  including  length
    of residence, age when he came to the UK and his strong network in  the
    UK and the lack of ties in Albania.  The FtT found this was capable  of
    outweighing any weight to be given to section 117B(5).


Discussion and conclusion

11.  I have decided that there was no material error in law in the  decision
    of the FtT.  The  decision  shall  stand.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds amount to a disagreement with the outcome.  I am satisfied that
    the FtT fully considered all the evidence and properly applied the law.
    The findings made as to private and  family  life  and  proportionality
    were sustainable on the evidence before the FtT.

12.  Mr Lindsay focused on the failure to apply section 117B(5) as the  main
    ground of appeal.  I considered that the FtT had clearly shown that  it
    was aware of the precarious status of Mr [L], but  concluded  that  his
    strong private life was compelling and deserving  of  recognition  over
    and above the public interest.  The FtT referred to his status  at  the
    time of the hearing as "3C leave" and to the fact that he was  awaiting
    a decision from the Secretary of State. It was entirely clear that  the
    FtT appreciated that Mr [L]'s leave was discretionary.

13.  As to whether or not the FtT had taken  a  "real  world"  view,  it  is
    clear that it did because it recognised that Mr [L], who was  found  to
    be entirely credible, had lived lawfully albeit precariously in the  UK
    for a "substantial" period  of  time  and  was  granted  leave  on  two
    previous occasions. The  question  of  weight  was  a  matter  for  the
    Tribunal. There was no attempt by the FtT  to  gloss  over  matters  as
    shown by the maintaining of the adverse credibility findings in respect
    of the Claimant. The FtT had also concluded that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to reintegration in Albania [11].


14.   The  FtT  reached  the   conclusion   that   there   were   compelling
    circumstances so as to justify consideration of Article 8 [12]. The FtT
    made a self direction on section 117B and clearly stated  that  it  had
    considered the issue of precariousness in respect of the  Claimant  and
    Mr [L] at [21].  The critical factors for the FtT were Mr [L]'s  strong
    private life and the best interests of the  child.   The  FtT  at  [21]
    found that it "would be antithetical to [the  child's]  best  interests
    for her leave the UK to live in Albania in the circumstances to which I
    refer... and which included the finding that Mr [L] would not be in the
    same position to support his child  if  the  family  were  to  live  in
    Albania (MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA civ 705 paragraphs 56 &  57).
    Further the FtT considered the strength of the ties in the UK and those
    in Albania, finding that the latter did not  involve  any  family  life
    element and simply amounted to visits. In so doing  the  FtT  correctly
    identified the law, made findings  on  the  evidence,  engaged  in  the
    process to identify the best interests  of  the  child  and  considered
    section 117B and public interest.

15.  Having regard to the decision as a whole there can be no  doubt  as  to
    why and how the decision was made by the FtT.  As such it  required  no
    further explanation or reasons (MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC) and Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)).


Decision
16.  The appeal is dismissed.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed
    and the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed
                  Date 18.7.2019


GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








NO ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD


Signed
                   Date 18.7.2019

GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
