
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/04519/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19th September 2019                  |On 24th September 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                        Nikitaben Arvindbhai Ghoghari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson of Counsel instructed by Kadmos
Consultants
For the Respondent:    Miss R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Rae-Reeves
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 13 June 2019.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 3 February 1986.

 3. She has a complex immigration history having originally arrived in  the
    UK in December 2009 as a Tier 4  student.   She  subsequently  made  an
    asylum claim in October  2014  but  she  no  longer  relies  upon  that
    application.

 4. The application before the judge was one made on 20  July  2017  as  an
    unmarried partner when she applied for leave to remain on the basis  of
    Article 8 within the Immigration Rules as well as on Article 8  outside
    the Rules.

 5. The judge concluded that she  had  been  living  with  her  partner,  a
    British citizen, Ravinder Singh Riyat,  since  either  March  2016,  or
    February 2017.  Accordingly, the judge  accepted  that  she  meets  the
    definition of partner as set out in the immigration rules since she has
    been in a subsisting relationship at the  date  of  application  for  a
    period of two years.

 6. The judge then turned his attention to the question  of  whether  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to family life with Mr  Riyat  continuing
    outside of  the  UK.   Mr  Riyat  has  three  children  from  a  former
    relationship including a 7 year  old  child  with  whom  he  has  daily
    contact.

 7. The judge concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances  which
    would tip the balance in  the  appellant's  favour  and  dismissed  the
    appeal, both within and without the Immigration Rules.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to take into account the best interests of the sponsor's son
    and had not considered that relationship  in  the  context  of  whether
    there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  sponsor
    enjoying family life together in India.

 9. On 14 September 2019 Judge Robertson granted permission,  finding  that
    it was arguable that nowhere in the decision does  the  judge  consider
    whether:-

      i) the sponsor would face insurmountable obstacles in  continuing  his
         relationship with the appellant because it would involve him giving
         up frequent contact and involvement that he has with his son; and

     ii) whether under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  it  is
         reasonable to expect the sponsor to relocate to India  to  continue
         his family life with the appellant when it involves leaving his son
         in the UK.

10. Although in the Rule 24 response the respondent initially defended this
    determination, at the hearing Miss Bassi  conceded  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in this determination and was  content  that  the
    decision be reversed.

11. In an otherwise detailed and thoughtful determination  the  judge  fell
    into error by failing to consider a  material  issue  namely  the  best
    interests of the sponsor's child and his relationship with  his  father
    in the assessment of the insurmountable obstacle test.  Accordingly, he
    erred in law.

Notice of Decision

12. The judge erred in law. His decision is set  aside.  It  is  remade  as
    follows. The appellant's appeal is allowed.

13. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                             Date 23 September 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
