
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04883/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 January 2019                   |On 28 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     UD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, Counsel, instructed by Oaks Solicitors
                    (Rowlandson House)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Albania. Her date  of  birth  is  13  May
    1982.  Her asylum application was refused by the Secretary of State  on
    11 May 2017.  Her appeal was dismissed on 8 December 2017 by the First-
    tier Tribunal ("FTT").  I set aside the decision of Judge  of  the  FTT
    NMK Lawrence on 23 October 2018, having found a material error  of  law
    for the following reasons:

         "6.  I will give brief reasons why the judge materially erred.   He
             failed  to  engage  with  the  evidence  in  this  case.   The
             Appellant prepared a very full and detailed witness  statement
             comprising 27 pages in which she described  not  only  serious
             and  significant  domestic  violence  towards  her   and   her
             children, but failed efforts that she made through the  police
             and judiciary in Albania to protect herself and her  children.
             Her evidence was that she would be at  risk  on  return.   The
             judge did not properly engage with this evidence.   He  failed
             to provide adequate reasons why the Appellant was not at  risk
             on return.  At paragraph 9 of his  decision  when  identifying
             the issues, he did not identify risk on return as a matter for
             him to decide.  The judge failed to engage with the  extensive
             background evidence relating  to  Albania  relied  on  by  the
             Appellant.   Furthermore,  consideration  of  sufficiency   of
             protection is flawed for the reasons identified in the grounds
             and the failure of the judge to properly  consider  risk.   In
             addition, the judge did not make clear  unequivocal  findings,
             in relation to the children's best interests, properly  taking
             into account, the evidence of the  independent  social  worker
             and the evidence of the  Appellant  about  how  her  husband's
             violence impacted on them.

         7.   In the light of the indication by the parties that the  issues
             are narrow, it having been agreed by the  Secretary  of  State
             the Appellant was the victim of domestic violence, in my  view
             the  matter  should  remain  in  the  UT.   The  hearing   was
             adjourned.  The matter will  be  reheard,  on  a  date  to  be
             notified  not  within  8  weeks  (Ms   Smith   indicated   her
             instructing  solicitor's  intention  to  instruct  a   country
             expert).  None the findings of the FTT are maintained".

2.   The resumed hearing was listed  on  23  January  2019.   The  Appellant
    submitted a large quantity of further evidence as well  as  relying  on
    the evidence that was before the FTT.  The evidence relied  on  by  the
    Appellant comprised documents that she submitted with  her  application
    for asylum which are to be found in the Respondent's bundle (RB)  which
    unfortunately were  not  replicated  in  any  of  the  various  bundles
    subsequently submitted by the Appellant's  solicitors  on  her  behalf.
    There was a bundle (AB1) which was before the FTT comprising 165  pages
    including the Appellant's witness  statement  and  a  letter  from  her
    daughter ("N").  In addition, within that AB1  there  are  the  country
    guidance cases of TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 and DM
    (Sufficiency of Protection, PSG, Women, Domestic Violence)  Albania  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00059.  There is a  second  bundle  (AB2)  which  was  not
    before the FTT. This comprises 235  pages  and  includes  a  report  by
    Stephanie Prempeh an independent social worker of 20 June 2017,  and  a
    psychologist's report of 8 August 2017 prepared by  Dr  Roxanne  Agnew-
    Davies and Matthew McDonnell.  There is a  supplementary  bundle  (AB3)
    which comprises 127 documents and includes Ms Smith's skeleton argument
    and the country expert report of Antonia Young of 13 January 2019.   In
    addition, within AB3 various decisions of  courts  in  Albania  and  in
    response to my direction a chronology relating to events in Albania.

3.   At the hearing Ms Smith submitted the cases of Bagdanavicius & Anor,  R
    (on the application of) v Secretary of  State  Home  Department  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 1605 and IM (Sufficiency of protection)  Malawi  [2007]  UKAIT
    0071 and R (on the application of) Agyarko and  Ikuga  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.

4.   Mr Lindsay relied on the RB and the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  (RFRL)
    of 12 May 2017.  He also submitted a copy of  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note (CPIN) Albania: Domestic abuse  and  violence  against
    women, Version 3.0, December 2018.

5.   It was agreed at a previous hearing, and it was  confirmed  before  me,
    that there were no  credibility  issues  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    account.  Her account in its entirety was accepted.  Following this  it
    was not necessary for her to give evidence and the  case  proceeded  by
    way of submissions only, the issue being sufficiency of protection  and
    relocation.   However,  to  understand  my  decisions  in  respect   of
    relocation and sufficiency of protection it is necessary to set out the
    Appellant's evidence. In  this  respect  I  was  not  assisted  by  her
    extremely lengthy and jumbled witness statement of 27  pages  dated  12
    June 2017. No attempt was made to record the Appellant's evidence in  a
    methodical chronological manner. The  chronology  later  submitted  has
    assisted me to some extent.

The Appellant's Evidence

6.   The Appellant attended school until the age of 14 or 15.  She  met  her
    ex-husband (AK) when she was approximately 15.  They married  when  the
    Appellant was  18,  in  December  1998.  Throughout  the  marriage  the
    Appellant suffered continual and serious  psychological,  physical  and
    sexual violence.  The Appellant catalogues rapes and physical  violence
    on almost a daily basis. The couple's three children were  all  victims
    of domestic violence at the hands of their father.

7.   The Appellant's parents stopped coming to their  home  as  he  was  not
    welcoming towards. She became isolated.  Shortly after the  Appellant's
    marriage her parents moved to the USA.  Her neighbours could hear  what
    was going on and there was gossip but no sympathy for  her  as  it  was
    considered normal for a husband to beat his wife.  AK did  not  have  a
    regular job and the family very often  had  no  money  for  food.   The
    Appellant was not allowed to eat without AK's permission.  Her  parents
    secretly sent her money.

8.   The Appellant's first pregnancy  ended  in  miscarriage.  AK  beat  her
    because she spilt a glass of water.  Initially he would not let her  go
    to the hospital. About a week after the miscarriage  she  was  able  to
    escape and she made it to the hospital where  she  was  told  that  the
    damaged foetus was stuck in the placenta.  The doctors  wanted  her  to
    stay in hospital for a few days. Her husband would not let her.

9.   The Appellant had two paternal uncles in Kukes. One  is  now  deceased.
    It was not possible for the Appellant to talk freely to family  members
    because her husband would be watching her.  She did on a few  occasions
    seek refuge with an uncle when her husband had forgotten  to  lock  the
    door. He would tell her that she must  leave  AK.  AK  would  on  these
    occasions promise to change. The Appellant was emotionally drained  and
    felt powerless and would return home.  She did not tell her  uncle  the
    full horror of her life.  They did not see her injuries and wounds.  AK
    would threaten her family too and she did not want to subject  them  to
    danger or become a burden on them.  The Appellant knew that  she  could
    not stay permanently with her uncle. It was not  possible  for  him  to
    take care of her. He had a meagre salary and lived  in  a  one  bedroom
    flat with his family.  He was scared of the AK.

10.  The Appellant's first daughter N was born  on  10  December  2002.  Her
    second daughter R was born on 19 January 2005. Her son M was born on 11
    June 2007.  Her husband did not like the girls.  He reacted  better  to
    the birth of a son.   All  the  children  dislike  their  father.  They
    remember a lot of violence.  They would often go to bed hungry and they
    have all been assaulted by him.  They had to wear long sleeves to cover
    bruises. AK put pressure on them not to say  anything  about  what  was
    happening at home.  He would shake them and throw them when  they  were
    toddlers.  If they spilt something he would force  them  to  kneel  and
    lick up the mess.   When M was aged 7 AK hit him on  the  back  and  he
    stopped breathing.  AK's uncle lived in the flat downstairs. They threw
    cold water on him.  He eventually started to  breath.   She  was  never
    allowed to drop the children at school or collect them. She  never  met
    the teachers.

11.  On one occasion the Appellant was beaten so badly that  she  lost  most
    of her upper front teeth. She wears dentures. She has several scars  on
    her head, hairline and eyebrows.  Once AK grabbed her hair  and  bashed
    her head against a doorknob causing her to fall unconscious.   Beatings
    were on the whole daily occurrences.

12.  The Appellant first reported  a  matter  to  the  police  in  May  2014
    following an incident.  Her parents were  visiting  from  the  USA.  AK
    slapped her.  Her father intervened.  To calm the situation  she  asked
    her father and brother to leave.  AK picked up an iron  bar  and  waved
    it. The Appellant was trying to put the children to bed.  AK went  into
    N bedroom with a knife in his hand. N covered her  face  and  screamed.
    The Appellant tried to calm him down.  He said "I am going to kill  the
    children and you first and then  I  am  going  to  kill  myself".   The
    Appellant had a small Nokia phone that AK gave her to contact him.  His
    uncle's details were  on  the  phone.  He  lived  downstairs  from  the
    Appellant and family.  She texted him and then she rang  him  and  left
    the phone on so that the uncle could hear what was going on.  His uncle
    came up to the flat and calmed him down.   At this point she  knew  the
    only way to keep the  children  safe  would  be  to  escape  from  him;
    however, she had no experience of the outside world or skills needed to
    survive on her own.

13.  On 21 May 2014  she  attended  the  police  station  and  reported  the
    incident. AK was questioned by the police. He tried to hit her in front
    of police officers and they intervened. She was asked to  go  to  court
    directly from the  police  station.  The  court  ordered  an  emergency
    protection order (PO).  He had to leave the house.  However, the  final
    order in June 2014 allowed him to live in the same house subject to him
    staying two metres away from the Appellant at all times.  The Appellant
    felt unable to return home following  this.  Her  father,  who  was  in
    Albania at the time, hired and paid a lawyer and for the Appellant  and
    children to stay in a hotel.  Her lawyer made  applications  to  change
    the PO and he filed a divorce petition on her behalf.  On 23 July  2014
    the court eventually restored the original PO and  she  returned  home.
    Her father installed a security lock.

14.  Matters did not much improve because the  Appellant  was  terrified  to
    leave the house. AK would breach the PO. He would hang around  outside.
    If she looked out of the window he would be there.  Her father  had  to
    return to the USA in order to return to his work.   AK  tried  to  gain
    access to the flat and the children would panic.  The  Appellant  could
    not go out alone.  Once her father left she was not able  to  buy  food
    without someone accompanying her. Her uncle was not able to  help  her.
    She had to rely on neighbours who were not very  helpful  because  they
    did not want to get involved.  The children's school was  insecure  and
    had no  gates  or  boundaries.   He  threatened  them.   The  Appellant
    returned to the police station and complained on many occasions on  the
    advice of her lawyer. She tried to call them on the phone.  The  police
    took no notice of her. She was fobbed  off.   She  managed  to  get  an
    appointment on with a top police officer thanks to her lawyer, however,
    he was annoyed and not interested and said that he did not have time to
    deal with it.

15.  There were many court hearings and her lawyer  constantly  argued  that
    there had been a breach of the PO.  Her lawyer told her  that  he  felt
    helpless and did not know how to  get  the  court  and  the  police  to
    enforce the PO.  AK attempted to commit suicide  in  20  June  2014  by
    cutting his wrists and throat. He was hospitalised and survived.

16.  On 10 December 2014 the AK followed the children home  and  he  grabbed
    N.  She managed to escape. The  Appellant  called  the  police.  No-one
    answered the phone. She attended the police station and registered  the
    complaint.  The police detained  AK  for  two  days.  He  was  released
    without charge.  N gave evidence in  the  family  proceedings  and  the
    judge questioned why she would try to get her father put in prison  and
    was angry with her. In court the Appellant's  ex-husband  would  attack
    her in front of the judge.  He threatened the  Appellant's  lawyer.  AK
    attended with his own lawyer and his friend.  He did  not  agree  to  a
    divorce.  He behaved badly in court  but  he  was  never  cautioned  or
    reprimanded. The divorce was refused by Kukes District Court and so was
    the application for a further PO. The Appellant appealed  to  a  higher
    court in Shkodre. She was granted a divorce in December 2014.  However,
    the court refused to make a further PO.

17.  After the divorce there was another court hearing about  property.  The
    Appellant was given custody of the children. However,  AK  was  granted
    contact with them. The flat was divided between her and her ex-husband.
     In the end her father purchased the flat.  The government gave a small
    sum of money to the children, however this went directly to AK who  did
    not forward it on. He  has  never  paid  maintenance.  The  Appellant's
    family eventually ran out of money.

18.  After the divorce AK's behaviour deteriorated. There  was  no  PO.   He
    continued to stalk her.  He waited for the children and often  followed
    them and made threats. He would show the children a knife and  threaten
    to kill them. The Appellant was effectively imprisoned.   The  children
    lived in constant fear.  The Appellant tried without successful to  get
    the police to help.  She had panic attacks.  They all slept together in
    one bed because they were all too scared to sleep alone.   Her  husband
    had told her on many occasions "Wherever you go I will somehow find you
    and kill you.  Don't think you can run away from me".

19.  The Appellant has never worked. She spent most of her life inside  from
    the age of 16. She would not be able to  survive  in  another  part  of
    Albania as a single woman with children.  She is unwell and needs help.
     Her children are suffering psychologically.  M is nervous and  anxious
    and gets angry for no  reason.   He  also  has  eating  problems.   Her
    daughters are doing well at school here despite  the  trauma.  However,
    they are still frightened.

N's evidence

20.  There is a letter from N (AB1) of 11 June 2017 expressing  difficulties
    that her family went through in Albania and the violence that  she  was
    subjected to at the hands of AK.  She describes an incident when AK had
    a knife.  She is happy here.

Court reports (Albania)

21.  For the purpose of the proceedings in  Albania  on  24  June  2014  the
    Albanian Department of Social Services prepared a report.  There  is  a
    second report "a psychological evaluation" prepared  on  7  July  2014.
    There are copies of these and translations in the RB.  The translations
    are of a poor quality.  However, they support the Appellant's case  and
    establish that the courts in Albania was aware of the violence  against
    the Appellant and children and that they feel threatened. They  support
    the Appellant's account including that AK attempted  to  take  his  own
    life.

The medical evidence

22.  Matthew McDonnell is an assistant psychologist  for  Domestic  Violence
    Training Limited and his supervisor,  Dr  Roxanne  Agnew-Davies,  is  a
    specialist in the field of impact of violence particularly domestic and
    sexual violence on women's mental health.   The  Appellant  attended  a
    psychological  assessment  on  23  June  2017  and  a   semi-structured
    interview was conducted and  a  number  of  psychological  tests.   The
    Appellant was diagnosed as having chronic major depressive disorder  of
    moderate severity and a  severe  complex  and  chronic  form  of  post-
    traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with dissociative features.  Her  risk
    of suicide was assessed to be minimal but it would escalate if she were
    obliged to return to Albania. The condition renders her  vulnerable  to
    the risk of further harm and exploitation and impedes  her  ability  to
    manage situations of risk.  She is a committed, responsible and  caring
    parent.  Her prognosis is poor because she is  not  fit  to  begin  the
    specialist trauma work required.  The  insecurity  of  her  immigration
    status undermines her mental health and  specialist  treatment  is  not
    appropriate until her safety is established.  If her status were secure
    her prognosis would markedly improve.  Her  symptoms  and  difficulties
    would be exacerbated if she was returned to Albania.





The evidence of the social worker

23.  Ms Prempeh concludes that the three children made  serious  allegations
    about physical and emotional violence that they experienced from AK and
    which she documents in her report and that they fear that they will  be
    killed by him should they return.  They have provided graphic  accounts
    and may benefit from counselling.  She concludes that the children will
    be of significant harm if they are removed from the UK to Albania.  The
    author has prepared an addendum report on 28 November 2017, having  had
    the opportunity to consider the psychological evidence relating to  the
    Appellant. She concludes that a settled status within the UK is  likely
    to have a positive effect upon  the  Appellant's  mental  health  which
    would  ultimately   be   conducive   to   the   children's   emotional,
    psychological and social wellbeing.

Country expert evidence

24.  The report is extremely detailed.  It  was  not  served  in  accordance
    with the directions of  the  Tribunal.  Mr  Lindsay  did  not  make  an
    application for an adjournment but simply asked me  to  take  the  late
    submission of it into account.  Mr Lindsay stated that he had  not  had
    the  opportunity  to  read  it,  which  was  hardly   surprising.   The
    presentation of the report is of concern to me.  The paragraphs and not
    numbered.  In any event the content of that report is  accepted  in  so
    far as it is consistent with the CPIN and country guidance. As Ms Smith
    appeared to concede, there was nothing of significance  in  the  report
    which was not a matter engaged with in the CPIN  or  country  guidance.
    The expert concludes that the Appellant and her children are vulnerable
    and that there would be no  sufficiency  of  protection.   Despite  the
    passing of protective laws they lack implementation. The expert  relies
    on the findings of the UT in TD and AD.  She refers to the  Appellant's
    attempts to approach the police who would not help her. The Appellant's
    explanation of the extreme difficulties she faced is plausible.  Having
    been given POs, they did not prevent her ex-husband  from  finding  and
    attacking her and her children. The Appellant's word counts for nothing
    in the face of others who are more powerful.  The Appellant  would  not
    wish to draw further attention to herself or her situation for fear  of
    further reprisal from either her husband, his friends or aunt, and that
    her perceived shame within her community would inhibit her from wishing
    to discuss her situation.  The Appellant would  fear  that  the  police
    would contact the perpetrator, his friends or family and she would  not
    have the confidence to attempt to approach the ombudsman  in  order  to
    take up the issue.

25.  The Appellant lacks social status  and  economic  standing.   She  only
    attended  primary  school.  She  is  deeply   affected   by   traumatic
    experiences.  In Kukes, which is an inland, rural  region  of  northern
    Albania near the Kosovo border, people  conform  to  traditional  Kanun
    law.  The Appellant's family have all  emigrated  leaving  her  without
    that important family support.  She would be considered  suitable  prey
    for  traffickers  and  her  two  teenage  daughters  would  be   highly
    vulnerable.  She would have no family network to call upon.  She  would
    be treated with suspicion and an outcast.  It would  be  difficult  for
    her to relocate.  There is freedom of movement in Albania  but  without
    the benefit of a supportive family it would be severely curtailed.   If
    she were to relocate she would have to register residence.   Relocation
    would not assure protection.  In order to assess any available shelter,
    it would be essential to go through the Social Services or the  police.
    The police failed to help her  in  Kukes.   She  would  be  fearful  of
    registering and thus alerting her ex-husband, his friend or  his  aunt,
    all whom she fears.  It is likely should she return that one  of  those
    people or even a trafficker would find her sooner or  later.   Her  ex-
    husband's close friend (G) works in the  Kukes  municipal  offices  and
    gossip is passed on.  The rural and  urban  populations  are  based  on
    networks of kin  and  neighbours  in  which  literally  everyone  knows
    everyone.  Because of the high reliance on personal family networks  of
    support any Albanian  person  would  be  generally  highly  visible  if
    dislocated from their local home place.  Not only is  it  difficult  to
    integrate and settle somewhere in Albania without  previously  existing
    and positive personal contacts and ties, but the whereabouts of  anyone
    is easily identified.  If she is returned to  Albania  she  would  feel
    compelled to lead a closed life as a means of survival.  She would live
    in daily fear of being discovered and attacked by her own or her in-law
    families.

Submissions

26.  The RFRL  needs  to  be  considered  in  some  detail  because  it  was
    extensively relied upon by Mr Lindsay.  The  Respondent's  position  is
    that the Appellant  provided  a  consistent  account  of  the  domestic
    violence  and  the  steps  that  she  took  regarding  protection.  The
    documents she produced were accepted.  To summarise,  it  was  accepted
    that the Appellant received ill-treatment and threats from her AK,  his
    aunt and his friend.  However, the Respondent's position  is  that  the
    Appellant's claim is not one that engages the 1951  Convention  because
    she is claiming asylum for a non-Convention reason.

27.  The Secretary of State relied on DM (Sufficiency of protection)  [2004]
    in asserting that the Appellant was not a member of a particular social
    group in Albania.  Reliance was also placed on AM  and  BM  (Trafficked
    women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 and MK (Lesbians)  Albania  CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00036.  The Appellant has immediate family members who despite no
    longer  residing  in  Albania  have  assisted  her.   She  has  a  good
    relationship  with  extended  relatives  and  support  from  uncles  in
    Albania.  She has never been the victim of trafficking and  it  is  not
    considered that she would be identified and targeted in Albania on  the
    basis of her status as  a  single  woman,  and  it  is  not  considered
    reasonably  likely  that  she  would  face   treatment   amounting   to
    persecution.

28.  The background evidence  shows  that  there  is  a  functioning  police
    service in Albania, although this may be susceptible to corruption  and
    that there may be corruption, inefficiency and incompetence on the part
    of individual members of the  police.   It  is  noted  that  after  her
    divorce she did not seek assistance from the  authorities.  She  should
    have continued  to  utilise  the  assistance  available  to  her.   The
    background evidence demonstrates the assistance that would be available
    to her on return. She has not established that the authorities would be
    unable or unwilling to protect her.  Internal relocation would be  safe
    and  reasonable.  She  has  relatives  there   and   has   demonstrated
    considerable resilience to date.

29.  In oral submissions Mr Lindsay agreed that the issues were  sufficiency
    of protection and internal relocation.  Mr Lindsay did  not  prepare  a
    skeleton argument, he responded to Ms Smith's skeleton  argument.   The
    first issue he raised was that relating to DM.  In  his  submission  DM
    must be followed; it is good law which has not been overturned and  the
    Tribunal is bound to follow it.  TD and  AD  did  not  modify  DM.  The
    Appellant is not a member of a particular social group as  a  woman  in
    Albania.  In any event, it is the Respondent's position that  there  is
    adequate protection in Albania.  TD and AD refers to trafficked  women.
    There  is  sufficiency  of  protection  and  a  clear   indication   of
    willingness to apply a proper  set  of  rules  to  protect  women.  The
    Appellant has a strong support network. Her father  purchased  property
    for her. She did not take steps to sell the property and  consider  how
    long she would be able to survive in Albania on the proceeds of it. She
    would receive support from her uncle in  Albania.  She  has  access  to
    support from the authorities  and  this  could  continue.  There  is  a
    functioning police service which has engaged with  the  Appellant.  She
    has access to assistance from the judiciary. She could have applied for
    a further PO after the divorce.  There  may  be  a  lack  of  emergency
    provision in Kukes but this is the only area where  the  Appellant  has
    attempted to access  help.   There  may  be  less  provision  in  Kukes
    generally but does not prevent her from accessing help  outside  Kukes.
    Social housing is available. Her basic needs would be met.

30.  The Appellant has not shown that AK would reach  her  if  she  were  to
    relocate to Tirana.  I asked Mr Lindsay whether his case is that  there
    would sufficiency of protection in the Appellant's home area.  He  said
    that there would be, but that this was not the "central plank"  of  the
    Respondent's case.  He said that it would  not  make  practical  common
    sense for her to return to Kukes. The most sensible option in his  view
    would be to relocate. Mr Lindsay addressed me in  relation  to  support
    and integration in Albania and the services that would be available  to
    the Appellant with reference to the  CPIN.   He  submitted  that  there
    would be extensive support and facilities  available,  particularly  in
    Tirana despite that the Appellant  has  no  experience  of  independent
    work.  In respect of mental health issues he referred me  to  7.3.2  of
    the CPIN. He submitted that the shelters  are  normally  equipped  with
    psychiatrists and that the triage system outlined  in  the  CPIN  would
    mean that the Appellant can  access  specific  support.   She  has  not
    attempted to access these facilities and it is entirely  reasonable  to
    expect her to do so. AK is a non-state actor and there is no reason why
    he would be able to seek  her  out.   In  any  event,  there  would  be
    sufficiency of protection.

31.  Mr Lindsay addressed me on Article 8  and  submitted  that  the  family
    could  return  together  to  Albania.  The  family  does  not  have   a
    significant private life here.  The starting point is that it would  be
    in the children's best interests to remain with their mother.  They are
    all Albanian nationals and the public  interest  in  removal  outweighs
    their right to private life.  The Appellant is financially soluble.

32.  Ms Smith made submissions.  She relied on  her  skeleton  argument  and
    made oral submissions expanding on  the  arguments  contained  therein.
    Her argument in relation to DM is that the Tribunal should  decline  to
    follow the decision because the reasoning is  inconsistent  with  later
    and higher authorities. It is  extremely  doubtful  that  it  could  be
    considered good law.  It was submitted  that  the  approach  in  DM  is
    inconsistent with Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL 47 with specific  reference
    to the guidance at paragraph 15.[1] Miss  Smith  relied  on  Regulation
    6(d) of the Qualification Regulations.[2]

33.  The evidence shows that women in Albania have a position in society  of
    inferiority and disadvantage because  of  the  discriminatory  attitude
    towards  them.  The  Appellant  has  been  unable  to  access  adequate
    protection from the authorities as a result of this.   Further,  it  is
    submitted that the Appellant engages the Refugee Convention for  reason
    of  imputed  political  opinion  because  her  actions  in  seeking  to
    challenge her husband's conduct via the courts and ultimately to  leave
    and divorce him challenge the established patriarchal order.

34.  Ms Smith submitted that the Appellant's ordeal has  gone  on  for  well
    over a decade, she  referred  to  the  seriousness  of  the  incidents.
    Although she has engaged with  the  authorities,  the  police  and  the
    courts she has been failed by  them.  The  authorities  are  unable  to
    protect her.  The police and the courts were of the  view  that  it  is
    sufficient that the Appellant is now divorced. Mr Lindsay has suggested
    no reason to suggest that AK has ceased to be motivated to pursue  her.
    Reference was made to what the  Appellant  said  in  her  interview  at
    questions 167 and 168, namely that her husband  would  find  her.   She
    made reference to AK's friend (G) who  threatened  the  Appellant.  The
    court refused to renew the PO order because the view is that a  divorce
    is sufficient.  The court granted AK contact with his children  despite
    being aware of  the  violence  perpetrated  by  him.   In  relation  to
    sufficiency of protection Ms Smith submitted that she does not have  to
    establish a systemic problem and she referred me to paragraph 55 (6) of
    the judgement in  Bagdanavicius where the court stated that a  claimant
    may still have a well-founded fear of persecution if he can  show  that
    its authorities know or ought to know of  circumstances  particular  to
    his case giving rise to his fear,  but  are  unlikely  to  provide  the
    additional   protection   his   particular   circumstances   reasonably
    require.[3]

35.   This  is  a  particularly  exceptional  case  where   sufficiency   of
    protection must be considered in the context of the persistence by  AK.
    I was referred to TD and AD, specifically to paragraphs 113 and 114.[4]

36.  It is conceded by the Appellant that there is  formal  equality  before
    the law for men and women but despite legislative advances the rate  of
    domestic violence remains extremely high.  The challenge  is  not  that
    there is an absence of legal rules against domestic violence  but  that
    there is a lack of efficient application of them.

37.  Reliance  was  placed  on  the  expert's  report,  at  page  26,  which
    establishes that  the  police  routinely  fail  to  take  requests  for
    protection seriously.   There is no  emergency  shelter  in  Kukes  and
    there are  no  shelters  offering  long  term  support  in  that  area.
    Reference in  this  respect  is  made  to  the  expert  evidence.   The
    Appellant in this case was willing to approach the authorities but they
    have shown themselves unwilling or unable to provide protection in  the
    particular circumstances of her case.  Whilst the Appellant obtained  a
    PO on 21 May 2014, AK was permitted to return to the  home  by  further
    order.  The order was reinstated on 23  July  2014  but  it  was  later
    discharged once the Appellant had obtained a  divorce  on  18  December
    2014. She was left without any protection.

38.  A divorce is not adequate protection for victims of domestic  violence.
     The Appellant's husband frequently and seriously breached the PO  with
    impunity.  The CPIN confirms that there are serious  difficulties  with
    the enforcement of POs and they are largely ineffective.  AK has  never
    been prosecuted for the substantive offences he committed  against  the
    Appellant including an attempt to attack her in the presence of  police
    officers.  The Appellant engaged the services of a lawyer  and  made  a
    complaint to the most senior officer in Kukes.  The Appellant  suspects
    that AK may have influenced the judicial process. There are  levels  of
    corruption in the police and  judiciary,  referred  to  in  the  expert
    evidence and supported by the conclusions of the Upper Tribunal  in  TD
    and AD at paragraphs 93 and 94.

39.  The legal system failed because of corruption, inefficiency or  because
    of a deeply ingrained discriminatory attitude towards women.   However,
    it does not really matter the reasons for the failure to  protect  her,
    it is the outcome  that  is  critical.   There  is  no  sufficiency  of
    protection  in  Kukes  and  there  is  no  sufficiency  of   protection
    generally.  My attention was also brought to the fact that AK has  been
    granted contact with his children despite  the  court  and  the  police
    being aware of the facts.

40.  Single  women  attempting  to  relocate  in  Albania  face  significant
    obstacles and whether internal relocation is available will  depend  on
    all the  facts.    I  was  reminded  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.   Relocation  is  not  reasonably
    available to the Appellant. She is from northern  Albania.  Whilst  her
    immediate family has been  supportive  they  have  rendered  help  from
    abroad. She has no family members in Albania to assist save one elderly
    uncle who was unable to protect her previously.  She will not  be  able
    to access either government or NGO shelters for  assistance.   She  was
    able in 2014 to access a state-run shelter for one night only when  her
    husband breached the PO. After one night she was told  to  leave.   The
    background evidence shows that  shelter  provision  is  inadequate  and
    significantly it is open to women with POs in place  or  being  applied
    for.  She has been refused a further PO.

41.  The Appellant has no experience of working outside  the  home  at  all.
    She has severe complex and chronic post-traumatic stress  disorder  and
    chronic major depressive disorder of moderate severity.  She has  three
    dependent children who are also traumatised  by  witnessing  and  being
    victims of domestic violence. It would not be in  the  children's  best
    interests to return to Albania. Many of the factors in TD and AD  apply
    to the Appellant.  She is vulnerable and  has  profound  mental  health
    problems; she will face stigma and has no family ties in  Albania;  she
    is poorly educated and as a divorced single mother will require support
    which will highlight her vulnerable position leaving her vulnerable  to
    trafficking, harm and exploitation. AK has warned her that he would  be
    able to find her wherever she went. He  has  attempted  suicide  which,
    according to the psychological evidence,  is  an  indicator  in  family
    homicide.  If she were to make an application for  a  further  PO,  her
    husband would become aware of her whereabouts.  The Appellant would  be
    returning to Albania as a single woman without family support and  this
    would  necessarily  affect  her  ability  to  find  work  and  survive.
    Further, she may be discovered in a small country where people talk  to
    each other.

Conclusions

42.  There was no meaningful challenge to  the  report  of  the  independent
    social worker and the psychologist's report. I accept  the  conclusions
    found by these professionals.  I find that the  Appellant  has  chronic
    major depressive disorder of moderate severity and severe  complex  and
    chronic PTSD. I find on return a risk of suicide would escalate. [5]  I
    find that she is vulnerable and that her symptoms would deteriorate  on
    return.[6]  I find that because of her vulnerability and mental health,
    she would not be able to cope with and  adapt  to  life  in  Tirana  or
    elsewhere in Albania.[7]

43.  Sufficiency of protection and relocation  must  be  considered  in  the
    context  of  the  acceptance  by  the  Respondent  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence. Her account is of serious and life - threatening abuse on her
    and her children by her ex-husband.  I find that the Appellant would be
    at risk on return to Kukes. I find that the legal system has failed  to
    protect her. There can be no other finding  considering  the  evidence.
    The court in Kukes failed to agree to a divorce. Despite  a  PO  having
    been granted on 21 May 2014 by the local court in  Kukes  excluding  AK
    from the family home, this was not properly enforced by the police.  In
    any event, this order was not renewed or amended, enabling him lawfully
    back into the family home.  In the light of the serious nature  of  his
    behaviour and the obvious level of risk, to allow  him  back  into  the
    family home was wholly irrational.    Although the PO  was  re-instated
    on 23 July 2014, once a divorce was obtained on 18 December  2018,  the
    Appellant was left without protection.   It may have  been  assumed  by
    the court that now she was divorced protection was  no  longer  needed.
    However, this was clearly misconceived because the  abuse  and  threats
    continued. The Appellant's efforts to contact the  police  were  of  no
    help to her and it is no surprise that she gave up  seeking  help  from
    the authorities after this point.  Despite being  conversant  with  the
    history in this case the higher  court  would  not  grant  a  PO.   For
    whatever reason the court may have  given,  there  was  no  logical  or
    rational conclusion, particularly in the light of  the  court  reports,
    why the court took the view that the  Appellant  and  her  children  no
    longer needed protecting.  Furthermore, it is a mystery why the  higher
    court permitted the perpetrator of serious  child  abuse  and  domestic
    violence contact with his children.

44.  When there  was  a  PO  in  force  it  did  little  to  deter  AK.   He
    continually breached the  order.   It  was  largely  ineffective.   The
    police were not committed to helping  the  Appellant  and  the  courts,
    aware of the violence, ultimately failed to protect her.



45.  AK was not punished for his crimes. On the occasion he was detained  by
    the police for two days, he was  ultimately  released  without  charge.
    Whilst  the  authorities  cannot  be  blamed  for  AK's  tenacity   and
    propensity for violence, they did not  protect  the  Appellant  or  her
    children.  In the light of the history of the case, the Appellant could
    not be expected to continue to try to seek protection of the police and
    the courts because they had shown that they were unwilling or unable to
    protect her and her children.

46.  The inevitable conclusion is that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Kukus  and  there  would  be  no  sufficiency  of  protection
    available to her there.  I have of course taken on board  Mr  Lindsay's
    submissions about sufficiency of protection. I  accept  that  the  CPIN
    establishes that there is a police force and law enforcement  available
    in response to violence against women.[8] There is a system  available.
    What is in the CPIN which was relied on both parties, fits in with what
    the Appellant states happened to her in Kukes. She sought help and  she
    was given some form of protection.  However,  she  was  not  ultimately
    protected from AK. Whilst her evidence about what happened in Kukes  is
    accepted, it is worth highlighting the limitations of  law  enforcement
    and the judiciary.  Professionalism of the police varies.[9] Although a
    PO may be easy to obtain, as a long-term protection it may be more of a
    challenge and there  are  problems  with  the  effectiveness  of  a  PO
    generally.[10] In addition shelters outside Tirana are limited and help
    in rural areas more difficult to access.[11]

47.  I accept that there  are  shelters  available  to  protect  victims  of
    domestic violence in Tirana.[12] They are limited elsewhere in Albania.
     From reading chapter 6 of the CPIN, it seems that a PO is necessary to
    obtain shelter, although there  is  reference  to  the  setting  up  of
    shelters taking women without a PO.[13]However, there  is  no  evidence
    that these are up and running.

48.  I have already referred to AK's tenacity and  criminality.  I  have  no
    hesitation in concluding that if he discovers the Appellant's return to
    Albania he will find her and the children.  AK presents a serious  risk
    to the Appellant and her children.  I have  no  hesitation  in  finding
    that even without knowledge of their return he is  actively  trying  to
    locate them. There is currently a court order giving him  contact  with
    his children. It can reasonably be inferred that by fleeing Albania the
    Appellant is in breach of this. It can be reasonably inferred that  the
    law in Albania would expect the Appellant to facilitate contact in  the
    light of the order. Whatever the case, the order gives AK a lawful  and
    enforceable right to see his children  and  a  very  strong  motive  to
    locate them.  The extant court order is reasonably likely  to  come  to
    light, should the Appellant return. She cannot reasonably  be  expected
    to relocate and live in Albania in breach of  a  court  order  and  she
    cannot reasonably be expected to return and facilitate contact.

49.  On the basis that the Appellant and her children are  fortunate  enough
    to a secure shelter outside Kukes without having to seek a PO (which  I
    do not think  is  reasonably  likely)  it  is  reasonably  likely  that
    eventually AK will find them.  AK is determined.  He  has  a  level  of
    support from family and a close friend and it is reasonably  likely  he
    will actively be seeking to enforce the court order giving him  contact
    with his children. He has breached court orders with impunity.  He  has
    shown no self-control or fear of punishment. He is as  hostile  towards
    his children as he is to the Appellant.  I have considered that Albania
    is a small country and what is stated in the CPIN  at  8.7.[14]  Whilst
    the Appellant's sole surviving uncle attempted to protect her,  he  was
    ultimately unable to do so. Her immediate family is abroad  and  unable
    to physically protect her. Her father has run out of  funds  to  assist
    her. There is a real risk that she will be discovered by her  extremely
    violent ex-husband and that she or  her  children  could  be  seriously
    injured or even killed. This would put the Appellant and  her  children
    at risk.

50.  The thrust of the Respondent's case is  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    able to access a shelter and the facilities and  protection  that  they
    offer to victims of  domestic  violence.   However,  whilst  there  are
    shelters available outside Kukes to those with a PO, it is  less  clear
    whether  there  is  shelter  for  those  without  a   PO.   There   was
    accommodation for the Appellant in a shelter for one  night  in  Kukes;
    however, at that time there was a PO.  Seeking a PO would lead  to  the
    disclosure of her return and it can be  reasonably  inferred  that  the
    starting point for the court considering whether to grant an  order  is
    that AK was granted contact.  The court has refused to make  a  PO  for
    whatever reason whilst conversant with the facts. It  is  difficult  to
    see why they would now grant a PO without further  violence,  and  even
    then, there is no reason to believe that one would be granted  or  that
    this would be effective. It is, in my view, not reasonably likely  that
    the Appellant would be able to secure a shelter in Tirana or  elsewhere
    in the absence of a PO and  her  position  would  then  be  even  worse
    because there will simply be no meaningful support available to her.

51.  Based on what has happened in the  past,  which  establishes  that  the
    authorities have not, for  whatever  reason,  managed  to  protect  the
    Appellant and her children, and because of the extreme  level  of  AK's
    criminality and  failure  to  abide  by  a  PO,  I  conclude  that  the
    authorities are unlikely to provide  the  family  with  the  additional
    protection their circumstances reasonably require. There  would  be  no
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant and her children. I  accept
    that TD and AD, applies, to a limited extent when considering access to
    protection.[15]

52.   Moreover,  the  evidence  that  relocation   is   unduly   harsh   and
    unreasonable is overwhelming.  The background  evidence  together  with
    the medical  evidence,  in  the  light  of  what  is  accepted  by  the
    Respondent, makes a truly compelling case. I have  taken  into  account
    the evidence in the CPIN about reintegration (7.1) and the provision of
    mental health care (7.3).  I have considered this against the  evidence
    of  the  Appellant's  serious  mental  health  problems  and   specific
    vulnerabilities. Although she is  not  a  victim  of  trafficking,  the
    Appellant is a single mother and she is very vulnerable. She  will  not
    suffer from the same shame  and  isolation  as  a  trafficking  victim.
    However, even if a shelter and support is available to her and assuming
    that the authorities could keep her safe from AK, return would  have  a
    significant adverse impact on the family, and her ability to  cope  and
    support her children not least because she  and  her  children  have  a
    significant subjective fear. I have taken into account  what  she  told
    the  psychologist  when  assessed.[16]   This  fear  is  likely  to  be
    compounded by serious mental health problems (I have taken into account
    the prognosis and treatment recommendations made in the  psychologist's
    report).[17] All these factors would  render  relocation  unreasonable.
    The children have settled here. They are at school. It is in their best
    interests not to return to Albania and to remain here. Whilst they have
    not been here very long, they are victims of child abuse perpetrated by
    their father. I accept they are traumatised. They are terrified  of  AK
    and understandably of having to return. I  stress  here  that  risk  on
    return is to all members of the family, not only the Appellant.

53.  The Appellant's case is that she is a member  of  a  particular  social
    group; namely, women in Albania or that she is at risk  on  account  of
    imputed political opinion as a woman and as a woman who has  challenged
    conventional mores about the conduct of a wife in  Albania  by  leaving
    and divorcing her husband.  This issue was  an  integral  part  of  the
    appeal, but it was not adequately expanded on by either party. The bulk
    of submissions I heard  related  to  risk  on  return,  sufficiency  of
    protection and relocation, despite my efforts to encourage expansion on
    this issue at the hearing.

54.  The treatment by AK  (and  her  children)  is  unarguably  persecutory.
    Notwithstanding DM, women in Albania are  now  undoubtedly  capable  of
    being a particular social group. The problem for this Appellant,  aside
    from DM (in that case the Appellant's treatment by her husband did  not
    amount to persecution and she was not at risk on return), is  that  she
    must show a well-founded fear of persecution based on her gender and  I
    do not find that she has established a causal  link.  Whilst  there  is
    significant discrimination against women the government  is  attempting
    to legislate to conform with European Union demands (see page 24 of  Ms
    Young's report). I accept that the Appellant has not been successful in
    seeking protection in Albania (and is not likely to in the light of how
    she has been treated to date), there is a judicial  system  capable  of
    protecting women. The evidence does not establish that  this  Applicant
    will be persecuted if she returns by reason of being a woman or  indeed
    because  of  resistance  to  social  mores.  Indeed  her  children  are
    similarly at risk.  The Appellant is not at risk  of  persecution  from
    the authorities in Albania. She cannot be considered  as  isolated  and
    shamed by her family. She is not at risk from her family  or  from  the
    authorities because she has deviated from strict family  traditions  of
    sex and marriage. She has the support of her family, although this does
    not amount to much in real terms. Whilst there is in this case  a  lack
    of protection, the evidence that I was referred to does  not  establish
    that this is because the Appellant is a woman or because of her imputed
    political opinion.  She and her children  will  be  persecuted  by  her
    husband/their father who is a non-state actor because they are  victims
    of domestic violence.  It was  not  argued  that  victims  of  domestic
    violence are members of a social group. Such an argument could  not  be
    successful.

55.  The  Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  under  Article  3  ECHR.  It  is
    dismissed under the Refugee Convention.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 25 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------

[1]  "A particular social group is a group of persons  who  share  a  common
  characteristic other than their risk of  being  persecuted,  or  who  are
  perceived as a group by society.  The characteristic will  often  be  one
  which is innate, unchangeable,  or  which  is  otherwise  fundamental  to
  identity, conscience or the exercise of one's human rights.


  ... sex can properly be within the ambit of the  social  group  category,
  with women being a clear example of a social subset defined by innate and
  immutable characteristics, and who are frequently treated differently  to
  men".


[2]  "(d)     a group shall be considered to form a particular social  group
  where, for example:


      (i) members of that group share an innate characteristic, or a  common
         background that cannot be changed, or  share  a  characteristic  or
         belief that is so fundamental to  identity  or  conscience  that  a
         person should not be forced to renounce it, and


      (ii)    that group has a distinct identity in  the  relevant  country,
         because it is perceived  as  being  different  by  the  surrounding
         society".


[3]  "Summary of conclusions on "real risk/sufficiency of state protection


  The common threshold of risk


  55.    1)   The threshold of risk is  the  same  in  both  categories  of
         claim; the main reason for introducing section 65 to the  1999  Act
         was not to provide an alternative, lower threshold of risk and/or a
         higher level of protection against such risk through the medium  of
         human  rights  claims,  but  to  widen  the  reach  of   protection
         regardless of the motive giving rise to the persecution.


      Asylum claims


      2)  An asylum seeker who claims  to  be  in  fear  of  persecution  is
         entitled  to  asylum  if  he  can  show  a  well-founded  fear   of
         persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and that there would be
         insufficiency of state protection to meet it; Horvath.


      3)  Fear of persecution is well-founded  if  there  is  a  "reasonable
         degree of likelihood" that it will materialise; R v.  SSHD,  ex  p.
         Sivakumaran [1988] AC 956, per Lord Goff at 1000F-G;


      4)  Sufficiency of state protection, whether from state agents or non-
         state actors, means a willingness and ability on the  part  of  the
         receiving state to provide through its legal  system  a  reasonable
         level of protection from ill-treatment of which  the  claimant  for
         asylum has a well-founded fear; Osman, Horvath, Dhima.


      5)  The effectiveness of the system provided is to be judged  normally
         by its systemic ability to deter and/or  to  prevent  the  form  of
         persecution of which there is a risk, not  just  punishment  of  it
         after the event; Horvath; Banomova. McPherson and Kinuthia.


      6)  Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state  protection  in  the
         receiving state, a claimant may still have a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution if he can show that its authorities know  or  ought  to
         know of circumstances particular to his case  giving  rise  to  his
         fear, but are unlikely to provide  the  additional  protection  his
         particular circumstances reasonably require; Osman.


[4]  "The effectiveness of the system provided is to be judged  normally  by
    its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent the form of persecution
    of which there is a risk, not just punishment of it  after  the  event.
    Notwithstanding  systemic  sufficiency  of  state  protection  in   the
    receiving state, a claimant may  still  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution if she can show that its authorities know or ought to  know
    of circumstances particular to her case giving rise to  her  fear,  but
    are unlikely  to  provide  the  additional  protection  her  particular
    circumstances reasonably require".


[5]   The  psychologist's'  report  summarises  the  author's   opinion   at
 paragraph 4and details the Appellant's vulnerability and the following  is
 stated:


    "In  other  words,  victims  accustomed   to   freezing   rather   than
    'fighting/fleeing' become trapped in situations even when they  are  at
    risk of further harm and do not effect change, protest or  escape  even
    if this were a possibility.  Compliance  and  inability  to  escape  is
    particularly  common  in  women  who  have  been  subjected  to  sexual
    exploitation and physical control over a protracted  period  (Zimmerman
    et al, 2006).  In common with other victims, and  already  demonstrated
    by her history of compliance and subjugation, [UD] is much more  likely
    to  become  helpless  and  submit  and/or  contemplate   suicide   when
    threatened because she  lacks  adequate  resources  to  take  adaptive,
    appropriate action (2.2: 5-6).  Dissociation such  as  this  is  always
    associated with higher levels of psychosocial  vulnerability  (Adams  &
    Bracha, 2004)".


[6]  See the psychologist's report at 4.5.2 which reads:


    "Due to the severity and extent of her psychological problems, [UD]  is
    very ill-equipped to cope with any major disruption; her  psychological
    profile significantly reduces her capacity to cope adaptively with  any
    situation of stress or fear.  To add to her instability by placing  her
    in a situation in which she is or perceives herself and her children to
    be at greater risk (2.2.36; 3.5.3; 3.8.10) would lead to an upsurge  of
    all trauma related symptoms and vulnerabilities described over Sections
    4.1 and 4.2, respectively."


[7]  See the following paragraphs of the psychologist's report:


    "4.5.2   Due to the severity and extent of her psychological  problems,
         [UD] is very ill-equipped to cope with any  major  disruption;  her
         psychological profile significantly reduces her  capacity  to  cope
         adaptively with any situation of stress or fear.   To  add  to  her
         instability by placing her in  a  situation  in  which  she  is  or
         perceives herself and her children to be at greater  risk  (2.2.36;
         3.5.3; 3.8.10) would lead to  an  upsurge  of  all  trauma  related
         symptoms and vulnerabilities described over Sections 4.1  and  4.2,
         respectively.


    4.5.3    It is perhaps  worth  pointing  out  that  [UD's]  psychiatric
         status depends on  her  psychological  perceptions  and  responses,
         rather than objective fact.  I am not in a position to comment upon
         the objective risk upon return to Albania, which is a matter for  a
         country  expert,  but  as  outlined  over  Section  4.2,   from   a
         psychological perspective, if she finds herself in a  situation  in
         which  she  feels  threatened,  experiences  rejection,   perceives
         herself to be surrounded by hostility, or that she and her children
         are  in  imminent  danger,  the  consequent  mental  and  emotional
         experience would be sufficient to  trigger  overpowering  intrusive
         memories, dissociation, arousal and intensive affect dysregulation,
         as well as self-harming behaviours.


    4.5.11   In summary, I anticipate that  [UD's]  psychological  problems
         and distress would be significantly  exacerbated  if  she  returned
         from the UK, where  she  feels  safe  (3.3.3),  to  Albania.   This
         deterioration in her already  fragile  psychological  health  would
         have very negative consequences for her already  impaired  capacity
         to cope with independent living and parent her children, as well as
         increase  the  risk  of  suicide.   The   absence   of   intensive,
         appropriate  psychological  treatment  and  loss  of   professional
         support would be likely to further endanger her  mental  health  in
         the short, medium and long-term.  Furthermore, removal  to  Albania
         would endanger [UD] and her children  given  that  [AK]'s  previous
         suicide attempt  and  repeated  threats  to  kill  [UD]  and  their
         children is regarded by domestic violence specialists a significant
         risk indicator of family homicide (2.2.27).


    4.5.12   Since social support is  a  major  prognostic  indicator,  the
         absence of a  robust  and  safe  professional  and  social  support
         system, along with the risk that she perceives  negative  judgement
         from the wider community would be highly deleterious.  If  [UD]  is
         driven further into social isolation, this would increase the  risk
         of significant deterioration in her mental  health.   In  short,  I
         believe that [UD]'s current psychological profile and  psychosocial
         vulnerability  place  her  at  much  greater  risk  should  she  be
         threatened with return to her country of origin, than a person  who
         has  not  suffered  from  mental  health  problems  and   has   not
         experienced such severe abuse".


[8] CPIN at 5.3;


    "Police


    5.3.1    The GREVIO report of November 2017 stated:


         'Based on its interviews with those working in  this  area,  GREVIO
         finds that satisfaction levels  concerning  the  law  enforcement's
         response to  violence  against  women  stand  generally  high.  The
         setting up, at police  departments,  of  special  units  to  handle
         domestic violence cases, together with consistent initial  and  on-
         going  quality  training  are  credited  for  ensuring   that   law
         enforcement officials treat violence against women as seriously  as
         any other violent offence. GREVIO welcomes the  indication  in  the
         state report that more and more women are joining the police,  thus
         increasing the possibility for victims to be heard by women  police
         officers. GREVIO recalls in this respect that compliance  with  the
         obligation laid down in Article 50 of the Convention requires inter
         alia providing for an adequate number  of  female  law  enforcement
         officers, including at high levels of  responsibility.  It  further
         requires hearing victims without delay by  specially  trained,  and
         where appropriate female, staff in premises that  are  designed  to
         establish a relationship of trust between the victim  and  the  law
         enforcement personnel. This is an  area  where  GREVIO  finds  that
         improvements could be made by  ensuring  the  presence  of  trained
         professionals, including women psychologists, in  police  districts
         and providing them with adequate facilities for  accepting  victims
         and their children.'


    5.3.2    The USSD HR Report 2017 noted that, 'Police often did not have
         the training or capacity to deal effectively with domestic violence
         cases.'


    5.3.3    The HO FFT stated, 'Josif Shtembari, the Director for  Crimes,
         at the General Directory for Police in Tirana noted  that  the  new
         law, introduced in 2007, had  created  an  organised  structure  to
         tackle the problem of DV. This legislation set out a structure with
         coordination between  the  local  police  office,  district  police
         office, social services and NGOs in the  particular  region.  [...]
         Since 2006, an entire chain of law enforcement institutions  follow
         up on incidents of DV.'


    5.3.4    The HO FFT further reported:


         'Josif Shtembari [...]  described  the  process  for  dealing  with
         claims of DV once the victim has notified the police:


         .    The police officer looks for visual signs of physical injuries


         .    The victim is referred immediately to a doctor who will make a
         report


         .    Either a claim is made to a court for a PO, or


         .    Proceedings are started for further evidence and the  case  is
         referred to the Prosecutor's Office


         .    Once sent to court an urgent PO will be decided in  24  hours,
         others take up to 15 days


         'The law requires that when a VDV [victim of domestic violence]  is
         interviewed by the  police  a  psychologist  or  social  worker  is
         present.


         'Mr Shtembari told the FFT that the police will take control of the
         scene of violence looking for weapons, as well  as  photographs  or
         videos of it, and they will also talk to witnesses.


         'He said that the police regard  the  moment  the  person  makes  a
         declaration as the crucial point in the  case  and  they  recognise
         that the victim may be in shock  when  they  first  arrive  at  the
         police station so they have tried to create a friendly  environment
         in which victims can make their statement.


         'Mr Shtembari told the FFT that any person  who  has  knowledge  of
         violence or crime must report it. This can be neighbours  but  this
         does not happen very often. Usually it is member of the family, and
         in particular the victim themselves.


         'Mr Shtembari noted that the Albanian law does not provide that the
         victim can have a copy of the police report but a record  of  court
         proceedings is available. CLCI said the police are obliged, by law,
         to give a copy of the law-suit to the victim, although  they  often
         don't.


         'Mr Shtembari further noted that if the person withdraws her claim,
         it usually stops there but if the person  is  subject  to  repeated
         violence, the police will continue with the investigation.  If  the
         case was initiated by the court, then it continues until the  court
         decides the outcome.


         'He said they do not have a figure for the number of cases that are
         withdrawn. It usually happens at the court, when the person doesn't
         show up, or at the Prosecutor's office.'


    5.3.5    The HO FFT also spoke to the Police  Department  in  Kkes,  a
         town in the north-east of the country, and reported:


         'The Kkes Police Department confirmed  the  details  given  by  Mr
         Shtembari, in that the law provides for a set practice  on  how  to
         deal with VDV, and that they follow this in Kkes: "When the victim
         first comes, and they are usually women, there is a  medical  check
         if needed. Then it  is  referred  to  the  psychologist  under  the
         municipal social services, if necessary. We emphasise very much the
         first moment of contact, or first communication with the victims to
         create a warm environment to make them feel confident, safe and  if
         there is a  need  for  medical  treatment,  we  send  them  to  the
         hospital.


         '"After the victim has  come  to  us,  we  interview  them  in  the
         presence of the psychologist and ask them about the  incident,  the
         background etc. After that, we fill in  a  form  for  a  Protection
         Order and lodge it in court. Depending on  the  PO  issued  by  the
         court, we either accompany the person to  the  Centre  for  VDV  in
         Tirana, or to their accommodation and explain  to  the  perpetrator
         his obligations under the law... The person  gets  a  copy  of  the
         report. It is the right of the victim to read and get  informed  of
         what was written in the report. They get this automatically. It  is
         a legal obligation and procedure to give a copy to the victim."


         'The Kkes Police Department stated that the offence  is  based  on
         the word of the victim and treated as "beating" and if  the  victim
         withdraws her case then the case is closed. However, in serious  or
         high risk cases, they ask the community police officer to keep  the
         case under close supervision as well as the specialist for DV cases
         in Kkes to have close contact with the victim and  check  how  the
         situation has progressed. The  community  police  specialist  would
         also meet the perpetrator.'


    5.3.6    The HO FFT also spoke to other stakeholders:


         'The Director of Social Services in Kkes noted  that  there  is  a
         round-table committee on issues surrounding DV headed by the  mayor
         of the municipality and that such a committee is required  by  law:
         "We are trying to coordinate our work with  the  police.  Sometimes
         cases are referred to  the  municipality  unit  for  DV;  some  are
         referred to the police. In most cases, the police doesn't follow-up
         these claims of DV to the prosecution office or to  bring  them  to
         the municipality office. They try to bring the conflicts to a close
         in their own way. In cases where the problems  are  very  pressing,
         the police contact us and we [...] try to resolve them together.


         "The head of DV unit has accompanied the women to court. They  have
         to bring a complaint and apply for  a  Protection  Order.  In  most
         cases, the police don't have enough information and  capacities  to
         follow-up the cases in court.  Because  the  administrator  of  the
         village  (appointed  by  the  municipality)  doesn't  give   enough
         information, it is mostly based on the victim's  allegations.  This
         means that when  the  claim  goes  to  court,  there  isn't  enough
         evidence to issue the PO. The court, most of the time, they tend to
         work on reconciliation between victim and perpetrator."


         'The Director of the WCSSC in Kkes noted that  there  has  been  a
         change in the reporting of DV cases over time, and the victims  now
         go more readily to the police, although often it is when they  have
         reached breaking point.  She  said  that  she  sometimes  asks  the
         prosecutor and the police to continue  with  cases,  even  where  a
         woman withdraws her case.'


    5.3.7    The HO FFT were also informed about trust in police and police
         attitudes:


         'Several sources noted that the number  of  reported  cases  of  DV
         showed an increased awareness and increased trust in the police  to
         investigate cases. The police are usually the first  institution  a
         VDV approaches. They are now more receptive to complaints and  more
         likely to follow up on them; helping women get  an  EPO  [emergency
         protection order] and PO; also advising them about how to pursue  a
         case. The Albanian Ombudsman said every case referred to the police
         is followed up.


         'However,  traditional  values  do  impact   on   police   thinking
         sometimes. Several sources commented that  there  have  been  cases
         where police have tried to negotiate with the victim to go back  to
         the perpetrator of the violence. They said that there  is  still  a
         lot  to  be  done  on  capacity  building,  attitude  changing  and
         professionalism - and also enforcing POs properly. [...]


         'The FFT was told that sometimes the police take the  side  of  the
         male, but that is  not  always  the  case,  and  is  becoming  less
         common.'


    5.3.8    The FFT further reported on a meeting with the UN:


         'Whilst  recognising  that  the  government  has  made  efforts  to
         increase the capacities of the police, and making  clear  that  the
         role of the police in the fight against violence has improved  over
         the last year, the UN stated that the professionalism of the police
         varies a lot, and that they have supported the  Police  Academy  to
         update their curriculum. [...]


         'The UN also noted that a positive development is the amendment  to
         the criminal code which includes provisions for the  protection  of
         victims  of  gender-based  violence  and  human   trafficking.   In
         particular, the new provisions require that that victims of  sexual
         violence and human trafficking communicate  with  the  same  gender
         officers. The new amendments have been in force since July 2017.'


    5.4.1    The GREVIO report of November 2017 stated:


         'GREVIO welcomes the introduction in the  LDV  of  a  mechanism  to
         provide victims of domestic violence with  court  orders  shielding
         them and family members from immediate threats to  their  security,
         health or well-being. Available data show that that  the  mechanism
         is widely used and that victims are willing to seek the  protection
         it affords, regardless of whether or not they  pursue  other  legal
         proceedings.  [...]  The  judicial  decision  pronouncing  an   EBO
         [emergency barring order] or PO constitutes an executive title from
         the moment it is adopted and is thus immediately enforceable.'


    5.4.3    The HO  FFT  also  spoke  to  the  Tirana  Family  Court,  who
         explained the procedure for obtaining a protection order:


         'As per Albanian law,  the  courts  start  from  the  rule  of  law
         principle. The judges start from the criteria within the  provision
         of the law. There is not any concrete or  specific  requirement  to
         provide specific proof; it comes from the police or the victim.


         'Usually the first phase when protection  is  given,  on  the  file
         there is data or reports or statements or evidence from the police,
         third parties or the victim. Can also be visual proof.


         'It has two phases: Urgent, to decide whether to have a PO based on
         the proof that is on the file. Second, further information -  phone
         calls, medico-legal reports, more  info  from  police  possibly  on
         perpetrator - then they decide on what to do.


         '90% accepted at the first stage. Then investigate further.


         'As well, during the 2nd stage, is a request given to the police to
         provide a psychological report in the case of minors.  This  is  to
         determine whether to apply a stronger reaction from  the  court  if
         necessary.


         'Also, a source for getting proof of the  violence  is  the  Social
         Services Office, and  also  the  statements  of  the  other  family
         members. But this latter one is a problem, given the strong  family
         ties that exist here in Albania. Depending on the full  access  and
         the statements on the file will determine  how  long  the  PO  will
         remain in place. There are also cases where the victim is a  repeat
         person, and the length of time is one year. Sometimes the  evidence
         is not so strong, but the judge  believes  that  the  person  is  a
         victim, in which case they give a shorter time (e.g. 3 months).


         'The Ministry for  Health  and  Social  Protection  said  the  main
         stakeholder is the local courts and once the proceedings have taken
         place, a copy of the order is sent to the victim,  the  police  and
         the local municipality social services.'


[9] CPIN at 5.3.7 "The HO FFT were also informed about trust in  police  and
                police attitudes:


         'Several sources noted that the number  of  reported  cases  of  DV
         showed an increased awareness and increased trust in the police  to
         investigate cases. The police are usually the first  institution  a
         VDV approaches. They are now more receptive to complaints and  more
         likely to follow up on them; helping women get  an  EPO  [emergency
         protection order] and PO; also advising thout how to pursue a case.
         The Albanian Ombudsman said every case referred to  the  police  is
         followed up.


         'However,  traditional  values  do  impact   on   police   thinking
         sometimes. Several sources commented that  there  have  been  cases
         where police have tried to negotiate with the victim to go back  to
         the perpetrator of the violence. They said that there  is  still  a
         lot  to  be  done  on  capacity  building,  attitude  changing  and
         professionalism - and also enforcing POs properly. [...]


         'The FFT was told that sometimes the police take the  side  of  the
         male, but that is  not  always  the  case,  and  is  becoming  less
         common.'


[10] CPIN 5.7 Protection orders: effectiveness


    5.7.2.   The HO FFT reported:


         'Many sources observed that a challenge in the area of  DV  is  the
         violation and lack of enforcement of protection orders.  Often  the
         courts decide to leave the victim and  the  offender  in  the  same
         household for economic reasons which has led  to  further  violence
         and, occasionally, murder.


         'Courts blame the police for not enforcing  the  POs,  whereas  the
         police blame the courts for issuing POs that are not enforceable.


         'The Social Services  Department  at  the  Municipality  of  Tirana
         commented that POs do work,  but  effective  social  services  were
         needed to make that happen. Their opinion  was  that  if  a  victim
         doesn't get support (including  housing  and  a  job)  then  it  is
         difficult for a PO to be effective. Tirana has a lot  of  services,
         NGOs and international agencies to help  people,  but  it  is  more
         difficult for people in the regions outside of Tirana  which  don't
         have these resources.


         'The Tirana Legal Aid Society noted that lawyers are allowed to ask
         for a Protection Order: "A Protection Order is free of charge;  but
         the expert is not free. This is why we are involved. We also  cover
         the costs of judicial  process.  We  ask  for  the  most  effective
         actions from the court. In some cases, I have  asked  for  parental
         custody orders.


         '"[...] Once a person  hasn't  respected  a  Protection  Order,  it
         switches from a civil to a  criminal  matter.  But  it  depends  on
         whether it is reported. Don't really  think  these  are  effective.
         They need other things to accompany it. For example, if the  person
         is to stay away from the other person, you  need  to  provide  that
         they  can.  Or,  subsequent  meetings  should  be   supervised   or
         monitored. But these don't happen often. And  there  is  a  problem
         with people being encouraged to report  breaches  of  a  Protection
         Order. When the cases are reported, the police are effective and do
         respond." [...]


         'The Director of the WCSSC in Kkes stated that POs were a big step
         ahead and were really necessary but the infrastructure to implement
         them was not fully in place. She said the state is obliged to  give
         women victims food, education, accommodation, employment, but  they
         don't. However, POs were generally reviewed  by  women  judges  who
         have been very considerate.'


    5.7.4    In November 2017, GREVIO noted:


         'GREVIO has been apprised of a number of difficulties regarding the
         application of this mechanism [i.e. protection orders],  which  for
         the most part do not relate to deficiencies in the law  but  rather
         to its ineffective implementation. The major issue is the  weakness
         of protection orders, such as those  ordering  the  perpetrator  to
         live in one part of the family dwelling leaving the victim to  live
         in the other. Available reports explain these decisions in terms of
         "a combination of discrimination and pragmatism on the part of  the
         judiciary" which is reluctant to leave  the  perpetrator  homeless.
         Thus, considerations relating to the scarcity of  housing  and  the
         low  socio-economic  status  of  the  perpetrator  have  at   times
         prevailed over the prime consideration which  should  underpin  any
         decision to issue an EBO/PO:  the  victim's  safety.  Moreover,  in
         taking this approach, rather than protecting the victim, protection
         orders have at times become the ante-chamber to more violence.'


    5.7.5    GREVIO further stated:


         'Other obstacles [besides victim and perpetrator remaining  in  the
         same house] standing in the way of an effective  implementation  of
         the EBOs/POs mechanism relate mainly to the lack of  reactivity  of
         responsible officials. These concern (a)  the  non-compliance  with
         procedural deadlines, such as the 24 hour deadline  to  notify  the
         victim, law  enforcement,  bailiffs  and  social  services  of  the
         issuance of EBOs, or the absence of  clear  deadlines  applying  in
         case of appeals against the decision to issue an  EBO/PO;  (b)  the
         scarce use by law enforcement and prosecution of their power to set
         in motion the procedure for the issuance of an EBO; (c) the failure
         of the responsible enforcement agencies, in particular bailiffs, to
         execute or to  ensure  the  enforced  implementation  of  EBOs/POs.
         GREVIO is further informed in this respect of cases where  bailiffs
         have required payments from the victims in order to enforce EBOs or
         POs. Both perpetrators acting in violation of protection orders and
         officials failing to execute them can be held accountable under the
         relevant provisions of criminal  law.  Although  the  state  report
         [drawn up by the Albanian  authorities  and  submitted  to  GREVIO]
         offers data  concerning  the  number  of  violation  of  protection
         orders, no information is provided as to the sanctions which  might
         have been applied as a consequence thereof.'


[11] CPIN 6.1.4    The HO FFT further stated:


         'Although women in the more rural and remote areas of  Albania  may
         find it difficult to access services locally, women who relocate to
         Tirana can obtain help and shelter there. Shelters are provided  to
         house victims of domestic abuse (both state-  and  NGO-run)  which:
         have sufficient capacity, are professionally  run,  have  effective
         safeguards against being detected; and a  re-integration  programme
         to help women re-establish themselves into the community. Women are
         increasingly aware of the services available to  them  and  how  to
         access them.'


[12] CPIN 6.1


    "Shelters: Numbers and location


    6.1.1    The USSD HR Report 2017 noted that, 'The  government  operated
         three shelters to protect survivors of domestic violence, and  NGOs
         operated six others.'


    6.1.2    The HO FFT stated 'There are four NGO shelters that can handle
         VoT [victims of trafficking] and two  more  specifically  for  VDV.
         [...] There are two shelters for VDV in Tirana, one of which is the
         state  run  National  Reception  Centre  for  Victims  of  Domestic
         Violence (NRCVDV). The Albanian Ombudsman stated that they have  an
         inspection strategy, that they  regularly  inspected  the  national
         centres [...].'


    6.1.3    The GREVIO report of November 2017 stated:


         'In relation to the coverage and geographical  spread  of  refuges,
         [...] there are currently 8 shelters offering safe immediate, short
         and long term accommodation to women victims of violence and  their
         children, with a total of 153 beds. This places  the  provision  of
         this sort of service at 137 beds short of the  number  required  in
         accordance with the standards set out in the Final Activity  Report
         of the Council of Europe Task  Force  to  Combat  Violence  against
         Women,  including  Domestic   Violence   which   recommended   safe
         accommodation in specialised women's shelters, available  in  every
         region, with one family place per 10 000 head  of  population.  The
         report acknowledges further that the concentration of  shelters  in
         the  capital  and  in  a  limited  number   of   other   localities
         (essentially, Elbasan, Vlora and Shkodra) leaves a wide portion  of
         the population, especially  in  rural  and  remote  areas,  without
         sufficient protection.'


[13] CPIN 6.1.5


         "The HO fact-finding report continued:


          'The director of the NRCVDV told the FFT that there is a plan  for
         another shelter for VDV (this is projected to be in the north  part
         of Albania, but is not finally settled). The Ministry of Health and
         Social  Welfare  said  that  the  government   is   undertaking   a
         feasibility study to look at the possibility of opening  three  new
         shelters for VDV before 2020. However, the UN doubted the state had
         the budget for new centres, and felt  they  needed  to  consolidate
         what they had got.


         'The shelters operate in  close  cooperation  with  each  other  to
         prevent over  reach.  Their  combined  capacity  is  sufficient  to
         address the need from adults and  there  is  no  national  capacity
         problem. The centre in Elbasan is  just  for  children,  which  can
         house 15-20, and when it is full they are referred  to  orphanages.
         The Municipality of Tirana said they have a good relationship  with
         the shelters, referring cases to each other.  The  Albanian  Social
         Services confirmed this, stating that  an  initiative  created  ten
         years ago by the Ministry of Interior effected cooperation  between
         the state and the NGO run shelters.


          'The shelters are licensed and regulated by  the  Inspectorate  of
         Social Services so they  must  adhere  to  the  official  standards
         regarding the level  and  quality  of  care  and  the  standard  of
         security they provide for clients. The Human  Rights  Officer  from
         the US Embassy thought the shelters were  very  good,  particularly
         those run by  the  NGOs  who  are  among  the  best  civil  society
         organisations in Albania. He commented  that  once  the  girls  are
         there they are generally happy and well taken care of.


         'The UN said it had worked with the government to set up the NRCVDV
         which now takes women without a PO. Several sources noted that  the
         government now funded the salaries of staff  in  NGO  shelters  and
         there had been efforts to use the funds  from  confiscated,  seized
         assets. The government also funds food and support  for  vocational
         training and health care. The Albanian Red Cross told the FFT  that
         they support both VoT and VDV in shelters with such things as food,
         blankets, clothes and toys for children.'


[14] CPIN at 8.7


    "Civil registration and data security


    8.7.5    With regard to whether the victim would be checked against the
         municipality  record  of  her  last  place  of  residence,  'Social
         Services commented that her previous  municipality  would  come  to
         know that she had moved to Tirana if she asked for her registration
         to be moved there. If she were residing at  a  shelter  in  Tirana,
         there would be no  need  for  her  to  do  this,  so  her  previous
         municipality  would  not  be  notified.  [...]  If  the  victim  is
         accommodated at a shelter elsewhere in  the  country,  their  civil
         registration is not moved with them but  stays  at  their  original
         location. [...]


         'However, if/when she eventually left the shelter she would then be
         required to move her registration to her  new  municipality  within
         one month, and in any case would need to do so so  that  she  could
         rent accommodation. At this point, her old  municipality  would  be
         made aware that she had  moved  to  Tirana's  administrative  area,
         though they would not be told her address within that area.'


    8.7.6    With regard to whether a person  can  be  traced  anywhere  in
         Albania, the State Police told the FCO that, '[...]  Albania  is  a
         small country, some people may know each other  and  talk  to  each
         other, and they could not prevent  people  from  encountering  each
         other or seeing each other by  chance.  However,  Albania  aims  to
         accede to the European Union and has therefore  adopted  standards,
         and introduced legal safeguards, for the  protection  of  data  and
         privacy which are in line with EU norms.'"


[15] The head note of TD and AD reads as follows:


    "Much of the guidance given in AM & BM (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG
    [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC)  is  maintained.  Where  that  guidance  has  been
    amended or supplemented by this decision it  has  been  highlighted  in
    bold:


         'a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
             women from Albania: trafficked women come from  all  areas  of
             the country and from varied social backgrounds.


         b)   Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally. Those  who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable. In extreme cases the close  relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.


         c)   Some women are lured to leave Albania with false  promises  of
             relationships or work. Others  may  seek  out  traffickers  in
             order to facilitate their departure  from  Albania  and  their
             establishment in  prostitution  abroad.  Although  such  women
             cannot be said to have left Albania against their will,  where
             they have fallen under the  control  of  traffickers  for  the
             purpose of exploitation there is  likely  to  be  considerable
             violence within the relationships and a lack of freedom:  such
             women are victims of trafficking.


         d)   In the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
             significant efforts to improve its  response  to  trafficking.
             This includes widening the scope  of  legislation,  publishing
             the Standard Operating Procedures, implementing  an  effective
             National Referral Mechanism, appointing a new Anti-trafficking
             Co-ordinator,  and  providing  training  to  law   enforcement
             officials. There is in general a Horvath-standard  sufficiency
             of protection, but it will not be  effective  in  every  case.
             When considering whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered.


         e)   There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
             for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of  trafficking
             are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'
             may be able to stay there for  up  to  2  years.  During  this
             initial  period  after  return  victims  of  trafficking   are
             supported and protected. Unless the individual has  particular
             vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues, this
             option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it
             is must be determined on a case by case basis.


         f)   Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
             live on her  own.  In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant
             challenges including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,
             financial  hardship  and  uncertainty,  a  sense  of  physical
             insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found  either  by
             their families or former traffickers. Some women will have the
             capacity to negotiate these challenges without undue hardship.
             There  will   however   be   victims   of   trafficking   with
             characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness  or  psychological
             scarring, for whom living alone in these  circumstances  would
             not be reasonable. Whether a particular appellant  falls  into
             that category will call for a careful assessment  of  all  the
             circumstances.


         g)   Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that risk exists  for  an
             individual claimant will turn in part on the factors that  led
             to the initial trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,
             including her background, age, and her willingness and ability
             to seek help from the authorities. For a proportion of victims
             of trafficking,  their  situations  may  mean  that  they  are
             especially vulnerable to re-trafficking, or being forced  into
             other exploitative situations.


         h)   Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:


             1)    The social status and economic standing of her family


             2)        The level of education of the victim of  trafficking
                  or her family


             3)   The victim of trafficking's state of health, particularly
                  her mental health


             4)       The presence of an illegitimate child


             5)       The area of origin


             6)   Age


             7)   What support network will be available".


[16] At 3.8.10 and 3.8.11 of the psychologist's report when Dr  Agnew-Davies
suggested to the Appellant that she could return  to  a  different  area  in
Albania, she stated:


    "3.8.10  The fear is that he's always going to find me and  he'll  kill
         me.  He has said to me on so many occasions, 'Wherever  you  go,  I
         will find you'.  He even messaged me on Facebook saying he is going
         to kill me.  I did not reply.  Albania is too small and wherever  I
         go there is a way for him to find me.  When I decided to  leave,  I
         did not even feel safe in Europe.  I was trying to get  as  far  as
         possible because I thought he could find me in Europe plus  he  can
         travel in Europe because there are different laws than in Britain.


    3.8.11   I asked whether the violence worsened over time. [UD] said, 'I
         could  say  yes,  in  the  last  months.   When  I  got  the  first
         restraining order he tried to commit suicide by cutting his  throat
         and slitting his wrists.  In that  period  he  got  more  and  more
         aggressive and it was hard for me to even  recognise  him  at  all.
         After the first order ended that lasted for six months, I asked for
         another restraining order but I wasn't granted one.  During the six
         month restraining order whenever I tried to ring  the  police  they
         barely helped me.  I even asked to see one of  the  highest  police
         [officers] but he would not even listen to what I had to  say.   He
         saw me but for only two minutes.   I  showed  him  the  restraining
         order and said 'This is only a piece  of  paper  and  you're  doing
         nothing about it' and he seemed like he did not care.  Even when  I
         was in court I had to literally hide behind my lawyer and the judge
         was just sitting there, smoking, enjoying her cigarette".


17 In terms  of  her  prognosis  and  treatment  recommendations  these  are
    detailed at paragraph 4.3 and I highlight the following:


    "4.3.3   PTSD has been associated with significant 'impairment  of  the
         person's ability to function in social or  family  life'  (National
         Centre for PTSD, 2005) and has been described as one  of  the  most
         costly psychological morbidities globally (Kessler  et  al,  2000).
         [UD]is severely compromised in terms of her capacity  to  function,
         as indexed by standardised measures (e.g.  3.4.1;  3.9.14)  and  as
         described over  Sections  4.1  and  4.2.   Her  prognosis  is  also
         undermined by her interpersonal difficulties and self doubts  which
         will make it harder for her to invest the  trust  necessary  for  a
         healing therapeutic relationship.  They would be improved by easier
         access to her brother and by access to an interpreter when she sees
         the GP until her English improves.


    4.3.4    With regard to her dual diagnosis, most people who  experience
         a single  Depressive  Episode  can  hope  for  complete  remission.
         Patients with dual diagnoses  are  prone  to  relapse  and  in  the
         interim, their depressive symptoms can persist for years associated
         with some disability and distress (APA, 1994).  Given the longevity
         of abuse and the resultant complexity and enduring nature of [UD's]
         disorders I think that any recovery will only take place  over  the
         long term: a matter of many years and in graded phases.  I  do  not
         anticipate full recovery in  the  foreseeable  future.   Even  with
         substantial input, if her right to remain is insecure, I doubt  her
         ability to  achieve  any  significant  improvement  in  her  mental
         health.


    4.3.11   In summary, the  positive  prognostic  markers,  such  as  her
         committed parenting, her recognition of her need to  talk  and  her
         stated relief from speaking with her solicitor (3.4: 3, 7;  3.9.7),
         and her support from her brother  and  family  who  are  all  at  a
         distance, are outweighed by  the  nature  and  severity  of  [UD's]
         history, the complexity of her symptoms, by her lack of  access  to
         appropriate groups and by her insecure  immigration  status.   [UD]
         will require long term highly specialist therapeutic treatment  and
         consistent social support, and is liable to relapse.  Stabilisation
         of her situation is necessary before she would be able to engage in
         the specialist trauma-focused work required by national  guidelines
         but would in itself significantly promote her recovery.


