
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04571/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th January 2018                         |On 2nd May 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     VDD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A Khan, Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs. N Wilcocks Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  As this  a
    protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction  is  made.  Unless
    and until a Tribunal or  Court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies amongst others to all parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a Vietnamese national who appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision of the respondent dated 27th  April
    2017 refusing his claim for asylum.  His appeal was dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  Judge
    Sullivan promulgated on 21st June 2017.


 3. The appellant was born on 8th September  1999.   He  was  therefore  17
    years old as at the date of the  respondent's  decision  and  when  his
    appeal was heard.  Mr Khan has  confirmed  to  me  that  there  was  no
    evidence before the Judge of the FtT that apart from  the  age  of  the
    appellant, the appellant was in  any  way  vulnerable.   There  was  no
    medical evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant to indicate that he
    would have difficulty giving evidence,  or  that  he  might  have  some
    difficulty in recollecting events.  The appellant  was  accompanied  at
    the hearing by a social worker, and  there  is  no  suggestion  of  any
    particular difficulties having been encountered by the appellant during
    the hearing itself.   Broadly  put,  the  complaint  made  against  the
    decision of the FtT Judge is said by Mr Khan to be concerned  with  the
    Judge's assessment of the evidence.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 4. The background to the appellant's arrival in  the  UK  and  the  asylum
    claim made by the appellant, is set out at paragraphs [2]  and  [3]  of
    the decision.  There is a brief summary of the background to the  claim
    for asylum at paragraph [3] of the decision.  At paragraphs [4] and [5]
    of the decision, the FtT Judge sets out the basis upon which the  claim
    was refused by the respondent.  It is noted at paragraph [5], that  the
    credibility of the appellant was in issue.  At paragraphs [10] to  [12]
    of the decision, the Judge sets out the preliminary matters  that  were
    addressed by the Judge, recording in  particular,  at  paragraph  [10],
    that prior to the arrival of the appellant and with  the  agreement  of
    the representatives, she checked that she had all of the documents that
    were relevant to the appeal.


 5. There was an issue before the FtT  as  to  whether  the  appellant  had
    claimed asylum previously, in the Netherlands.   For  the  purposes  of
    this decision, I need not consider that issue further because the Judge
    found that  the  respondent  had  not  satisfied  the  Judge  that  the
    appellant's fingerprints were in fact taken in the Netherlands, or that
    he had made a claim there previously.   What  the  judge  does  say  at
    paragraph [11] is this:


         "When the Appellant arrived  I  ensured  that  he  could  hear  and
         understand the interpreter and told him to say if at any time there
         was something he did not hear or understand.  I explained the  need
         for note to be made of the proceedings.  I told him that  he  could
         ask for a break at any  time  and  told  the  key  worker  who  had
         accompanied him to the hearing to alert me if she had any  concerns
         for him.  I explained to the Appellant that I had  already  checked
         the documentary evidence  and  that  it  would  form  part  of  the
         evidence on which I would base any decision so that he would not be
         asked to repeat what could be read there."


 6. The Judge's record of the proceedings is set out at paragraphs [13]  to
    [15] of her decision.  The Judge's findings as to  the  credibility  of
    the appellant, and her conclusions upon the evidence are to be found at
    paragraphs [18] to [25] of the  decision.   Importantly,  at  paragraph
    [18] of the decision, the Judge states:


         "I  have  considered  all  of  the  evidence  before  reaching  any
         conclusion in this matter.   The  order  in  which  I  set  out  my
         findings is not an indication that I have considered any one aspect
         of this matter in isolation from,  or  priority  to,  another.   In
         assessing the Appellant's evidence I have kept in  mind  his  youth
         both at the dates of key events and currently.  I acknowledge  that
         discrepancies may arise in evidence for many reasons  and  are  not
         necessarily indicative of an account that has  been  fabricated  or
         embellished.  Where I find discrepancies  in  this  Appeal  I  have
         assessed them in light of the Appellant's age and in the context of
         the evidence as a whole, including any explanation offered  by  the
         Appellant, before deciding what weight to give to the evidence."


 7. The Judge addresses, at paragraphs [20] and [24] of the  decision,  the
    various strands to the appellant's claim for asylum.  For  the  reasons
    set out at paragraph [20] of  the  decision,  the  Judge  rejected  the
    appellant's account that his grandfather borrowed money from  gangsters
    in 2014, that he still  owes  money  to  the  gangsters,  or  that  the
    appellant is regarded as  responsible  for  any  such  loan.   For  the
    reasons set out at paragraph [21] of the decision, the  Judge  rejected
    the appellant's account that he was a Viet Tan  supporter  in  Vietnam,
    that he  distributed  leaflets  for  them,  or  that  he  attended  two
    demonstrations in Hanoi.  The Judge rejected  the  appellant's  account
    that he was arrested by the authorities in January 2016 or at all.   At
    paragraph [22] of her decision, the Judge  considered  the  photographs
    relied upon by the appellant but she was not satisfied that they  would
    come to the attention of the Vietnamese authorities. The Judge was  not
    satisfied that the appellant has done any more than attended  a  single
    gathering when three photographs were taken,  and  the  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that  the  appellant's  behaviour  will  have  generated  any
    interest in  him  on  the  part  of  the  Vietnamese  authorities.   At
    paragraph [23], the Judge states:


         "I am not satisfied that the appellant has been or would now be  of
         any interest to the Vietnamese authorities. I find that he has  not
         demonstrated that he would be at real risk of persecution on return
         to Vietnam."


The appeal before me


 8. The appellant claims that the error of approach is that the judge makes
    no reference to having considered the respondent's policy;  "Processing
    Children's Asylum Claims" of  12th  July  2016  in  her  decision.  The
    appellant relies upon the decision in SF and  Others  (Guidance,  post-
    2014 Act) [2017] UKUT 120 to support the proposition that the FtT Judge
    should have applied the guidance to aid consistent decision-making.


 9. Permission to appeal was granted on 6th November 2017 by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Eshun.  The matter comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  the
    decision of the FtT contains a material error of law,  and  if  so,  to
    remake the decision.  At the end of the hearing before me,  I  informed
    the parties that I dismiss the appeal.  I provided my reasons in brief,
    and I informed the parties that a full written decision  would  follow.
    This I now do.


10. Before addressing the criticism made of the decision of the FtT  Judge,
    it is useful at this stage to note the guidance that  was  provided  by
    the Senior President of Tribunals in the Court of Appeal decision of AM
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123.  In that case, an expert medical report relating to a 15-year-
    old asylum seeker indicated that he  suffered  from  moderate  learning
    difficulties. It outlined the ground rules which should be  adopted  at
    the hearing to  ensure  procedural  fairness.  The  Judge  ignored  the
    advice, and  made  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the  asylum
    seeker. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal also ignored the medical  report,
    finding that the FtT Judge had  taken  full  account  of  the  learning
    difficulties, and had been entitled to its view. By  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the Court of Appeal, it was common ground that there had
    been fundamental procedural unfairness, and that  the  case  should  be
    remitted.


11. As to procedural  fairness,  Sir  Ernest  Ryder,  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals noted that the strict rules of evidence do not apply  in  the
    Immigration and Asylum  Chamber,  like  they  do  in  the  courts.  The
    Tribunal Rules make clear that there is flexibility and a wide range of
    specialist expertise, which a Tribunal can utilise to deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly.  The Court of Appeal gave guidance  on  the  general
    approach to be adopted in law and practice, by the FtT  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal where claims for  asylum  are  made  by  children,  and  young
    people, or indeed  other  incapacitated  or  vulnerable  persons  whose
    ability to participate effectively in proceedings might be limited. The
    guidance is designed to ensure that  such  persons  have  an  effective
    right of access to the Tribunal and a voice in the proceedings, so that
    their claims are fairly determined.  At paragraphs [21] and  [22],  Sir
    Ernest Ryder stated:


         "21. It is submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  agreed
         basis  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  merits  reflects   core
         principles  of  asylum  law  and  practice  which  have  particular
         importance in claims from children  and  other  vulnerable  persons
         namely:


            a. given the gravity of  the  consequences  of  a  decision  on
            asylum and the accepted inherent difficulties  in  establishing
            the facts of the claim as well as  future  risks,  there  is  a
            lower standard of proof, expressed as  'a  reasonable  chance',
            'substantial grounds for thinking' or 'a serious possibility';


            b. while  an  assessment  of  personal  credibility  may  be  a
            critical aspect of some claims, particularly in the absence  of
            independent supporting evidence, it is not an end in itself  or
            a substitute for the application of the  criteria  for  refugee
            status which must be holistically assessed;


            c. the findings of medical experts must be treated as  part  of
            the holistic assessment: they are not to be treated as an 'add-
            on'  and  rejected  as  a  result  of  an  adverse  credibility
            assessment or finding made prior to and without regard  to  the
            medical evidence;


            d.  expert  medical  evidence  can  be  critical  in  providing
            explanation  for  difficulties  in  giving   a   coherent   and
            consistent account of  past  events  and  for  identifying  any
            relevant safeguards required to meet vulnerabilities  that  can
            lead to disadvantage in the determination process, for example,
            in the ability to give oral testimony and under what conditions
            (see  the  Guidance  Note  below  and JL  (medical  reports  -
            credibility) (China) [2013] UKUT  00145  (IAC) ,  at  [26]  to
            [27]);


            e.  an  appellant's  account  of  his  or  her  fears  and  the
            assessment of an appellant's credibility must also be judged in
            the context of the known objective circumstances and  practices
            of the state in question and a failure to do so can  constitute
            an error of law; and


            f.  in  making  asylum  decisions,  the  highest  standards  of
            procedural fairness are required.


         22.  Although I agree  with  these  submissions  I  would  like  to
         emphasise that these principles are not an exhaustive or  immutable
         checklist. That said, the principles were not applied  properly  or
         at all in the determination of this appellant's  claim  for  asylum
         either by the FtT or the UT. I recognise that this marks a  failure
         of the system to provide sufficient and adequate protection in  the
         asylum process for the particular requirements, needs and interests
         arising out of the disadvantages that the appellant has as a highly
         vulnerable child. There is a consensus  that  the  critical  errors
         arose from the focus on the credibility of the appellant's  account
         and the failure to properly have regard to the  objective  evidence
         and to give it priority  over  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to
         provide oral testimony."


12. In reaching my decision  I  have  borne  in  mind  and  considered  the
    guidance given by the Senior President of Tribunals.


13. The appellant claims that in reaching her decision  at  paragraph  [20]
    that she was not satisfied that the  appellant's  grandfather  borrowed
    money from gangsters in 2014, still owes money to  the  gangsters  from
    2014, or that the appellant is regarded as  responsible  for  any  such
    loan, the Judge failed to consider the  respondent's  policy  guidance;
    "Processing Children's Asylum Claims" of 12th July 2016.   It  is  said
    that the guidance establishes that  a  child  may  have  little  or  no
    concept of fear as parents  or  family  members  may  not  share  their
    experiences or fears with children. Children may also be too  young  to
    comprehend what constitutes a risk and what does not.  It  is  said  on
    behalf of the appellant that in reaching her  conclusion  at  paragraph
    [20], there is no indication that that the judge considered  whether  a
    minor of the age and maturity of the appellant,  would  have  knowledge
    and understanding of the relevant matters. It is said  that  the  Judge
    merely speculated, and the appellant should have been given the benefit
    of the doubt given that he was not directly involved in borrowing money
    and was very young when the matters referred to, occurred.


14. Similarly it is said that the appellant was only 14 years  old  at  the
    time of his claimed political activities. In light of his  tender  age,
    it is unreasonable to expect  a  child  to  completely  understand  the
    policies of the respective political party. It is said that  the  Judge
    failed to consider the  report;  "Vietname:  Political  Opponents",  of
    November 2016 that was  relied  upon  by  the  appellant.   The  report
    confirms that where a  person  is  perceived  to  have  taken  part  in
    opposition political activities and as a result would have come to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities, they would face a  real  risk  of
    persecution.


15. Dealing first with the Judge's overall assessment of the claim and  the
    credibility  of  the  appellant,  I  accept  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely, does not mean  that  it
    is untrue. It is clear that the ingredients of the story, and the story
    as a whole,  have  to  be  considered  against  the  available  country
    evidence, and any reliable expert evidence, and other familiar factors,
    such as consistency with what the appellant has said before,  and  with
    other factual evidence.


16. The assessment of credibility is always a highly fact  sensitive  task.
    The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence  as  a  whole.   In
    assessing the credibility of the appellant and the  claim  advanced  by
    him, the Judge was required to consider  a  number  of  factors.   They
    include, whether the account given by the appellant was  of  sufficient
    detail, whether the account is  internally  consistent  and  consistent
    with any relevant specific and general country information, and whether
    the account is plausible.  If an  account  is  littered  with  internal
    inconsistencies that may be enough for a Judge to dismiss the  evidence
    of an appellant as incredible.  It does not  follow  that  a  Judge  is
    entitled to dismiss an account in the  same  way,  simply  because  the
    account is implausible.  That is not however to say  that  a  Judge  is
    required to take at face value, an account of  facts  proffered  by  an
    appellant.


17. Here, at paragraph [16], the Judge  confirms  that  she  has  not  made
    findings without first looking at all the evidence in  the  round.   In
    assessing the evidence she has kept in mind the appellant youth both at
    the dates of key events and currently. The judge reminds  herself  that
    discrepancies may arise in  evidence  for  many  reasons  and  are  not
    necessarily indicative of  an  account  that  has  been  fabricated  or
    embellished. The Judge records that where she has  found  discrepancies
    in the appeal, she has assessed them in light of  the  appellant's  age
    and in the context of the evidence as whole.  Having made  that  clear,
    there is no reason for me to  believe  that  she  did  not  adopt  that
    approach.  What follows at paragraphs [20] to [23] are  findings  that,
    in my judgement, arise from a combination  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    account, a lack of detail or sufficient explanation, and  matters  that
    appeared to the Judge, to be implausible.


18. The Judge had the opportunity of hearing the appellant and  having  his
    evidence tested.  The Judge did not consider  irrelevant  factors,  and
    the weight that he attached to the evidence was a matter for her.   The
    obligation on a Tribunal Judge is to give reasons in sufficient  detail
    to show the principles on which the Tribunal has acted and the  reasons
    that have led to the decision.  Such reasons need not be elaborate, and
    do not need to address every argument or every factor which weighed  in
    the decision.  It is  sufficient  that  the  critical  reasons  to  the
    decision, are recorded.  The failure of  the  Judge  to  refer  to  the
    respondent's guidance is, in  my  judgment  immaterial.   The  guidance
    tells Home Office staff about how to process and assess  asylum  claims
    from children.  Asylum claims  made  by  children  must  be  considered
    within  the  framework  set  out  at  paragraphs  349  to  352  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


19.  In my  judgment,  a  careful  reading  of  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    establishes  that  the  FtT  Judge  reached  her  overall  findings  by
    reference to a combination of inconsistencies in the account, a lack of
    detail or sufficient explanation, and  matters  that  appeared  to  the
    Judge, to be implausible. The decision of the Judge is not based simply
    upon inconsistencies and/or implausibility's in the  account  that  was
    proffered by the appellant.  The conclusions of  the  Judge  have  also
    been reached by reference to the known objective evidence as to  events
    in Vietnam.


20. Having carefully considered  the  decision  of  the  FtT  Judge,  I  am
    entirely satisfied that it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision.   I  am
    satisfied that there is no material error in the decision  of  the  FtT
    Judge and I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is dismissed.


19. An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date          12th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          12th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

