
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04687/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2018                           |On 26 April 2018              |
|Prepared 22 February 2018                     |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [M H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss H Masih, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, whose nationality is a matter of dispute, date of  birth
    [ ] 1984, claims to be a  national  of  the  Arab  Republic  of  Syria,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision, dated 5  May  2017,
    to refuse recognition  as  a  refugee  and  to  refuse  a  Humanitarian
    Protection claim.  The appeal against that decision came before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Parkes (the Judge)  who,  in  a  decision  dated  7
    November 2017, dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  Permission to  appeal
    that decision was given on 15  December  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Scott-Baker (ARJ).

2.   The Respondent made a Rule 24 response on 10  January  2018,  which  in
    short said that the  Judge  had  properly  considered  the  issues  and
    arrived at a sustainable conclusion so that there was no arguable error
    of law.

3.   Miss Masih's first major ground of attack is  that  the  Appellant  had
    put forward an expert  report  by  Professor  Yaron  Matras,  dated  19
    October 2017, which the Judge had failed to properly  address,  bearing
    in mind a competing and differing report by 'Verified'.  The  basis  of
    the Judge preferring the report of Verified was simply that the  report
    showed it had been considered by a number of people,  three  in  total.
    The report does not make clear the extent to which those  who  did  the
    work on the case for Verified had the necessary linguistic  skills  and
    experience to be able to make the correct assessment of the evidence.

4.   Professor Matras set out his own assessment but, as I have  been  taken
    to it, set out a number of cogent criticisms of the assessment and  the
    influences upon the assessment that  Verified  had  made.   Those  were
    severally identified in Professor Matras's report at paragraphs  3,  4,
    5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4 and in the conclusions at paragraph  7  of  the
    report.

5.   It is most unfortunate but the Judge simply  failed  to  address  those
    criticisms which undoubtedly bear on the assessment of the  Appellant's
    speech and the analysis of the root of that speech, both  in  terms  of
    whether or not she was of the area claimed  but  more  importantly  the
    potential influence on the Appellant being brought up by a mother whose
    own speech  could  well  have  affected  the  general  profile  of  the
    Appellant's  own  speech.   It  is  unnecessary  to  descend  into  the
    particulars of the explanation of this, since it is clearly a matter of
    some complexity, but quite  simply  the  Judge  did  not  address  that
    evidence.  It seemed to me reading the report it showed clear points of
    difference which must be relevant to the overall assessment carried out
    by Verified.

6.   As Professor Matras also pointed out, there is no indication  that  the
    Verified report's main author has  any  knowledge  of  Kurdish  and  no
    indication that the analysts who had assisted in the  overall  exercise
    had any formal training in linguistic analysis.  It  may  be  that  the
    professor's criticisms of their reference to  'standard  Kurmanji'  and
    general criticisms made that derive therefrom, simply demonstrate  that
    Verified did not appreciate the potential differences that might arise,
    let alone the possibility that the Appellant might have  been  involved
    in using  a  'transitional  dialect'.   On  that  ground  alone,  I  am
    satisfied that the Original Tribunal's decision  cannot  stand  because
    adequate and proper or sufficient reasons have not been given  for  the
    Judge's preference of that report.

7.   Mrs Aboni made the general point that the issue was not the sole  issue
    and  there  were  other  aspects  of  the  Judge's  findings  and   the
    Appellant's evidence which enabled him on an alternative or  additional
    basis to stand by the reasons that he gave.  Miss Masih pointed to  the
    Appellant's statement and rebuttal of aspects raised by the  Respondent
    against the Appellant's evidence.   She  essentially  argued  that  the
    Judge has simply not addressed those matters sufficiently or adequately
    or given reasons which were enough to show that the adverse conclusions
    reached had a rational basis.

8.   It seemed to me once again it is very difficult  to  tell  whether  the
    Judge's assessment of the other wider evidence was  not  influenced  by
    the erroneous assessment expressed in the Verified report in preference
    of that to the report of Professor Matras.  In those  circumstances  it
    did not seem to me that  the  Original  Tribunal's  decision  could  be
    correct in that assessment of the wider evidence as a basis to  sustain
    the decision reached.

9.   I find the Original Tribunal's decision cannot  stand  and  the  matter
    will have to be remade in its entirety.

10.  I conclude that the appropriate course is for the matter to  be  remade
    in accordance with the law by the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  matter
    will be listed there.

DIRECTIONS

1.   List at Birmingham.   Not  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes.
    List for two hours.

2.   List for a telephone CMR, at which directions should  be  given  as  to
    the  preparation  of  any  further  evidence,  the  attendance  of  any
    witnesses,  their  identity  and  nationality  and  other   particulars
    necessary for the Respondent to make appropriate background checks.

3.   An interpreter will be required in Kurdish Kurmanji.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order is required or appropriate.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

