
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04005/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  SALEH [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Greasley, promulgated on 26 July 2016, dismissing  his  appeal  against
    refusal of asylum.

 2. The first ground of  appeal,  directed  against  paragraph  22  of  the
    decision, states that "when recounting the [respondent's]  reasons  for
    refusal" the judge referred to a "further material inconsistency"  over
    a matter of dating, which the respondent later conceded to have  arisen
    from incorrect transposition of dates from the Persian calendar. It  is
    said that the judge  took  this  into  consideration  when  considering
    overall credibility, and "this error improperly informed his opinion".

 3. At paragraph 59 the judge holds it  against  the  appellant  that  upon
    arrival in the UK he did not attempt to claim international protection.
    Ground two submits that as the appellant was encountered in a lorry  on
    the date that he entered the UK, was taken  to  a  police  station  and
    claimed asylum, this was no basis for a negative finding.

 4. Ground three criticises a point also made at paragraph  59,  where  the
    judge  found  it  adverse  to  the  appellant's  credibility  that   he
    repeatedly asked for repetition of  clear  and  unambiguous  questions.
    This is said to have been perfectly reasonable behaviour on the part of
    the appellant, and incorrect speculation by the judge.

 5. Ground four criticises the judge for speculating against the  appellant
    at paragraph 54, finding no explanation of how witnesses would identify
    individuals as being from the KDP and be able to report back so quickly
    to the authorities.  It  is  said  to  be  unrealistic  to  expect  the
    appellant to know who reported him, and speculation to have taken it to
    be beyond  reasonability  that  villagers  might  have  recognised  KDP
    fighters.

 6. The foregoing are said to be unsupported speculations  and  assumptions
    which cumulatively amount to error in law.

 7. A First-tier tribunal judge  declined  to  grant  permission  on  these
    grounds, observing that lengthy reasons  were  given  for  the  adverse
    credibility findings; that the point in ground 1 was not given  as  one
    of the judges reasons, but in a recital of the  respondent's  position;
    and that it was strictly true that the appellant  made  no  attempt  to
    claim asylum on arrival.

 8. The appellant renewed his application  to  the  upper  tribunal,  which
    granted permission on 5 October 2016,  observing  that  although  other
    proper reasons might  have  been  given,  the  decision  contained  two
    arguably bad points: relying on an issue which had  been  disavowed  by
    the respondent,  and  on  not  claiming  asylum  on  arrival  when  the
    appellant arguably had "no choice but to comply with his agents".

 9. Mr Winter applied to argue additional grounds, as follows.  Mr Matthews
    did not object to these grounds being considered.

10. The first additional ground  is  that  the  judge  erred  in  assessing
    documentary evidence, namely a summons from the revolutionary court and
    a warning letter from a prosecutor by (i) reaching a conclusion  before
    surveying all the evidence; (ii) putting the cart before the  horse  by
    putting the burden on the appellant to demonstrate the  documents  were
    genuine,  then  reaching  adverse  credibility  findings  because   the
    appellant failed to discharge that burden; (iii) failing to ask whether
    the documents were at the  centre  of  the  request  for  international
    protection and whether there were simple enquiries which the respondent
    could make to conclusively prove whether the documents could be  relied
    upon, the obligation of verification being upon the Secretary of State;
    (iv) failing to consider that the respondent could have  asked  for  an
    adjournment to verify the documents; (v) failing to adjourn ex  proprio
    motu; and (vi) speculating, in finding the documents did not  give  the
    impression being six months old.

11. Mr Winter accepted that the appellant had not put any previous argument
    along the lines of this ground, but he said it was such an obvious  and
    material error that it should be accepted even at this late stage.

12. The second additional ground is that the  judge  misapplied  Chiver  by
    founding on matters which did not go to the  core  of  the  appellant's
    account - (i) not mentioning the shooting of his  friend  at  interview
    (ii) failing to give details about his father and uncle [later said  to
    be peshmerga fighters under  government  suspicion]  at  interview  and
    (iii) failing to give details about documents at interview  or  in  his
    witness statement.

13. Additional ground three is that the judge erred in law at  paragraph  4
    by irrationally expecting the appellant to know information outside his
    knowledge, namely how witnesses would have known  he  was  helping  the
    KDP.

14. Additional ground four is that the judge erred when  finding  that  the
    appellant prevaricated in his responses,  because  the  judge  gave  no
    examples of the questions asked, and so failed to provide a  sufficient
    explanation for his finding.

15. Finally, Mr Winter submitted that additional ground one might be enough
    on its own  to  set  aside  the  determination;  otherwise,  the  other
    grounds, in combination, disclosed such error.

16. I am not satisfied that the grounds disclose any such error  on  points
    of law as to require the decision to be set aside.

17. On the original ground one, the judge simply records this matter  while
    summarising the position first taken  by  the  respondent.  It  is  not
    revisited and is not taken as an adverse point in the resolution of the
    case.

18. Failure to claim asylum earlier in the UK is perhaps not a point of any
    real significance against the appellant, when he  apparently  made  his
    claim shortly after being encountered at or  near  a  motorway  service
    station, having made an  illegal  entry  and  decamped  from  a  lorry.
    Another weak point is the comment that the documents produced  did  not
    give an appearance of being six months old, when the judge does not say
    how he could tell one way or the other, and what difference this  made.



19. There is no error of treating the documentary evidence in isolation, or
    of reaching adverse conclusions before turning to it. The judge applied
    the lower standard of proof to the evidence  cumulatively  and  in  the
    round; see the decision as a whole, and paragraph 49 in particular.

20. As Mr Matthews pointed out, according to the  appellant's  evidence  he
    had the documents at the time of his interview and  later  when  making
    his witness statement through his solicitors, yet he produced them only
    the day before the hearing.  The  judge  gives  good  reasons  for  not
    finding these to be reliable documents, and was under no  duty  of  his
    own initiative to adjourn and to require the respondent to make further
    enquiries. This is not one of these fairly rare  situations  where  the
    respondent might be under any such duty, and it is a far-fetched  point
    for an appellant who by his  own  account  had  the  documents  in  his
    possession for some six months, yet kept quiet  about  their  existence
    and produced them as a last minute ambush. There was nothing to prevent
    the appellant from having efforts made on his side to authenticate  the
    documents.

21. The extent to which the matters mentioned at additional ground two went
    to the core of the account was for the judge to decide. He was  plainly
    entitled to find they were quite important.  There is nothing in Chiver
    or any other authority to the effect they should have been left out  of
    account.

22. It might have been desirable for the judge to  quote  examples  of  the
    appellant prevaricating in his evidence, playing  for  time  or  giving
    unresponsive answers, but first instance judges are entitled  to  reach
    their findings, with appropriate caution, based in part on  the  manner
    in which an appellant gives evidence before them.

23. The grounds seek to probe quite minutely for error in the decision, but
    apart from two minor points they disclose no error of reasoning, and no
    error of principle in the approach taken.

24. The grounds do not show that the decision, read fairly and as a  whole,
    is a less than legally adequate explanation to the appellant of why his
    account has been rejected and his appeal has been dismissed.  The judge
    gives numerous sensible reasons  in  which  either  no  flaw  has  been
    asserted, or the criticisms of which have no substance.

25. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            14 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




