
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04949/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 5 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNALJUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             AMINE ETTAKAFFOULI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant currently identifies himself as  a  citizen  of  Morocco,
    born on 9 January 1977.  He has previously asserted that  he  is  Iraqi
    and that he is  Italian.   He  first  came  to  the  attention  of  the
    respondent in October 2002.  Various proceedings  have  been  exhausted
    since that date.  He made further submissions on 2 April 2019,  refused
    by the respondent on 2 May  2019.   FtT  Judge  O'Hagan  dismissed  his
    appeal by a decision promulgated on 1 August 2019.

 2. By an application dated 13 August 2019, the appellant sought permission
    to appeal to the UT.  His grounds are directed against this part of the
    FtT's decision:

      [31] ... if the appellant's claim  ...  based  on  his  sexuality  was
      genuine, there is a reasonable degree of likely  that  he  would  have
      informed his ... representatives prior to May 2016 ...  within  ...  a
      confidential environment, and in absence of members of the Arab Muslim
      community, such as a  solicitor's office.  If he did  not  have  legal
      representation ... he would have told the respondent  ...  within  the
      confidential environment of an interview room ... [he] has  very  good
      command  of  the  English  language  and  would  not  ...  require  an
      interpreter to disclose this material fact.

      [32] I do not find credible the reasons ... given for delay.  I do not
      accept the appellant's evidence for failing to disclose sooner that he
      is a gay man.

 3. The grounds say that although the Judge narrated the correct  approach,
    at [31] she  "discloses"  her  "actual  approach",  and  that  although
    "clumsily worded" she meant that even if  unrepresented  the  appellant
    would have disclosed his sexuality to the SSHD  earlier  than  he  did.
    The grounds continue:

      In both those respects the Judge inverted the standard of proof.   The
      judge should not have asked whether there was a reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood that the appellant would have disclosed his  sexuality  ...
      but should have assessed whether there was no realistic prospect  that
      he would  have  disclosed  his  sexuality  earlier  ...  These  errors
      fundamentally  undermine  the  decision.   It  cannot  be  known  what
      conclusion would have been reached had the Judge applied  the  correct
      standard.

 4. FtT Judge Swaney granted permission on 30 August 2019.  She  said  that
    the Judge had correctly applied the lower standard of  proof,  and  the
    grounds were not arguable, but there was an obvious point, although not
    in the grounds:

      The  judge  notes  the  appellant's  evidence  about  ...   same   sex
      relationships and ... having openly attended gay bars in  the  UK  ...
      The judge refers to paragraph 339L of the rules ... but does not  make
      any explicit finding as  to  whether  ...  corroborative  evidence  is
      necessary or engage with any reasons why it might not be available ...
      particularly given the lapse of time ... since  ...  relationships  in
      Morocco and Greece.  The judge arguably finds the appellant incredible
      ... based on her finding that his explanation for failing to  disclose
      ... earlier ... was not reasonable rather than ... being one factor in
      an assessment ... in the round.

 5. On 3 April 2020, the UT issued  directions  with  a  view  to  deciding
    without a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether  its
    decision should be set aside.  Parties were also given the  opportunity
    to submit on whether there should be a hearing.

 6. The appellant's response dated 16 April 2020 is along these lines:

      i) At [1] - [5],  he  "seeks  to  vary  the  grounds  ...  upon  which
         permission has been granted" to include the original grounds in the
         application.

     ii) On the point on which permission was granted, he  founds  upon  the
         lapse of 23 years since the appellant was in Morocco, and 17  years
         since he was in Greece; and submits  that  the  Judge  "isolated  a
         negative aspect" and determined the appeal on that, rather than  on
         a rounded assessment.

    iii) A rehearing in the FtT is sought.

 7. In a response dated 20 April 2020, the SSHD submits:

      i) The FtT was entitled to attach weight to 14 years delay in claiming
         to be gay, a fraudulent claim as an Iraqi national, and failure  of
         a previous claim based on private life.

     ii) The determination in 2015 that the appellant was not credible,  and
         was an economic migrant, was the  starting  point.   The  appellant
         made no claim to be gay in that appeal.

    iii) The judge at [29] noted that delay was not in itself fatal.

     iv)  The  judge  accepted  that  cultural  norms  and  the  appellant's
         community might lead to secrecy, but it was open  to  her  to  find
         that he had opportunities to disclose outside that context.

      v) The appellant  might  have  been  unable  to  provide  evidence  of
         relationships before he came to the UK, but he provided no evidence
         of claimed relationships here, or of attending gay bars.

     vi) Even if it had  been  accepted  that  the  appellant  is  gay,  his
         discretion was such that he would not be at risk.

 8. The appellant's further submissions add the following:

      i) The grant of permission by the FtT denied him  the  opportunity  to
         advance his original grounds.  They should be considered by the UT.

     ii) The respondent appears to accept that it would have been  difficult
         to bring  evidence  of  historic  relationships.   That  shows  the
         overall findings to be defective.

    iii) The threshold for error not to be material is high, "...  of  great
         rarity".

     iv) The respondent's point about behaving with discretion is novel, and
         would have to be assessed afresh in the FtT.

 9. Neither party has suggested that a hearing is necessary.   Consistently
    with rules 2 and 34, the UT may now decide, based  on  all  submissions
    received, whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether its decision
    should be set aside.

10. The next question is which grounds may properly be advanced.

11.  The  appellant's  approach  to  renewing  the  original   grounds   is
    procedurally misconceived.  The correct course, where  the  FtT  grants
    permission on certain grounds but refuses on others, is to apply to the
    UT for permission under rule 21(2).

12. If an application for permission on those  grounds  was  before  me,  I
    would not find them to be arguable.

13. The term "inversion" in the grounds is odd.  A judge might  invert  the
    burden of proof, by putting it on the wrong party, but not the standard
    of proof.

14. If the grounds are intended to convey that the FtT reversed the  burden
    of proof, there is nothing in the decision to show that it  might  have
    thought the SSHD, rather than the appellant, had to establish the case.

15. In trying to specify the error, the grounds say that  the  FtT  "should
    not have asked whether there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that
    the appellant would have disclosed his sexuality ...  but  should  have
    assessed whether there was no realistic prospect  that  he  would  have
    disclosed his sexuality earlier".  I find this difficult to follow.  If
    anything, it seems  to  suggest  that  the  FtT  should  have  put  the
    appellant to a higher test.

16. The FtT directed itself at [22 - 23] on the lower standard of proof and
    expressed its conclusions in those terms at [34, 35, 36 & 37].

17. The original grounds identify no  error  on  a  point  of  law  in  the
    decision.  If permission had been granted on those grounds, I would not
    have upheld them.

18. The point on which permission  was  granted  is  that  the  FtT  should
    arguably have considered whether corroboration  might  reasonably  have
    been forthcoming.

19. All the  judge  said  at  [28]  is  that  in  absence  of  evidence  to
    corroborate that the appellant is homosexual,  she  was  "cognisant  of
    paragraph 339L of the rules".  That paragraph provides:
        It is the duty of the person to substantiate the  asylum  claim  or
        establish  that  they  are  a  person  eligible  for   humanitarian
        protection or substantiate their human rights claim. Where  aspects
        of the person's statements are  not  supported  by  documentary  or
        other evidence, those aspects will not need confirmation  when  all
        of the following conditions are met:
        (i) the person has made a  genuine  effort  to  substantiate  their
        asylum claim or establish that  they  are  a  person  eligible  for
        humanitarian protection or substantiate their human rights claim;
        (ii) all material  factors  at  the  person's  disposal  have  been
        submitted, and a satisfactory explanation  regarding  any  lack  of
        other relevant material has been given;
        (iii)  the  person's  statements  are  found  to  be  coherent  and
        plausible and do not run counter to available specific and  general
        information relevant to the person's case;
        (iv) the person has made an asylum claim  or  sought  to  establish
        that they are a person eligible for humanitarian protection or made
        a human rights claim at the  earliest  possible  time,  unless  the
        person can demonstrate good reason for not having done so; and
        (v) the general credibility of the person has been established.

20. The Judge did not, in the terms of the grant of permission,  "make  any
    explicit  finding  as  to  whether  ...   corroborative   evidence   is
    necessary"; but she was not required to, and it would have been odd  if
    she did.  The question whether corroboration is generally required  was
    not her for answer.  It is not required; every judge  should  know  it;
    and they do not have to say it in  every  decision.   A  general  self-
    reminder of the terms of paragraph 339L may be rather pointless, but it
    is not an error of law.

21. In taking up and developing this ground, the appellant  now  points  to
    the possible difficulty of corroborating gay  relationships  from  long
    ago; that may be  well  be,  but  if  he  thought  it  needed  explicit
    rehearsal, he might have argued it to the FtT.

22. The difficulty of proving long ago matters does not help him  over  his
    life in the UK in more  recent  years.   He  has  referred  vaguely  to
    keeping secrets from his own community, but going  to  gay  bars  is  a
    matter which would naturally fall for proof from other quarters.

23. It is difficult to see that more detailed  consideration  of  paragraph
    339L might have advanced the appellant's position.  Application of  its
    sub-paragraphs to his history more obviously tends against him.

24. The decision is not based only on absence of corroboration and delay in
    disclosure.  The judge directed herself at  [28]  and  [29]  that  such
    matters were not  necessarily  decisive.   Previous  adverse  findings,
    applying Devaseelan, were also significant.   The  eventual  assessment
    was in the round.

25. Had I resolved the grounds otherwise,  I  would  not  have  upheld  the
    decision on the alternative  basis  that  the  appellant  would  behave
    discreetly from choice, not from fear of persecution, and so would  not
    be at risk.  The SSHD did not  raise  that  with  any  clarity  in  the
    refusal letter,  and  it  is  not  recorded  as  part  of  submissions.
    However, as the negative  credibility  finding  stands,  the  issue  is
    immaterial.

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

27. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

28. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman      Date: 27/7/2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
