
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
PA/04184/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 20th September 2018                     |24th September 2018        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Murphy (counsel) instructed by Morgan Pearse,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. To preserve the  anonymity  order  deemed  necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Asjad  promulgated  on  6  June  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 16 February 1993 and is a national of  Albania.
On 16 March 2018 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Asjad ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  29  June  2018  Designated
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McClure gave permission to appeal stating

      1. By decision promulgated on 6 June 2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Asjad dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent to refuse her protection and human rights claims.


      2. The grounds of the application:-


      (a) Despite the birth certificate of their child, the local  authority
      bills indicating that the appellant and her  partner  lived  together,
      letters from hospitals, GPs, NHS and the Home Office all addressed  to
      the appellant and her  partner  at  the  alleged  address,  the  Judge
      concluded that this was not a genuine relationship and the couple were
      not living together.


      (b) The Judge on examining photographs indicated that the majority had
      the partner in outdoor clothes  such  that  she  concluded  that  that
      indicated that this was  not  a  genuine  relationship.  Many  of  the
      photographs of the partner with the  child  were  of  the  partner  in
      normal indoor/everyday clothing.


      (c) It is submitted that the Judge acted inconsistently to  the  point
      of irrationality in failing to take account of the evidence  that  was
      presented.


      (d) Issues were raised with regard to the appellant's claim for asylum
      including that adverse conclusions  have  been  made  which  were  not
      justified on proper examination of the evidence, for example  Albanian
      prison guards were referred  to  as  prison  police  and  the  adverse
      conclusions based thereon was therefore not justified.


      3. Having considered the decision as a whole whilst  the  relationship
      between the appellant and her partner had not existed  for  two  years
      prior to the date of hearing, the existence of the child and the  fact
      that the parties have provided substantial documents to show that they
      were living together, which documents supported their  oral  evidence,
      the grounds may be argued. Whilst the conclusions by the Judge contain
      a more detailed examination of  the  evidence,  I  do  not  limit  the
      grounds that may be argued in the circumstances.

The Hearing

5. (a) Mr Murphy, for the appellant, moved the grounds of  appeal.  He  took
me straight to [40] of the decision which  he  described  as  "muddled".  He
told me that the Judge's article 8 assessment  is  defective  and  that  the
Judge had failed to take account  of  documents  which  clearly  demonstrate
that the appellant lives with her partner.  He  told  me  that  there  is  a
wealth of evidence of cohabitation,  and  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
adequate weight to that evidence.

(b) Mr Murphy told me that the Judge approached  the  article  8  assessment
taking adverse credibility points from the appellant's asylum claim  as  the
starting point, and finding that the rejection of  the  appellant's  account
in her asylum claim undermine the documentary evidence relied on. He  relied
on Ex parte Virjon B 2002 EWHC 1469, a case in  which  the  Adjudicator  had
assessed a medical report on the basis of his  credibility  findings  rather
than reaching his findings on the basis of all the  evidence  including  the
medical report.

(c) Mr Murphy told me that the Judge's findings at [40]  are  confusing.  He
said that it is not clear whether or not the Judge finds  that  family  life
exists. He argued that  the  Judge's  comments  about  the  quality  of  the
relationship between the appellant and her partner appeared to be  a  moral,
rather than a legal,  judgement.  The  Judge's  conclusion  that  article  8
family life does not exist is not sustainable.

(d) Mr Murphy told me  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  all  relevant
article 8 issues including  the  rights  of  the  appellant's  partner,  and
wholly elided consideration of section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009.

(e) In relation to the asylum appeal, Mr Murphy  simply  adopted  paragraphs
17 to 20 of  the  grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  &  make  no  further
submission. He asked me to  find  a  material  error  of  law,  to  set  the
decision aside and to remit this case to the  First-tier  for  a  new  fact-
finding exercise.

6.(a) For the respondent, Ms Everett that told me that  the  appeal  against
the decision on  the  asylum  claim  is  without  merit,  that  the  Judge's
decision is properly reasoned. She told me that the Judge  sets  out  cogent
findings & clearly found that credibility was the determinative  issue.  She
asked me  to  allow  the  decision  to  stand  in  relation  to  asylum  and
humanitarian protection.

(b) Ms Everett conceded that the Judge's article  8  assessment  is  flawed.
She told me that [40] contains a material error of law, saying that even  if
the article 8 claim is weak it should be considered properly. She  asked  me
to preserve the findings in relation to the asylum claim but set  aside  the
Judge's article 8 ECHR decision. She asked me  to  remit  the  human  rights
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Analysis

7. The grounds of appeal relating to the asylum claim focus on  the  Judge's
credibility findings.  Between  [18]  and  [25]  the  Judge  summarises  the
evidence. The Judge's findings of fact lie between  [26]  and  [38]  of  the
decision. At  [27]  the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
contradictory and vague and that the  appellant  struggles  to  identify  an
agent of persecution. The Judge  examines  documentary  evidence  and  finds
that the documentary evidence produced creates a conflict in the evidence.

8. Between [26] and [38] the Judge sets out  adequate  reasons  for  finding
that the appellant is neither a credible nor a reliable witness.  The  Judge
explains why she finds the evidence to be  contradictory  and  inconsistent.
The Judge commences [32] by saying that the appellant  could  not  give  any
tangible testimony of threats she had received. At  [33]  the  Judge  quotes
from the appellant's answers in cross-examination.

9. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

10. MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 tells me that adequacy meant  no
more nor less than that.  It was not a counsel of  perfection.   Still  less
should it provide an opportunity to undertake a  qualitative  assessment  of
the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even  surprising,  on  their
merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons, is in part, to enable  the
losing party to know why she has lost and it is also to enable an  appellate
court or tribunal to see what the reasons for the decision are so that  they
can be examined in case there has been an error of approach.

11.  A  fair  reading  of  the  decision  in  the  asylum  and  humanitarian
protection claim demonstrates that the Judge took account of each strand  of
evidence. The Judge  considered  the  background  materials  as  part  of  a
holistic assessment of all of the evidence. There is nothing wrong with  the
Judge's fact-finding exercise. In reality the appellant's appeal amounts  to
little more than a disagreement with the  way  the  Judge  has  applied  the
facts as she found them to be. The appellant might not like  the  conclusion
that the Judge arrived  at,  but  that  conclusion  is  the  result  of  the
correctly applied legal equation. The correct test in law has been  applied.
The decision in the asylum, humanitarian protection and articles 2 & 3  ECHR
appeal does not contain a material error of law.

12. Although a thorough and well-reasoned decision is given in  relation  to
asylum, humanitarian protection  and  articles  2  &  3  ECHR,  the  Judge's
article 8 assessment is lacking.

13. The Judge has crammed the article 8 assessment into  one  paragraph.  It
is difficult to find clear reasons for the Judge's  decision  at  [40].  The
Judge is dismissive of documentary evidence which appears to  be  supportive
of the appellant's claim to  live  with  her  partner,  and  does  not  give
adequate reasons  for  dismissing  the  documentary  evidence.  The  Judge's
findings  in  relation  to  the  photographic  evidence  are  difficult   to
understand. There are (almost) as many photographs  of  Mr  Lleshi  with  no
coat as there are of Mr Lleshi wearing a coat.

14. There is  reliable  evidence  that  Mr  Lleshi  is  the  father  of  the
appellant's child. I am told that the appellant is now pregnant  with  their
second child. There is no consideration of the best interests of the  child.
It is difficult to see how the Judge concluded that article  8  family  life
does not exist

15. It is accepted that the errors at [40] amount to  a  material  error  of
law. I preserve the Judge's findings on asylum, humanitarian protection  and
articles 2 and 3 ECHR, but set aside the article 8 ECHR decision.

16. Almost Four months have now passed since the decision  was  promulgated.
The appellant's circumstances have changed once again. The  article  8  fact
finding assessment is flawed. A new fact-finding exercise is  necessary.  As
a result, I cannot substitute my own decision.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required on article 8 ECHR only. The  Judge's
findings in relation to asylum, humanitarian protection and articles 2  &  3
ECHR stand.

19. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Birmingham  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Asjad.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 6 June 2018  does
not contain errors of law  in  the  relation  to  the  Asylum,  Humanitarian
Protection and article 2 & 3 Grounds  of  appeal.  Insofar  as  this  appeal
relates to those parts of the Judge's  decision  the  appeal  is  dismissed.
The Judge's findings in the Asylum, Humanitarian Protection and article 2  &
3 appeal are preserved.

21. The decision on the article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal of  the  First-tier
Tribunal promulgated on 6 June 2018 contains a material error of law and  is
set aside.  I remit the outstanding article 8 ECHR appeal to the  First-tier
Tribunal sitting at Birmingham to  be  heard  before  any  First-tier  Judge
other than Judge Asjad.


Signed
                       Date 20 September 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




