
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04295/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 14th June 2021                |  On the 28th June 2021              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     TM
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


  This appeal has been decided without a hearing pursuant to rule 34 of the
               Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Handley ("the judge"), promulgated on 2 August 2019. By that  decision,
    the judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision, dated 29 March 2019, refusing  his  protection  human  rights
    claims.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal, as did the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The  latter  decision  was  challenged  by  judicial  review
    proceedings in the Court of Session. By a decision dated 26  May  2020,
    the refusal of permission by the Upper Tribunal was reduced. Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was then granted by the  Vice-President
    on 8 February 2021 in light of the Interlocutor and the Joint Minute.

 3. Subsequent to this, the respondent provided a rule  24  response.  This
    confirmed that she was not opposing the appellant's appeal and  invited
    the Upper Tribunal to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    re-heard before a different judge.

 4. By correspondence received by the Upper Tribunal on 10 June  2021,  the
    appellant's representatives confirmed that  he  was  amenable  to  this
    course of action, asked that the error of law hearing,  listed  for  30
    June 2021, be vacated, and that a written decision  be  issued  in  due
    course.

 5. I have considered all the documents on file and concluded  that  I  can
    fairly dispose of this appeal without the need for a hearing,  pursuant
    to rule 34 of the Upper Tribunal's procedure rules.



Conclusion on error of law

 6. I shall deal with this  matter  briefly,  given  the  position  of  the
    parties and my own conclusion that the grounds of appeal are  made  out
    and that the respondent was right to have conceded this.

 7. For the reasons set out in the detailed grounds of appeal,  I  conclude
    that the judge failed to provide adequate reasons for  concluding  that
    the appellant would not be at  risk  of  being  re-trafficked.  I  also
    conclude that the judge failed to provide adequate reasons  in  respect
    of the issues of state protection and internal relocation.

 8. It is clear that the errors were material to the outcome of the  appeal
    and I exercise my discretion and set the judge's decision aside.



Disposal

 9. It is, in the circumstances of this  case,  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The rehearing of the appeal by the First-tier Tribunal must start  from
    the premise that the respondent has accepted that the  appellant  is  a
    victim of trafficking (see paragraphs 33 and  43  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal  letter).  All   other   relevant   matters   will   fall   for
    consideration.




Anonymity


11. For reasons unknown, the First-tier Tribunal declined to make an
    anonymity direction. Given that this is a protection case and that
    proceedings are ongoing, I make such a direction.



Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


13. I exercise my discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

14. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal;

   2. The remitted hearing shall not be  conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Handley;

   3. The remitted hearing shall be conducted in light of what  is  said  in
      this decision.



Signed:  H  Norton-Taylor                                   Date:   14  June
2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
