

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04510/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2019                 |On 18 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 A S (Sudan)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order  previously  made.  Unless  the
Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these  proceedings
or any form of publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify
the appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.

Any failure to comply with this direction  may  give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.





                            Decision and reasons

1. The appellant, a citizen of Sudan, appeals with  permission  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
   respondent's decision to refuse him international  protection  under  the
   Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

2. On 18 December 2018, I found an error of law and set aside  the  decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal, directing that the decision be remade in  the
   Upper Tribunal.

3. The appellant has a  psychotic  mental  illness  which  may  be  paranoid
   schizophrenia, and has no family network in Sudan.  Most  of  his  family
   members are now overseas.  He had a brother in the JEM.

4. At a  hearing  on  18  March  2019,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
   appellant and all three of  his  witnesses  were  Darfuri  Tunjurs.   The
   appellant produced at that hearing a skeleton argument and a  substantial
   bundle of further evidence.

5. The appeal was  adjourned  to  enable  the  respondent  to  consider  her
   position in the light of the ethnicity concession and the  new  evidence.
   Following consideration of her position,  the  respondent  accepted  that
   there is a risk of persecution and/or serious harm for the  appellant  in
   his home area because he is a Darfuri Tunjur.

6. The remaining issue in this appeal was whether  the  appellant  could  be
   expected to exercise an internal relocation option to Khartoum. The Upper
   Tribunal has given guidance, which Mr Clark and  Ms  Laughton  had  seen,
   which is shortly to be reported as AAR and AA (non-Arab Darfuris: return)
   [2019] UKUT (IAC) as follows:

         "The situation in  Sudan  remains  volatile  after  civil  protests
         started in late 2018 and the  future  is  unpredictable.  There  is
         insufficient evidence currently available to show that the guidance
         given in AA (non-Arab Darfuris -  relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT
         00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010  (IAC)  requires
         revision. Those cases should still be followed. "

7. For the respondent, Mr Clark accepted in the light  of  the  decision  in
   AAR and AA, that the time is  not  right  to  depart  from  the  existing
   country guidance, and that accordingly the appellant's appeal falls to be
   allowed.

Decision

8. Accordingly, and by consent, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.
   I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.


Date:         16 September 2019         Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
