
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04837/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 June 2017                       |On 22 June 2017                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     K H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  He  was  born
    on 8 September 1989.  He entered the United Kingdom on 17 December 2015
    and claimed asylum.  On 26 April 2016, the Secretary of  State  refused
    the appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human
    rights grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed.  In a decision dated 31 October 2016, the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge A D Troup) dismissed the appellant's appeal on all
    grounds.  Before Judge Troup, it was accepted that the appellant  could
    not return to his home area as it fell within  one  of  the  "contested
    areas" of Iraq.  The sole  issue  before  the  judge  was  whether  the
    appellant could internally relocate to the Iraqi Kurdish Region  (IKR).
    Judge Troup found that internal relocation to  the  IKR  was  a  viable
    option and as a consequence the appellant could not succeed  on  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds or under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  On 22 December 2016, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ
    Macdonald) granted the  appellant  permission  to  appeal.   Thus,  the
    appeal came before me.

 5. Before me, Mr Diwnycz, who represented the Secretary of State, accepted
    that the judge had erred in law in  reaching  his  adverse  finding  on
    internal relocation.  Mr Diwnycz accepted that the appellant's ground 3
    was made out, namely that the judge had approached the issue of whether
    internal relocation was "unduly harsh" on the basis that the  appellant
    had to establish a breach of Art 3 of the ECHR.

 6. Mr Diwnycz's acceptance of  the  error  of  law  is,  in  my  judgment,
    entirely correct.  The test of "reasonableness" or "unduly harsh" which
    applies in determining whether internal relocation is an  option,  does
    not require the appellant to establish  a  breach  of  Art  3  (see  AH
    (Sudan) v SSHD [2007] UKHL 49 at [9]).  In applying that yard-stick  at
    paras 39 and 42, the judge erred in law.

 7. Both representatives indicated that the proper disposal of  the  appeal
    was that it be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order that  fresh
    factual findings, applying the  correct  approach,  could  be  made  in
    respect of the issue of internal relocation to the IKR.

 8. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.  I set  that
    decision aside.

 9. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Troup.  As regards the appellant's international
    protection claim, the sole issue will  be  whether  the  appellant  can
    internally relocate to the IKR.  In addition, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should also remake the decision in respect of Art 8.


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  21 June 2017
