
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04797/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2020                           |On 19 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     kh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban, Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national  of  Iraq  who  made  an  asylum  claim  on
    arriving in the United Kingdom on 13  December  2018.   His  claim  was
    refused and he appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Woolley and dismissed in a determination sent out on  15
    October 2019.  He now appeals to this Tribunal on grounds drafted by Ms
    Alban who has expanded on them before me today.  Permission was granted
    by Judge Macdonald in December 2019.

 2. The appellant claims to have been in a relationship with a girl  called
    Sumaya whom he met at school.  That was  a  secret  relationship  until
    Sumaya's cousin saw them  together.   At  that  point  members  of  the
    appellant's own family went to Sumaya's family to ask for her  hand  in
    marriage.  The family is said to be a powerful one in the region and it
    is said that Sumaya's father is an important member  of  the  PUK  with
    regional power attributable to that.  The application for marriage  was
    refused.  That was in about 2015 or 2016.  The relationship  continued,
    because it could  continue  at  school,  and  because  Sumaya  and  the
    appellant were in contact by telephone; a telephone which  belonged  to
    Sumaya's mother.  The appellant was injured when a car  was  driven  at
    him in November 2017.  That is attributed by the appellant to  being  a
    deliberate  attack  by  Sumaya's  family  on  him.   The   relationship
    culminated in an incident on 26 October 2018.  The appellant says  that
    he visited Sumaya when she was at a relative's house.   He  was  drunk.
    They had sexual contact.  They were surprised and he  escaped  but  she
    was killed.  His own family were angry with  him  but  his  father  and
    paternal uncle made arrangements for him to leave Iraq.  He  now  fears
    that if he returns he will himself be in danger as the potential victim
    of an honour crime and that, because his former girlfriend's family are
    powerful within the PUK, there will be a lack of protection if he is at
    that risk.

 3. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim  had  indicated  that
    very little of what he said about the details upon which he relied  was
    accepted.  When the matter was listed for hearing  standard  directions
    were sent out: but it was only on the day before the hearing  that  the
    appellant sought to support his claim by what were  said  to  be  court
    documents from Sulamaniyah.  They consist of  a  number  of  sheets  of
    paper with Arabic writing on them, each of which has  the  same  stamp.
    The documents produced were the originals.  They were accompanied by  a
    witness statement in rather general terms about  what  they  might  be.
    The Secretary of State took custody of the original documents  and  was
    directed  by  the  judge  at  the  time  "to  provide  a  supplementary
    report/decision dealing with the validity or allowance of the  document
    produced at court today", and  it  was  directed  that  the  matter  be
    relisted.

 4. In due course the respondent made what enquiries could  be  made  about
    them.  Resources available in the United Kingdom merely indicated  that
    there was no feature of them  enabling  authenticity  to  be  confirmed
    here.  There was then the possibility of looking abroad, and  the  Home
    Office indicated that enquiries could be made but the Iraqi authorities
    might take six to twelve months to indicate a reply and no reply  could
    be guaranteed in any event.  That was the state  of  affairs  when  the
    matter came before Judge Woolley at the hearing to which I have already
    referred.  Judge Woolley's conclusion on examining the  documents,  and
    reading or examining the copies of  the  documents,  the  Secretary  of
    State  having  retained  the  originals,   and   examining   also   the
    translations was that he was not prepared to place any  reliability  on
    the documents or their contents.

 5. Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal relates to  that  matter.   Ms  Alban
    submits that the Secretary of State had  an  obligation  or  burden  in
    relation to the documents.   She  derives  that  proposition  from  the
    decision of the European Court of Human Rights  in  Singh  &  Others  v
    Belgium (Application No. 33210/11) as expounded by the Court of  Appeal
    in PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.  She  says
    that in the circumstances the authenticity of the  documents  as  court
    documents should have been accepted by the judge and that the judge was
    in those circumstances not entitled to take the view that they were not
    established as authentic.

 6. Be that as it may, the judge did look at the contents of the  documents
    and examined the other evidence supporting the appellant's claim.   The
    judge's conclusion was that the appellant's story was  not  the  truth.
    The judge's comments on the evidence before him and his analysis of  it
    occupy paragraphs 43 to 52 of the decision.  The judge notes  a  number
    of apparent inconsistencies in the story at various stages.  The  judge
    first  of  all  notes  that  the  appellant's  account  is  that  in  a
    longstanding relationship which had been formerly rejected in  2015  or
    2016 and in which the underlying motive of the account  is  the  girl's
    parents' traditional protection of her virtue.  Nevertheless, the  girl
    was allowed to continue to go to the same school as the appellant, that
    she would evidently have contact with him there, and not only that, but
    that according to the appellant she did  have  contact  with  him  very
    regularly by telephone two or three times a  week  using  her  mother's
    phone.  The judge expresses the view that that is not the way in  which
    the country information indicates  that  traditional  Kurdish  families
    behave but also that this is not a very obviously consistent account of
    the family's own activities.

 7. Secondly, the judge notes the evidence about the appellant's  assertion
    that he was attacked in November 2017 by being run over in a car driven
    by members of the girl's family.  I will look at that in a little  more
    detail in a moment.

 8. Thirdly, and not the subject of  any  challenge  by  Ms  Alban  on  the
    appellant's behalf, the judge noted substantial inconsistencies between
    the accounts given by the appellant at various stages of what  happened
    on the night of 26 October 2018 which he says was the culminating event
    of the relationship.  There are also substantial inconsistencies in the
    various accounts he gave particularly of his  own  departure  from  the
    scene and in due course  from  the  country  as  well.   Meanwhile  the
    accounts that he gave are not consistent with the accounts given in the
    various supposedly court documents.  On those points,  the  grounds  of
    appeal assert first that the judge erred in reaching conclusions  about
    the way in which the girl's family would have behaved if  they  were  a
    traditional Kurdish family based on the country information,  and  that
    the judge erred in his assessment of the evidence of the incident  with
    the car.  As I  have  said,  there  is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    indication of the inconsistencies in other parts of the story.

 9. The other two grounds of appeal apply only if the  appellant's  account
    is or may be the truth.  It is alleged that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of the possibility of relocation and of risk in  Baghdad  as
    part of the process of return.

10. I turn then to look at two specific grounds to  the  challenge  to  the
    judge's credibility findings.  The first relates to the  modalities  of
    the relationship during the time when it took place.   The  judge  says
    that bearing in mind what has happened:-

         "If the family had rejected the marriage proposals of the appellant
         it is not consistent  with  the  tight  control  which  traditional
         Kurdish families (as the appellant says this was) have  over  young
         women that Sumaya was still being allowed out on her own so  as  to
         be still able to meet the appellant, or that she was still  allowed
         access to a phone so as to be able to contact him."

    The judge goes on at paragraph 44:-

         "After Sumaya and the appellant were discovered  in  November  2017
         they were still able to keep contact, and Sumaya was still  allowed
         to go to the same school as the appellant.  Her  family  must  have
         been aware that they would still be able to see each  other  there.
         The inconsistency of this was put to the appellant at Q59 [that  is
         to say of his asylum interview] and he answered "she said  she  was
         allowed to go out but had to go back quickly".  I find this  answer
         to be disingenuous.  If she was allowed to go to  school  then  her
         family would have known should would be there  for  a  considerable
         time each day, and in that time that she would have the opportunity
         of seeing the appellant."

11. The judge's conclusion  is  not  based  solely  on  generalities  about
    Kurdish families.  It is based also on a common sense approach  to  the
    appellant's evidence.  It seems to me that there is no error in  either
    of those features.  A traditional Kurdish family  might  or  might  not
    behave in the way that any other traditional Kurdish family  does,  but
    what is clear is the control over  women  exerted  by  the  traditional
    Kurdish family does not appear to be a control exerted by the family of
    the appellant's friend.  However, what is clear is that the family  did
    behave in a particular way, that is to say, they allowed her to  go  to
    school, the same school as the appellant, where to their knowledge  the
    appellant was, and was interested in her, and, what is more the two  of
    them, that is to say the appellant and the girl,  had  regular  contact
    using the girl's mother's telephone.  That despite Ms Alban's assertion
    that there was no reason that the mother should have known  what  calls
    were being made from her own phone essentially does throw  considerable
    doubt on any suggestion that  the  relationship  was  secret  from  the
    girl's parents.

12. The second point of credibility relates, as I have  said,  to  the  car
    incident.  The position here is this.  When the appellant  was  subject
    to a preliminary screening interview he said that the car was driven by
    or that the incident was the responsibility of the girl's  family.   At
    his preliminary questionnaire he said that the car was  driven  by  the
    brother and cousin of the girl.  At his fuller asylum interview he  was
    asked at question 6:  "Were there any other people there", and he  said
    this: "It was in the afternoon".  He was asked: "Did you  see  who  was
    driving the car?", he answered "No".  He was asked: "Did you ever  find
    out who hit you with the car", and his answer was  this:  "I  knew  the
    car.  It belonged to their family, I don't know who  was  the  driver".
    And he then repeated that he knew the car belonged to them, the family.



13. At question 51 it was pointed  out  to  him  that  in  his  preliminary
    questionnaire he had said that the car was driven by  the  brother  and
    the cousin, and he was asked why he had said that, when now he said  he
    did not know who was driving, and he said this:  "I  didn't  know  were
    they exactly but I recognised  the  car  and  I  thought  it  might  be
    themselves, the brother and the  cousins".   Looked  at  by  themselves
    those answers  are  in  my  judgement  perfectly  consistent  with  one
    another.  He had a view that it was the brother and the cousin.  He was
    not certain of it.  It seemed to their car.  When he was asked in brief
    he said it was the brother and the cousin.  When  asked  in  detail  he
    said he did not know exactly but he thought it might be them.  That  is
    of itself perfectly fair and in my view perfectly consistent.  However,
    the problem for the appellant is this.   When  it  comes  to  making  a
    witness statement for the purposes of  his  appeal  he  says  that  his
    brother and his friend who witnessed the incident said that it was  the
    girl's brother and cousin.  That is something which in  the  nature  of
    things had to have happened before  his  asylum  interview.   In  other
    words, when he said on each of those three occasions what he knew about
    the incident, he already had been told that it was the brother and  the
    cousin by witnesses who had seen them.  That is, as the  judge  pointed
    out, a new elaboration.

14. Contrary to Ms Alban's submission, it is not consistent  with  what  he
    previously said.  What he previously said was that he did not know.  He
    now says that he did know, and what is more, that he has known all  the
    time.  The judge took the view that this elaboration using a  new  pair
    of independent witnesses to produce clear evidence that the attack  had
    been from the girl's family  showed  signs  of  trying  to  support  an
    otherwise unsupported or even incredible story.  That judgement was  in
    my view amply merited.  It is  perfectly  clear  that  the  appellant's
    account that he did not know who it was but thought it might have  been
    them when he was interviewed is inconsistent with what he  subsequently
    said which was that two people had told him that it  was  them  because
    they were watching.

15. So much for the judge's points on credibility as attacked by Ms  Alban.
    The two points that she raises on  credibility  in  my  view  are  each
    points which the judge was entitled to make and the other points  as  I
    have indicated are not challenged.

16. In order to deal with the other points,  as  I  have  said,  the  judge
    looked at the court documents, so  that  even  if  the  documents  were
    accepted as being authentic court documents the judge's  judgement  was
    that they were not  a  reliable  support  of  the  appellant's  account
    because indeed they cast further inconsistencies.  But Ms Alban's  case
    is that the judge was led wrongly into a  criticism  of  the  documents
    themselves.  That is an important argument if it is to be accepted.  It
    is not to be accepted.  As I have indicated it is not important in  the
    context of this case because the judge's view was that the contents  of
    the documents did not support the appellant's story  anyway.   What  Ms
    Alban says is that these were documents which were able to be verified,
    that the respondent took the responsibility of verifying them, that the
    respondent failed to verify them, and that as a result they  should  be
    treated as authentic.

17. There is a very considerable number of problems  with  that  series  of
    submissions.  The first is that the documents do not  speak  themselves
    as court documents.   Sometimes  the  very  appearance  of  a  document
    indicates that it purports to be a particular  thing,  a  passport  for
    example, or a birth certificate.  These are not  documents  in  such  a
    form.  They are, as I have  indicated,  simply  pieces  of  paper  with
    writing in Arabic on them, each bearing, as it happens, the same stamp.
     Even the stamp does not demonstrate that they are court documents.

18. Secondly, there is no real indication of what they even purport to  be.
    They were accompanied by a witness statement by  the  appellant  saying
    that the documents were obtained from the court by a person  who  works
    there, being his aunt's husband.  They are produced with what  is  said
    to be the envelope they came in but  without  any  covering  letter  in
    which the aunt's husband or  anybody  else  could  say  how  they  were
    obtained.  They are, it is said, the original documents, that is to say
    the actual documents from the court file, not copies of them.  In other
    words, the person who obtained them must have obtained them by removing
    them from the court file, if what is said is correct.  And indeed there
    is nothing in their translated form which suggests other than that they
    purport to be the original documents, including in at least  two  cases
    the fact that they are not from the court but from the police reporting
    to the court.  It seems to me that it  can  only  be  in  circumstances
    where documents on their face appear to be documents  of  a  particular
    sort that it can be said that in the absence of any  query  about  them
    they should be accepted as genuinely from that source.  So that is  the
    first problem.  The starting point of the submission that  they  should
    have been accepted as court documents in the absence of information  to
    the contrary does not get off the ground because there is no reason  to
    suppose from anything on them that they purport to be court  documents.



19. Thirdly, I do not understand from the accounts as I have been given  of
    what  happened,  including  their  very   late   presentation   without
    translation the day before the original date  fixed  for  the  hearing,
    that the Secretary of State could be interpreted as  having  undertaken
    any burden in relation to them, that is to say, any  formal  burden  of
    proof in relation to their status at a forthcoming hearing.

20. Fourthly, the authorities on the subject appear to be directly  counter
    to the proposition Ms Alban makes.  The authorities are those to  which
    she refers and which I have referred to earlier.  In PJ (Sri Lanka) the
    Court of Appeal was concerned to interpret and to apply the judgment of
    the European Court of Human Rights in Singh  v  Belgium.   In  Singh  v
    Belgium the documents in question related directly to  the  nationality
    of the claimants.  The documents purported to  be  UNHCR  attestations.
    If they  were  genuine  they  would  have  established  the  claimant's
    nationality, if not, of course, not.  Their genuineness  was  a  matter
    which could have been ascertained from the UNHCR.  The court  indicated
    that in circumstances where documents were central to a claim and where
    a simple process of enquiry would have  resolved  conclusively  whether
    they were authentic and reliable that there was a duty on the authority
    to make a careful review of the grounds of claim.  No more  than  that.
    In PJ (Sri Lanka) itself Counsel for the appellant submitted that there
    was an obligation on the Secretary of State to check  the  authenticity
    of the documents disputed in  that  case  which  were  documents  which
    purported to transcribe part of the court  records  in  Sri  Lanka  and
    which had been attested by two independent  Sri  Lankan  lawyers.   The
    court concluded as follows in the judgment of Fulford LJ, with whom the
    other members of the court agreed:-

         "29. In my  judgment,  there  is  no  basis  in  domestic  or  ECHR
             jurisprudence  for  the  general  approach  that   Mr   Martin
             submitted ought to be adopted whenever  local  lawyers  obtain
             relevant documents  from  a  domestic  court,  and  thereafter
             transmit them directly to lawyers in the United Kingdom.   The
             involvement  of  lawyers  does  not  create   the   rebuttable
             presumption that the documents they produce in this  situation
             are reliable.  Instead, the jurisprudence  referred  to  above
             does  no  more  than  indicate  that  the   circumstances   of
             particular cases may exceptionally necessitate an  element  of
             investigation by the national authorities, in order to provide
             effective protection  against  mistreatment  under  article  3
             ECHR.  It is important to stress, however, that this step will
             frequently not  be  feasible  or  it  may  be  unjustified  or
             disproportionate.  In Tanveer Ahmed [2002] IAR 318  the  court
             highlighted the cost and logistical difficulties that  may  be
             involved, for instance because  of  the  number  of  documents
             submitted by some asylum claimants.  The enquiries may put the
             applicant or his family at risk, they  may  be  impossible  to
             undertake because of the prevailing local  situation  or  they
             may place the United  Kingdom  authorities  in  the  difficult
             position  of  making  covert  local  enquiries   without   the
             permission of the relevant  authorities.   Furthermore,  given
             the uncertainties that frequently remain following attempts to
             establish the reliability of documents, if the outcome of  any
             enquiry is likely to be inconclusive this is a highly relevant
             factor.  As the court in  Tanveer  Ahmed  observed,  documents
             should not be viewed in isolation and the evidence needs to be
             considered in its entirety.

         30.  Therefore, simply because a relevant document  is  potentially
             capable of being verified does  not  mean  that  the  national
             authorities have an obligation to take this step.  Instead, it
             may be necessary to make an enquiry in  order  to  verify  the
             authenticity and reliability of a document - depending  always
             on the particular facts of the case - when it is at the centre
             of the request for protection, and when a  simple  process  of
             enquiry  will  conclusively  resolve  its   authenticity   and
             reliability (see Singh v Belgium [101]  -  [105]).  I  do  not
             consider that there is any  material  difference  in  approach
             between the decisions in Tanveer Ahmed and Singh v Belgium, in
             that in the latter case the Strasbourg court simply  addressed
             one of the exceptional situations  when  national  authorities
             should undertake a process of verification."

21. In the present case it may be that the documents were at the centre  of
    the claim although that proposition itself might be subject to dispute.
     The position is perfectly clear that there was no  simple  process  of
    verification which would conclusively establish whether they were  what
    they purported to be or not.  First, there was no  clear  authority  to
    which they could be referred.  Secondly, the process of referral was as
    the Secretary of State's response indicated neither simple  nor  likely
    to be conclusive.  Thirdly, the very process of their production,  that
    is to say, apparently by abstraction of the originals  from  the  court
    files would itself have led to difficulties in discovering whether they
    had originally been at the court or not.

22.  I therefore reject in its entirety the submission  based  on  anything
    other than the appellant's burden of proof in relation to the documents
    and their content.  As I have said, in any event the  judge  considered
    the contents of the documents and what would have been drawn from  them
    if they had been what they purported to be.  That would  to  an  extent
    have demonstrated that the appellant was not telling a consistent story
    about the events on that night.  But the  position  is  also  that  the
    judge was clearly entitled to regard the form of the document  and  the
    absence of any confirmation of the document's origin or that  the  form
    was what might be expected in a document of  that  sort  or  any  other
    matter verifying them by a statement from the person who  had  obtained
    them or anything else to the conclusions which he did reach  that  they
    were not entitled to be treated as reliable.

23. For those reasons, I conclude that the judge was entitled to  make  the
    findings he did make about the  appellant's  account.   It  is  not  an
    account which is reasonably likely to be the truth.

24. In those circumstances grounds 3 and 4 as pleaded have no  application;
    but I must nevertheless consider whether the appellant might be able to
    show that his return could raise protection or other issues despite the
    rejection of his story.  The position is that he would be returning  to
    his own area.  The journey would be likely to be via  Baghdad  airport,
    but would not need to include any presence in Baghdad itself.   As  the
    judge found, and as is not  challenged,  the  appellant  will  have  no
    difficulty in obtaining, or renewing, his CS ID.   There  is  no  basis
    for any finding that his return would raise any relevant issue.

25. For the reasons, I have given I find no material error of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and I dismiss this appeal.






                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 17 March 2020


