
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04199/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                           |On 26 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  o a h h m
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Revell, Counsel instructed by MTC & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereinafter  "the  claimant")  is  a  national  of  Sri
    Lanka.  Following the appellant's (hereinafter "the Secretary of State"
    or "SSHD"     ) decision dated 22 April 2016  refusing  her  claim  for
    asylum the appellant's appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Birk.  In a decision posted on 23 August 2017 the  judge  allowed
    her appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  She was satisfied  that
    the appellant had given a credible account of  facing  risk  on  return
    arising from the fact that she had fled Sri Lanka in 2011  having  been
    released from detention during which she was accused of assisting a key
    member of the LTTE intelligence wing.

2.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal essentially submit that the  judge  failed
    to conduct an "in the round" assessment of credibility and  effectively
    failed to weigh in the balance against the  appellant  several  adverse
    findings she herself  made  regarding  (i)  discrepancies  between  the
    sponsor and the witness' evidence and the seeming failure to act upon a
    reconsideration  for   further   treatment   by   a   therapist;   (ii)
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence as to  continuing  interest
    in her after  leaving  Sri  Lanka;  (iii)  the  implausibility  of  the
    appellant's reason for her delay in claiming asylum.   Mr  Nath  argued
    that the judge's statement at paragraph 21 that "I make  a  very  mixed
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility" was symptomatic of a failure
    to weigh negative findings in the balance.

3.   As I stated to the parties, I see nothing wrong  in  principle  with  a
    judge recording that he or she makes  mixed  findings  on  credibility.
    That is part and parcel of many judicial assessments - some aspects are
    accepted but others are rejected.   However,  I  consider  Mr  Nath  is
    entirely right to assert that a rational assessment of credibility in a
    case in which mixed findings of fact are made  requires  the  judge  to
    explain or convey why  it  was  concluded  that  the  appellant's  core
    account is credible.  In the case of this judge's  decision  there  are
    two main problems.

4.   First, in relation to one of the  judge's  positive  finding  that  was
    highly material to the outcome, does not reflect a proper understanding
    of the fact that the burden of proof rested on the appellant  and  that
    s/he could only be relieved from  the  duty  to  substantiate  relevant
    elements of his/her application in limited circumstances as set out  in
    Article 4(5) of the Qualification Directive.  This  problem  arises  in
    acute form at paragraphs 24 and 25 where the judge wrote:

         "24.  The  Appellant  has  provided  no  medical  evidence  of  the
             mistreatment that she claims to have suffered whilst detained.
              She only attended her GP on 26.10.15 which was shortly before
             making her application for  asylum  to  report  that  she  was
             suffering from anxiety and stress which  she  reports  started
             from episode of sexual  harassment  some  years  previous  but
             which  was  not  ongoing.   There  is  a   letter   from   her
             psychological wellbeing practitioner dated 5.1.16 which states
             that she will be referred onto a high intensity therapist  but
             there is nothing forthcoming that was presented to me.


         25.  However, I find that she gave a clear account of the  physical
             mistreatment whilst she was detained.  Also  in  view  of  the
             beatings and rapes in 2011 and the lack of injuries  save  for
             swelling at the time, I find that it  would  be  difficult  to
             provide medical evidence now in support and so I find that the
             lack of evidence does not detract from the credibility of  the
             Appellant's account."

5.   Whilst it might have been open to the judge to rely on the fact that  a
    medical report in 2017 regarding alleged  beatings  and  rape  in  2011
    would have limited value, it was incumbent on the judge to examine  why
    the appellant had failed to get a  medical  report  in  2011  when  she
    arrived in the UK and  her  claimed  injuries  would  still  have  been
    visible.  Article 4(5) states that:

         "5.  Where Member States apply the principle according to which  it
             is the duty of the applicant to substantiate  the  application
             for  international  protection  and  where  aspects   of   the
             applicant's statements are not  supported  by  documentary  or
             other evidence, those aspects  shall  not  need  confirmation,
             when the following conditions are met:


             (a)  the applicant has made a genuine effort  to  substantiate
                  his application;


             (b)  all relevant elements, at the applicant's disposal,  have
                  been submitted, and a satisfactory  explanation  regarding
                  any lack of other relevant elements has been given;


             (c)  the applicant's statements are found to be  coherent  and
                  plausible and do not run counter to available specific and
                  general information relevant to the applicant's case;


             (d)  the applicant has applied for international protection at
                  the earliest  possible  time,  unless  the  applicant  can
                  demonstrate good reason for not having done so; and


             (e)   the  general  credibility  of  the  applicant  has  been
                  established."

6.   There is nothing to suggest that the judge asked whether  the  claimant
    had made a genuine effort to substantiate her claim to ill-treatment or
    that she had given a satisfactory explanation for not seeking a medical
    report in 2011.

7.   Further, on the judge's own findings, the claimant had not  shown  good
    reason for applying for asylum at the earliest possible time.  In  such
    circumstances, the judge's reasons fail to explain why the claimant was
    excused the need for confirmation.

8.   This problem  coalesces  with  the  judge's  problematic  treatment  of
    aspects of the claimant's account which were not accepted.   Separately
    from the issue of confirmation of her account, the judge's own  finding
    was that "her considerable delay in claiming asylum does undermine  her
    generally credibility".  Yet nowhere in the  decision  does  the  judge
    explain why she nevertheless accepted that the claimant's core  account
    was credible.

9.   Of particular concern also is the judge's treatment of  the  claimant's
    evidence regarding continuing interest in her since departure from  Sri
    Lanka.  At paragraphs 29-30 she writes:

         "29. She states that she last contacted her family in Sri Lanka  in
             2015.  She says that they reported that  the  CID  were  still
             asking about  her  whereabouts  and  to  be  informed  if  she
             returned.  I find  that  she  has  been  inconsistent  in  her
             account as to the frequency of their visits.   She  stated  in
             interview that it was many times (q.34) and  then  she  stated
             that it was from time to time (q.133) and in her statement  at
             paragraph  11  she  states  that  it  was  occasionally.    In
             interview (q.139-148)  she  talks  about  calls  from  unknown
             people asking about her.  She said that her father said it was
             often but not how often.  She goes onto  say  that  the  calls
             were from time to time and then when why were looking for  her
             the calls came often.  They were from different people and she
             thinks it was the CID.  She did not know why if they were  the
             CID they did not identify themselves.


         30.  I find that the evidence about the adverse interest in her  in
             terms of the frequency of visits did vary and was inconsistent
             on her account.  However, overall I  find  that  she  gave  an
             account of adverse interest in her subsequent to  her  leaving
             and that the reason why she is no longer in contact  with  her
             parents is because she was concerned  about  the  phone  being
             tapped."

10.  It is hard to follow the logic of the reason given in paragraph 30  for
    deciding to disregard the claimant's significant inconsistencies.  That
    the judge did disregard it entirely is clear from subsequent paragraphs
    - e.g. at 33 she relies as one of the main  reasons  for  allowing  the
    appeal the fact of "persistent adverse interest in  her  by  the  CID".
    The judge's use of the word "persistent" might suggest  that  what  was
    relying on  was  that  frequent  or  occasional  the  CID  visits  were
    persistent, but if so that would still leave the problem of  explaining
    why the inconsistencies did not undermine the claim to there being  any
    visits or adverse interest  in  the  first  place.   The  only  reasons
    advised by the judge in paragraph 30 are (a) that she gave  an  account
    of adverse interest; and (b) the  reason  why  she  was  no  longer  in
    contact with her parents was because she was concerned about the  phone
    being tapped.  As regards (a) giving an account cannot be equated  with
    a credible account.  As regards (b), the  evidence  the  claimant  gave
    about continuing adverse interest related to her last contact with  her
    family in 2015.  What contact she had had since - or rather the  reason
    for non-contact after that - had no obvious bearing  on  the  truth  or
    otherwise of her claim about  the  2015  contact.   Upon  analysis  the
    judge's treatment of this issue  lacks  any  coherent  or  intelligible
    reasoning.

Notice of Decision

11.  For  the  above  reasons  I  consider  that  the  judge's  reasons  for
    accepting the claimant's core account as credible are  legally  flawed.
    They lack coherence and  although  she  states  at  para  19  that  she
    "considered all the evidence in  the  round",  her  decision  fails  to
    explain why the positive  findings  were  considered  to  outweigh  the
    negative findings.  The Upper Tribunal will not lightly interfere  with
    a judge's findings on credibility but  in  the  circumstances  of  this
    decision the nature of the errors in this case leave me no alternative.

12.  To conclude:

     The judge's decision is set aside for material error of law.

     In the nature of the judge's errors, the case needs to be  remitted  to
    the FtT, to be dealt with by a judge other than Judge Birk.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 22 March 2018

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

