

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Pa/04372/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|by Microsoft Teams                             |                              |
|                                               |On 12 August 2021             |
|On 6 August 2021                               |                              |
|                                               |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                E K (Turkey)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Sophie Panagiotopoulou of Counsel, instructed by
Montague
                  Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of E K who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on  15  March  2018  to  refuse  him  refugee  status  under  the  1951
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The human rights claim is limited to Article 3 ECHR only: the appellant
    makes no Article 8 ECHR claim in these proceedings.

 3. The respondent accepts that the appellant is a citizen of Turkey and is
    a Kurd from the south east of the country.  She also accepted  that  in
    his evidence he showed a level of knowledge of the People's  Democratic
    Party (Halklarin Demokratik Partisi, hereafter 'HDP'), but she rejected
    this part of his account as vague and inconsistent.

 4. The  decision  to  set  aside  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision  also
    preserved a finding that the appellant is a military service evader.

 5. Mode of hearing.  The hearing today was a  hybrid:  Ms  Panagiotopoulou
    and Ms Everett appeared remotely by  Microsoft  Teams.   The  appellant
    attended in person and gave his evidence through a Kurdish interpreter.
     Both the appellant and interpreter confirmed that they  were  able  to
    understand each other.

 6. There were no technical  difficulties  with  the  remote  part  of  the
    hearing, save that Ms  Everett  had  some  sound  problems  which  were
    resolved by turning off her camera for  part  of  the  hearing.   I  am
    satisfied that all parties were in a quiet and private place  and  that
    the  hearing  was  completed  fairly,  with  the  cooperation  of  both
    representatives.

 7. Vulnerable appellant. The appellant  is  a  vulnerable  person  and  is
    entitled to be treated appropriately,  in  accordance  with  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance No  2  of  2010:   Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive Appellant Guidance.  At the beginning of the hearing, I asked
    both him and his representative what  would  be  necessary  by  way  of
    adjustment.  Ms Panagiotopoulou had no instructions on the  point,  and
    there was no assistance in the expert medical evidence.  The  appellant
    said that he would like a glass of water.

 8. I noted from the  papers  that  the  appellant  had  experienced  panic
    attacks both during the asylum interview and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  I told him that if he felt that this was likely to happen, or
    he felt uncomfortable, I would rise to allow him to compose himself.  I
    emphasised that the purpose of providing an interpreter, and of  making
    vulnerability adjustments for his oral evidence was to  enable  him  to
    give the best evidence to the Tribunal.

 9. The appellant did not have any panic attacks  or  require  any  further
    adjustment during his oral evidence, or indeed, during the hearing.  At
    the end of  his  evidence,  I  asked  the  appellant  whether  he  felt
    comfortable, and whether he had been able to give  his  best  evidence,
    and he confirmed that he had.  I asked him again  at  the  end  of  the
    hearing if he was still feeling all right and he confirmed that he was.

Background

10. The appellant comes from a small village near  Elbistan  in  south-east
    Turkey in April 1997 and is now 24 years  old.   His  account  is  that
    between 2014-2015, he suffered attacks  from  non-state  agents,  Sunni
    Muslims and Christians, because he was wearing a waistcoat with the HDP
    logo.

11.  On  1  November  2014,  the  Turkish  authorities  arrested  him   for
    distributing propaganda, and he was detained for three  days  and  ill-
    treated.  On his release, the appellant took no  further  part  in  HDP
    activities until 2016, a period of two years.

12. In July 2017, the Turkish authorities arrested the appellant  at  night
    from his home, releasing him after two days'  detention,  on  condition
    that he provided information every week to  the  police  regarding  HDP
    activities.   He was tortured during that detention and has scars  from
    it.

13. The appellant gave incorrect information on HDP to the police 5  times,
    and then fled Turkey on 27 August 2017, arriving at Stansted Airport on
    28 August 2017.  His father made the  arrangements  and  the  appellant
    does not know how much it cost.  The appellant travelled on a  passport
    to which he was not entitled, which  was  not  in  his  own  name.   He
    applied for asylum on arrival.

14. The appellant took part in an HDP demonstration in London on 4 December
    2018, against the conflict in Afrin.

15. If returned, the appellant fears further arrest  and  ill-treatment  by
    the Turkish authorities,  and  also  attacks  from  Sunni  Muslims  and
    Christians, if they find out that he supports the HDP.

First-tier Tribunal decision

16. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal.  He found that the appellant
    had attended only one HDP demonstration, on 4 December 2019  (so  post-
    decision), which he considered was an  isolated  incident  designed  to
    embellish the appellant's claim, by manufacturing evidence a  fortnight
    before the First-tier Tribunal hearing.   Nor did  the  judge  find  it
    'plausible that the appellant's presence at  that  demonstration  would
    have come to the notice of the authorities  in  Turkey'.   He  did  not
    consider that the demonstration was likely to give rise to  a  risk  on
    return.

17. The appellant has some body scars.  The  First-tier  Judge,  apparently
    with the agreement of the appellant's representative,  dismissed  Dr  J
    Hajioff's medical evidence regarding the scarring  on  the  appellant's
    body, and placed no weight thereon.  He rejected the  core  account  in
    its entirety, save that the appellant was a military service evader.

18. He examined evidence from the Turkish government website (which has  an
    app) and concluded that the offence therein being pursued was likely to
    be the appellant's failure to attend and perform his military  service.
     On return to Turkey, the judge  found  that  the  appellant  would  be
    detained and sent to perform his military service.

19. For the appellant, Ms Panagiotopoulou did not rely on the mental health
    aspects of Dr Hajioff's report.  The judge  found  that  Turkey  had  a
    functioning mental health system and that the appellant would have 'his
    whole family still living in the country' to help  look  after  him  on
    return.

20. The First-tier Judge found the appellant's credibility to  be  'totally
    undermined' and rejected his entire account.  He dismissed  the  appeal
    and the appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

21. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jackson,
    principally on the basis of the  First-tier  Judge's  failure  to  deal
    properly with the vulnerability aspect of his appeal, or to assess  the
    psychiatric evidence in the round.

22. In addition, there was arguably a lack of  adequate  reasoning  in  the
    decision for:  rejecting the account  of  other  demonstrations  having
    been attended in London; isolating and rejecting the medical  evidence;
    failing to apply  current  country  guidance;  rejecting  the  criminal
    proceedings in Turkey; finding the appellant's  evidence  evasive;  and
    requiring corroboration of his HDP membership and detention.

Rule 24 Reply

23. The respondent made no Rule 24 Reply.

24. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

25. The appellant gave evidence to the Upper Tribunal.   He  confirmed  his
    asylum interview.  He is not literate in English: he adopted his asylum
    interview, which he said had been read  to  him  in  translation.   The
    refusal letter had also been read to him in Kurdish.

26. The appellant was unable to read more  than  occasional  words  in  his
    principal  witness  statement  of  30  April  2018,  and  despite   his
    willingness to adopt that statement without understanding it, I did not
    permit him to do so.  His supplementary witness  statement  of  29  May
    2019 was read to him in Kurdish at the hearing by the  interpreter  and
    the appellant did adopt that statement.

27. I directed Ms Panagiotopoulou to  put  the  matters  in  the  principal
    witness statement to the  appellant.   In  his  evidence-in-chief,  the
    appellant dealt with the two  printouts  from  the  Turkish  government
    website, confirming that there was a criminal case under consideration.
     He did not know what the  offence  was:  there  was  a  place  on  the
    applicant (three dots where printed out) which should have allowed  him
    to click through to the offence, but he had not been able  to  make  it
    work.

28. When in Turkey, the appellant had  distributed  leaflets  in  the  town
    centre of Elbistan, in villages, in shops, and to people's houses.  His
    HDP activities had caused him to be treated quite badly: the  appellant
    had fled that treatment to come to the United Kingdom. If returned,  he
    would be drafted and required to fight his own people.   Since  he  was
    the subject of criminal  proceedings,  he  would  be  arrested  at  the
    airport and ill-treated by the authorities.

29. The appellant asserted that there were 'seven  or  eight'  other  cases
    against him, but there was no evidence of  those.   One  had  a  future
    hearing date set.  In the United Kingdom, the  appellant  had  remained
    active in the Kurdish  community  centre  and  attending  protests  and
    demonstrations.  He had  attended  'seven  or  eight'  of  those  since
    arriving in the United Kingdom.  He would  be  sent  information,  then
    just go and join in.  They were about 'defending the Kurdish people'.

30. The appellant relied on photographs from a Turkish language  newspaper,
    the 'Telgraph' [sic], one of  which  clearly  showed  him  attending  a
    demonstration on 4 December 2019.  He had not been able to provide  any
    further information to his solicitors: after  the  last  demonstration,
    there had been the Covid  lockdown  and  no  other  protests.   He  had
    provided evidence of attending earlier demonstrations but they were not
    in the bundle.  He had also been distributing leaflets.

31. In cross-examination, the appellant said he  came  from  a  very  small
    village in Turkey.  He was in touch with family once in  a  while,  but
    communication was not that easy.  He used WhatsApp  on  his  telephone.
    The family had not asked a lawyer to  find  out  what  the  charge  was
    against him: they were living in the village, not in Istanbul, and help
    was limited and lawyers too expensive.  He  thought  the  charges  were
    probably related to his previous arrests.  He could  think  of  nothing
    else they could be.

32.  The  leaflets  the  appellant  distributed  for  HDP  concerned  party
    activities, Newroz meetings, speeches by party  leaders,  things  about
    the appellant's people and the Kurdish community centres, and also  the
    Party itself.  The idea was to distribute  the  news  and  gather  more
    people for protests,  to  bring  them  together  for  solidarity.   The
    protests in the United Kingdom were about defending the Kurdish  people
    in Turkey, protesting about President Erdo?an and  the  government  who
    conflated Kurdish people and PKK sympathisers, and mistreated  ordinary
    Kurds.  The protests which the community centre organised were  usually
    held around Westminster, or nearer the Home Office, and that area.

33. The appellant understood that  he  would  be  arrested  and  forced  to
    undergo military service in Turkey if returned.  He did not want to  do
    it.  There were legal ways of avoiding or  delaying  military  service:
    for example, you could defer if you were in University, or High School,
    or you could pay the government to be excused.  Military service was  a
    year now.  Liability  began  at  18  years  but  did  not  end  at  any
    particular age: you could be asked to perform military service  at  any
    age, if you had not yet served.

34. The appellant thought you needed  to  pay  about  Turkish  Lira  30,000
    (about �2500 at today's rates).  The appellant did not  know  how  that
    compared with the amount his father had paid for  his  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom.

35. The appellant had not gone to University: he wanted to be a  pilot  but
    the family did not have the  money,  so  he  took  a  short  course  in
    hairdressing and worked as a hairdresser.  The appellant's main  reason
    to come to the United Kingdom was to have proper  freedom,  and  escape
    oppression.

36. I asked the appellant at the  end  of  his  evidence  if  he  had  been
    comfortable.  He said he  had.   I  offered  a  short  break,  but  the
    appellant declined: he told me that he did not need it.

37. There was no re-examination.

Documents before the Upper Tribunal

38. I have had regard to all evidence placed  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    whether or not specifically mentioned in this decision.

Dr Jack Hajioff's report

39. Dr Jack Hajioff MB ChB MRCS LRCP MRCPsych DPM has  assisted  the  Upper
    Tribunal on numerous  occasions.   He  is  qualified  in  medicine  and
    surgery, in London  and  Liverpool  (MBChB,  MRCS,  LRCP)  and  also  a
    consultant psychiatrist (MRCPsych and DPM).  Dr Hajioff's  opinion  was
    prepared to the Istanbul Protocol  standard  in  relation  to  physical
    injuries, and his assessment of the appellant's  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder was prepared to the DSM-IV standard.  At [60] in  his  report,
    Dr Hajioff confirmed that he was aware of his overriding  duty  to  the
    court, with which he had complied, with reference to the Ikarian Reefer
    test.

40. Dr Hajioff saw the appellant on 5 September 2019 to prepare his report,
    interviewing him through an interpreter because the appellant  did  not
    speak much  English.   He  was  provided  with  a  number  of  relevant
    documents.

41. Dr Hajioff has 30 years' experience of working as a psychiatrist, which
    involves seeing self-inflicted and  accidental  injuries,  as  well  as
    mental health assessment.  For  the  last  15  years,  he  has  been  a
    visiting  psychiatrist  in  Pentonville  Prison,  where  he  saw   many
    prisoners who had been through traumatic experiences.    Many  of  them
    had injuries, ranging from cuts and cigarette  burns  to  more  serious
    injuries.  For the last 10 years, he has  assessed  many  refugees  and
    asylum seekers and provided formal reports on their mental state.  Most
    of them had injuries of some kind.

42. Dr Hajioff's summary of the appellant's account was that  he  was  born
    and brought up on a farm with livestock, with his parents, brother  and
    two sisters.   He  is  unmarried  and  has  no  children.   His  formal
    education ended at the age of 14.  He was  sporty,  playing  a  lot  of
    football, but had no significant injuries from that. The appellant used
    alcohol from time to time, vodka and raki on social occasion, and  more
    since coming to the United Kingdom.  He had only  used  cannabis  about
    four times, to relax him.  The appellant is a smoker, and  was  smoking
    about 10 cigarettes a day, again to help with stress.

43.  The  appellant  was  first  arrested,  with  HDP   colleagues,   while
    distributing leaflets on 1 November 2014.  He was pushed to the ground,
    struck with batons, kicked, handcuffed,  then  put  in  a  cell  alone.
    Later, he was twice interrogated, being questioned, verbally abused and
    beaten.  He was released after three days for lack of evidence.

44. The appellant resumed political activity  in  2016.   He  was  arrested
    again on 27 July 2017 at home, handcuffed, blindfolded and ill treated.
     He was kicked in the face,  breaking  his  nose.   His  left  arm  was
    twisted so hard behind his back that it broke and the bone was exposed.
     He agreed to whatever they wanted: he was terrified.   When  released,
    the appellant went to hospital where he had an operation to  deal  with
    the fracture in his arm.

45. The appellant agreed to report HDP activities to the police, and he did
    so on 5 occasions, always giving false information.  Realising he would
    be found out, the appellant's father arranged for him to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom, where he was able to contact a  cousin  already  living
    here.  He claimed asylum, and went to live with that cousin.

46. The appellant said that despite the support  of  his  cousin,  and  his
    cousin's family, he remained very anxious.  Sometimes he went  to  work
    with his cousin and tried to help him there.  He was uneasy  in  public
    places, especially if there were police around.  He avoided  crowds  of
    men and never went out after dark alone.  Sirens and fireworks startled
    him.

47. The  appellant's  appetite  had  been  poor  on  arrival  and  remained
    variable: he had managed to gain back some lost  weight,  but  was  now
    losing weight again.  He could not apply himself to demanding tasks and
    took very little exercise, apart from a walk with the family sometimes.
     He could not concentrate long enough to read, or to  watch  sports  or
    films on television.

48. The appellant had difficulty  sleeping,  and  when  he  slept,  he  had
    nightmares, now about twice a week, though they were more frequent when
    he arrived.  The appellant slept in the living room,  locked  the  door
    every night and left a light on all night.  He had  panic  attacks  and
    had been prescribed paroxetine, an antidepressant. He  also  had  gout,
    giving him severe pains in his left big  toe.   The  appellant's  nails
    were bitten: he told Dr Hajioff that this habit  had  begun  after  his
    first arrest.  That was indicative of marked anxiety or tension.

49. Dr  Hajioff  applied  the  Istanbul  Protocol  classification  and  was
    satisfied that an  irregular  scar  on  the  appellant's  forehead  was
    typical of an injury from a blunt instrument.  Scars on the appellant's
    arm from the surgical repair of his fracture were diagnostic of such  a
    repair.  The appellant had covered the long scar on the back of his arm
    with a tattoo.

50. The appellant had a number of small scars  on  his  hands  and  fingers
    which Dr Hajioff considered to be typical  of  defence  injuries.   The
    scars were all pale, indicating that they were likely to be more than a
    year old.   Dr Hajioff had considered whether  the  scarring  could  be
    self-inflicted, but the pattern of scarring was  not  typical  of  such
    scarring and he considered it unlikely.

51. Overall, it was Dr Hajioff's professional opinion  that  the  appellant
    had chronic  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  as  defined  in  DSM-IV,
    together with evidence of injury consistent with his account.  He would
    benefit from continuing to take paroxetine, which had been shown to  be
    effective for post-traumatic stress disorder  as  well  as  depression.
    Counselling might also help him: NICE had advised  in  its  March  2005
    Guidelines  that  psychological  treatment  was  more  effective   than
    medication for treating post-traumatic stress disorder.

Other evidence

52. The appellant produced two articles from the newspaper Telgraph, one of
    which has a colour photograph (kindly supplied  after  the  hearing  in
    electronic  format)  which  shows  the  appellant  wearing  a   Kurdish
    headscarf and holding a placard at a demonstration on 4 December  2019.
    An accompanying article explains that  the  demonstration  was  against
    President Erdo?an's attendance at NATO's  70th  anniversary  summit  in
    London, at which he attended a side meeting with Prime  Minister  Boris
    Johnson, President Macron of France, and Chancellor  Angela  Merkel  of
    Germany.  A photograph on that page is headed Erdo?an: wanted  for  war
    crimes, stop arming Turkey, stop NATO's war on Kurds.

53. A research response from the Canadian IRB on the situation of Kurds and
    supporters or perceived  supporters  of  the  HDP,  at  [2]  reports  a
    deterioration in the treatment of Kurds in Turkey in recent years, most
    examples being from 2019.   So  far  as  relevant  to  the  appellant's
    circumstances, at [3.1], the CIRB Report says this:

         "3.1 Treatment of Supporters and Perceived Supporters of the HDP

         According to sources, the Kurdish government alleges that  the  HDP
         has ties to the PKK, which is designated as a  "'terrorist'"  group
         by the EU, among others (Al Jazeera 19 Aug. 2019; Euronews  5  Nov.
         2019), including Turkey (Al Jazeera 19 Aug. 2019). Sources  further
         state that the HDP denies any link to the PKK (Al Jazeera  19  Aug.
         2019; Euronews 5 Nov. 2019;  Reuters  27  Mar.  2019).  US  Country
         Reports 2018 indicates that prosecutors "used a broad definition of
         terrorism and threats to national security" and that, according  to
         defense lawyers and opposition groups, "in some cases"  used  "what
         appeared to be  legally  questionable  evidence  to  file  criminal
         charges against  and  prosecute  a  broad  range  of  individuals,"
         including HDP politicians (US 13 Mar. 2019, 15-16). In  its  annual
         report for 2018, Human Rights Watch similarly stated that

              [m]any terrorism trials in Turkey lack compelling evidence of
              criminal activity or acts that would reasonably be deemed
              terrorism, and the practice of holding individuals charged
              with terrorism offenses in prolonged pretrial detention
              raised concerns [that] its use has become a form of summary
              punishment. (Human Rights Watch 17 Jan. 2019, 2)

         In a March 2019 article, Associated Press  (AP)  reports  that  ...
         "[t]he government accuses the HDP  of  links  to  outlawed  Kurdish
         militants, and 10 lawmakers, 40 mayors and thousands  of  activists
         remain jailed," and quoted President Erdo?an  as  calling  the  HDP
         "'terror lovers'" (AP 30 Mar. 2019). According  to  sources,  three
         mayors were removed from office and 400  people  were  arrested  or
         detained in August 2019 based on  alleged  links  to  the  PKK  (Al
         Jazeera 19 Aug. 2019; BBC 19 Aug. 2019). ...

         According to the Director of a UK-based Turkish organization  cited
         by the UK Home Office, "'[b]eing ethnically Kurdish  and  outspoken
         politically'" "could  cause  the  authorities  to  suspect  an  HDP
         member/supporter of supporting the PKK," and that individuals  that
         "may  attract  the  attention  of  the  authorities"  include   the
         following: ... "'[c]anvassers (knocking on  doors,  leafletting)'";
         ...(UK Oct. 2019, 18). ... A human rights lawyer cited in the  same
         report stated that HDP supporters  could  also  be  arrested  "'for
         handing out leaflets'" and targeted for posting  on  social  media,
         attending a march, meeting or rally, or  entering/exiting  an  HDP-
         associated building (UK Oct. 2019, 19). ...

         Further information, including on the treatment of perceived
         supporters of the HDP, could not be found among the sources
         consulted by the Research Directorate within the time constraints
         of this Response."


54.  The  appellant's  country  evidence   bundle   includes   an   Amnesty
    International report dated 4 September 2017 and another  for  the  year
    2017/2018, as well as the 2018 US State Department Report, Human Rights
    Watch report and Freedom House Report.  I am aware that there are  more
    recent reports available which are  referred  to  in  the  respondent's
    CPIN, on which Ms Everett relies.

55. The appellant also relies on the respondent's CPIN evidence on  Kurdish
    political parties and the PKK (October 2019).  At 9.2 in the March 2020
    report, the respondent summarised evidence gathered in  a  Fact-Finding
    Mission to Turkey in October 2019, to  the  effect  that  that  several
    government sources conflate support for the HDP with suspicion  of  PKK
    support.  At 9.3.5, the respondent  cited  the  February  2019  Freedom
    House report,  indicating  that  following  the  collapse  of  the  PKK
    ceasefire in 2015, 'the government accused the HDP of being a proxy for
    the [PKK] which is designated as a terrorist organisation'.

56. The US State Department Report for 2018 noted  that  'opposition  party
    members  faced  frequent  accusations  from  the  highest   levels   of
    government of alleged terrorism related crimes'. At  9.4.1,  the  March
    2021 CPIN stated that:

         "9.4.1.  In June 2019, the HO Freedom from Torture met the Director
         of a Turkish organisation in the United Kingdom,  who  stated  that
         'An escalation in tensions with the PKK [leads] to an  increase  in
         harassment of HDP supporters, particularly when there are waves  of
         activism and protests in  the  aftermath  of  anti-PKK/anti-Kurdish
         events."

57. Parliamentary immunity for HDP MPs had been removed after the  coup  in
    2016 and high-ranking  officials  were  at  risk  of  prosecution.   At
    paragraph 10.2, the CPIN discussed the extent of arrests for  perceived
    terrorism crimes after the failed 2016 coup.

Submissions

58. For the Secretary of State, Ms Everett relied on the skeleton  argument
    drafted by Ms Willocks-Briscoe, on  the  refusal  letter,  and  on  the
    respondent's latest CPIN.  The respondent maintained her  challenge  to
    the credibility of the appellant's account.  He  seemed  to  have  very
    little curiosity or  information  about  the  criminal  proceedings  in
    Turkey.   His  family  had  not  investigated  it  either.   That   was
    implausible and should diminish the credibility of his core account.

59. The respondent accepted that the appellant had some knowledge about the
    HDP party but his assertions were vague, limited to noble  concepts  of
    freedom from oppression.  The respondent accepted that Kurds  were  not
    treated equally in  Turkey  but  more  specific  information  could  be
    expected.   Protests  generally  had  an  issue:  there  was  only  one
    photograph, from a single demonstration, showing the  appellant.    The
    evidence was not sufficient to demonstrate that the Turkish authorities
    would be aware of the appellant's activities in the United Kingdom.

60. Military service was now reduced  to  6  months  (see  CPIN),  although
    during the Covid  pandemic  it  had  been  extended  by  a  month,  for
    practical reasons.  It was possible to buy one's way out of  it  for  a
    moderate sum.  The appellant would not come  to  adverse  attention  on
    return for failure to undergo military service: see Sepet and Bulbul.

61. The appeal should be dismissed.

62. For the appellant, Ms  Panagiotopoulou  also  relied  on  her  skeleton
    argument and on the country background information.   The  respondent's
    Fact-Finding Mission Report of October 2019 confirmed  that  HDP  Party
    supporters who had attended  demonstrations  and  distributed  leaflets
    would come to adverse attention; and that HDP supporters  are  targeted
    by the  authorities.  The  appellant's  account  of  his  treatment  in
    detention was credible in context, as was his  assertion  that  he  was
    being watched.

63. The Canadian IRB document Turkey, the situation and treatment of  Kurds
    and Alevis after the coup attempt in July  2016,  referred  to  in  the
    respondent's  2019   Fact-Finding   Mission   report,   supported   the
    appellant's account that as a Kurd he  would  be  perceived  as  a  PKK
    supporter.    Since   the   coup,   the   Turkish    authorities    had
    disproportionately targeted Kurds and the situation for them in  Turkey
    had deteriorated. The existing country guidance  in  IK  (Turkey)  when
    there had been hope of improvement was a false dawn: the  situation  of
    Kurds in Turkey  had  deteriorated,  not  improved,  since  then.   The
    appellant's  claim  and  evidence  was  consistent  with  the   country
    background evidence.

64. There was no allowance in the refusal letter for the appellant's mental
    state during the asylum interview.  Some of his  answers,  particularly
    about HDP, were very detailed.  They were not learned proforma answers.



65. The appellant had given a  consistent  account  of  his  ill-treatment.
    There might be a number of reasons why the issue of the  criminal  case
    was not pursued, but  that  was  irrelevant  to  risk  on  return:  the
    information would be on the GDPS when he returned,  and  the  appellant
    would be identified and questioned. The appellant had no current travel
    document and would need  an  emergency  travel  document,  putting  the
    Turkish authorities on notice of  his  return.   The  country  evidence
    indicated that he would be taken to  the  airport  police  station  and
    questioned, for 6-9 hours.  The appellant could not be expected to  lie
    about what he had been doing in the United Kingdom.

66. That was a clear risk affecting the appellant.  The Refugee  Convention
    test was met and the appeal should be allowed.

67. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Existing country guidance

68. It is a long time since the Upper Tribunal gave country guidance on the
    position of Kurds in Turkey.

69. In IA HC KD RO HG (Risk, Guidelines, Separatist) Turkey CG [2003] UKIAT
    00034 (28 July 2003) ('A(Turkey)')  at  [46],  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal identified a number of factors which should be considered when
    deciding whether an appellant was at risk on return to Turkey:

         "46. The following are the factors which inexhaustively we consider
         to be material in giving rise to potential suspicion in  the  minds
         of the authorities concerning a particular claimant.


             (a) The level if any of the  appellant's  known  or  suspected
             involvement with a separatist organisation. Together with this
             must be assessed the basis upon which it is contended that the
             authorities knew of or might suspect such involvement.


             (b) Whether the appellant has ever been arrested  or  detained
             and if so in what circumstances. In this  context  it  may  be
             relevant to note how long ago such arrests or detentions  took
             place, if it is the case that there appears to  be  no  causal
             connection between them  and  the  claimant's  departure  from
             Turkey, but otherwise it may be  a  factor  of  no  particular
             significance.


             (c)  Whether  the  circumstances  of  the   appellant's   past
             arrest(s)  and  detention(s)  (if  any)  indicate   that   the
             authorities did in  fact  view  him  or  her  as  a  suspected
             separatist.


              (d) Whether the appellant was charged or placed on  reporting
             conditions or now faces charges.


             (e) The degree of ill treatment to  which  the  appellant  was
             subjected in the past.


             (f) Whether  the  appellant  has  family  connections  with  a
             separatist organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.


             (g) How long a period elapsed  between  the  appellant's  last
             arrest and detention and his or her departure from Turkey.  In
             this regard it may of  course  be  relevant  to  consider  the
             evidence if any concerning what  the  appellant  was  in  fact
             doing between the time of the last arrest  and  detention  and
             departure from Turkey. It is a factor that is only  likely  to
             be of any  particular  relevance  if  there  is  a  reasonably
             lengthy period between the  two  events  without  any  ongoing
             problems being experienced on the part of the  appellant  from
             the authorities.


             (h) Whether in the period after the  appellant's  last  arrest
             there  is  any  evidence  that  he  or  she  was  kept   under
             surveillance or monitored by the authorities.


             (i) Kurdish ethnicity.


             (j) Alevi faith.


             (k) Lack of a current up-to-date Turkish passport.


             (l) Whether there is any evidence that  the  authorities  have
             been pursuing or  otherwise  expressing  an  interest  in  the
             appellant since he or she left Turkey.


             (m) Whether the appellant became an informer or was  asked  to
             become one.


             (n) Actual perceived political activities abroad in connection
             with a separatist organisation.


             (o) If the returnee is a military draft evader there  will  be
             some logical impact on his profile to those assessing  him  on
             his immediate return. Following Sepet of course this alone  is
             not a basis for a refugee or human rights claim."

70. A (Turkey) and the decision in IK (Returnees, Records, IFA)  Turkey  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00312 (02 December 2004) both the 2016 failed coup and the
    crackdown which followed it.  In IK, the IAT held that the  A  (Turkey)
    list was not a  checklist,  but  should  be  considered.   The  country
    guidance given in IK was summarised at [14]:

         "1.  The evidence of Mr Aydin (paragraph 32)  accurately  describes
         the defined and limited ambit of the computerised  GBT  system.  It
         comprises  only  outstanding  arrest  warrants,  previous  arrests,
         restrictions on travel abroad, possible draft evasion,  refusal  to
         perform military service and tax arrears. "Arrests" as comprised in
         the GBTS require some court intervention, and must be distinguished
         from "detentions"  by  the  security  forces  followed  by  release
         without charge. The GBTS is fairly  widely  accessible  and  is  in
         particular available to the border police  at  booths  in  Istanbul
         airport, and elsewhere in Turkey to the security forces.

         2.   In addition, there is border control information  collated  by
         the national police (Department for Foreigners, Borders and Asylum)
         recording past legal arrivals and departures of  Turkish  citizens,
         and information about people prohibited from entering Turkey  as  a
         result of their activities abroad, collated by MIT.

         3.   The Judicial Record  Directorate  keeps  judicial  records  on
         sentences served by convicted  persons,  separate  from  GBTS.  The
         system is known as "Adli Sicil." It is unlikely  that  this  system
         would be directly accessible at border control in addition  to  the
         information in the GBTS.

         4.   The  Nufus  registration  system  comprises  details  of  age,
         residence, marriage, death, parents' and  children's  details,  and
         religious status. It may also include arrest warrants and if any of
         the people listed have been stripped of nationality.  There  is  no
         evidence that it is directly available at border control.

         5.   If a person is held for  questioning  either  in  the  airport
         police station after arrival or subsequently  elsewhere  in  Turkey
         and the situation justifies it, then some additional inquiry  could
         be made of the authorities in his local area about him, where  more
         extensive records may be kept either manually or on computer. Also,
         if the circumstances so justify, an enquiry could be  made  of  the
         anti terror police or MIT to see if an individual  is  of  material
         interest to them.

         6.   If there is a material entry in the  GBTS  or  in  the  border
         control information, or if a returnee is travelling  on  a  one-way
         emergency travel document, then there is  a  reasonable  likelihood
         that he will be identifiable as a failed asylum seeker and could be
         sent to the airport police station for further investigation.

         7.   It will be for an Adjudicator in  each  case  to  assess  what
         questions are likely to be asked during such investigation and  how
         a returnee would respond without being required to lie.  The  ambit
         of the likely questioning depends upon the  circumstances  of  each
         case.

         8.   The escalation of the violence following the ending of the PKK
         ceasefire reinforces our view that the risk to a  Kurdish  returnee
         of ill treatment by the authorities may be greater if his home area
         is in an area of conflict in Turkey than it would be elsewhere, for
         the reasons described in paragraphs 90 and 116.

         9.   The Turkish Government is taking  action  in  legislative  and
         structural terms to address the human rights problems that  present
         a serious obstacle to its membership of the EU.  It  has  made  its
         zero tolerance policy towards torture clear.  However  the  use  of
         torture is long and deep-seated in the security forces and it  will
         take time and continued and determined effort  to  bring  it  under
         control in practice. It is premature  to  conclude  that  the  long
         established view of the Tribunal concerning the potential  risk  of
         torture in detention as per A (Turkey) requires  material  revision
         on the present evidence. However the situation will require  review
         as further evidence becomes available. For the time being as in the
         past, each case must  be  assessed  on  its  own  merits  from  the
         individual's own history and the relevant risk factors as described
         in paragraph 46 of A (Turkey).

         10.  Many of the individual risk factors described  in  A  (Turkey)
         comprise in themselves a broad spectrum of variable potential  risk
         that requires careful evaluation on  the  specific  facts  of  each
         appeal as a whole. The factors described in  A  (Turkey)  were  not
         intended as a simplistic checklist and should not be used as such.

         11.  A young, fit, unmarried person,  leaving  his  home  area  and
         seeking unofficial employment in a big city, may not feel the  need
         to register with the local Mukhtar, at least at the outset. Many do
         not. However, given the range  of  basic  activities  for  which  a
         certificate of residence is needed,  and  which  depend  upon  such
         registration,  we  conclude  that   it   would   in   most   normal
         circumstances be unduly harsh to expect a person  to  live  without
         appropriate registration for any material time,  as  a  requirement
         for avoiding persecution. This does not  necessarily  preclude  the
         viability of internal  relocation  for  the  reasons  described  in
         paragraph 133.13 below.

         12.  The proper course in assessing the  risk  for  a  returnee  is
         normally to decide first whether he has  a  well  founded  fear  of
         persecution in his home area based upon a case sensitive assessment
         of the facts in the context of an  analysis  of  the  risk  factors
         described in A (Turkey). If he does not then he is unlikely  to  be
         at any real risk anywhere in Turkey.

         13.  The risk to a specific individual in most  circumstances  will
         be at its highest in his home area for a variety  of  reasons,  and
         particularly if it is located in the areas of conflict in the south
         and east of Turkey. Conversely the differential nature of the  risk
         outside that area may be sufficient to  mean  that  the  individual
         would not be at real risk  of  persecution  by  the  state  or  its
         agencies elsewhere in Turkey, even if they were made aware  of  the
         thrust of the information maintained in his home area by  telephone
         or fax enquiry from the airport police station or elsewhere, or  by
         a transfer of at least some of the information to a new  home  area
         on registration with the local Mukhtar there.  Internal  relocation
         may  well  therefore  be  viable,  notwithstanding  the  need   for
         registration in the new area. The issue is whether any individual's
         material history would be reasonably likely to lead to  persecution
         outside his home area."

Analysis
71. I consider first what facts can be found, on the  evidence  before  me.
    It is accepted by the respondent that the appellant is a draft  evader.
     It may well be that the appellant's primary reason for wanting  to  be
    in the United Kingdom would be to continue to avoid  military  service.
    That is not conclusive of this appeal, however.  All of the A  (Turkey)
    factors and the guidance in IK must  be  considered,  as  well  as  any
    change in the intervening years.

72. I am satisfied that Dr Hajioff is in a position to be of assistance  to
    the Upper Tribunal both as to the appellant's psychiatric difficulties,
    and the scars on his body as they correlate with his account of injury.
      I treat his evidence as reliable on both issues,  by  reason  of  his
    specific experience. Dr Hajioff did not say whether the appellant would
    be unable to give evidence to the  Upper  Tribunal.   He  expressed  no
    opinion on that issue, presumably because it was not put to him.

73. Having seen the appellant give his evidence, I am satisfied that he was
    calm and that he gave his evidence to the best of his ability.  I treat
    him as a reliable witness, having regard to the lower standard of proof
    applicable in international protection claims.

74. I find that this appellant is an ethnic Kurd from south-east Turkey, an
    area of conflict between the authorities and the PKK.  I find that  the
    rest of the appellant's core account is reasonably likely to  be  true,
    to that lower standard, and that he is a person who  has  in  the  past
    twice come to notice for HDP activities and has been significantly ill-
    treated in detention.

75. Of the A (Turkey) factors, the  evidence  is  that  he  has  no  actual
    connection with the PKK, but that the  authorities  in  2017  suspected
    that he did have such connections as  a  HDP  sympathiser  and  leaflet
    distributor.  Factors (b), (c), (d) and (e)  all  apply:  he  has  past
    arrests and some kind of pending criminal charge, and he was placed  on
    reporting conditions, which he  has  breached.   There  are  no  family
    connections engaging (f).

76. I accept Dr Hajioff's evidence under (e) as to the degree of past  ill-
    treatment: the appellant has  both  scarring  which  is  diagnostic  or
    typical of what happened to him, and post-traumatic stress disorder and
    panic attacks, caused by those  events.    The  appellant  left  Turkey
    reasonably promptly, after about 5 weeks.  He did  become  an  informer
    (factor (m)).

77. The appellant  is  being  actively  sought  for  the  criminal  offence
    (factors (h) and (l)).  He is a Kurdish man  and  of  the  Alevi  faith
    (factors (i) and (j)).   The appellant's evidence is that his  passport
    was taken from him at the airport on  arrival,  but  he  did  have  his
    Turkish  identity  card  (factor  (k)).    He  has  no  activities   in
    connection with the PKK, but he does have sur place activity  for  HDP,
    however limited (factor (n)).  The appellant is a draft evader  (factor
    (o)).

78. Given the accepted detentions and ill treatment, this appeal is a 'past
    persecution' case engaging paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 (as amended):

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

79. I consider whether the respondent has shown that there are good reasons
    to consider that persecution or serious harm will not  be  repeated  if
    the appellant is returned now.  This appellant  is  a  person  who  has
    failed to report or to give the information which he  promised  to  the
    police in his home area about the activities of  HDP.     There  was  a
    risk in his home area when his father arranged  for  the  appellant  to
    come to the United Kingdom.

80. I place weight on the record of some kind  of  criminal  offence  which
    appears on the mobile  phone  app  already  mentioned.   The  appellant
    showed the app to the Home Office Presenting Officer on  his  telephone
    at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, and Ms  Everett  did  not  seek  to
    suggest that the information extracted from that app on  two  occasions
    and included in the bundle was not a genuine record  of  some  kind  of
    outstanding criminal proceedings against him.

81. The country guidance in IK in 2004 was that the  GBTS  information  was
    widely accessible, in particular to border police in  Istanbul  airport
    and the security forces elsewhere in Turkey.  At [6], the  Tribunal  in
    IK found that an entry there, or the use of a one-way emergency  travel
    document, would give rise to a reasonable likelihood that  he  will  be
    identifiable as a failed asylum seeker and sent to the  airport  police
    station.

82. There have been significant technological developments in the 17  years
    since 2004, when the IK country  guidance  was  given,  as  well  as  a
    deterioration in the treatment of  Turkey's  citizens  since  the  coup
    attempt in 2016, and I note  that  the  appellant's  second,  and  more
    serious, ill-treatment in detention fell in 2017, in the  aftermath  of
    the failed coup.

83.  The optimistic observation at [9] of the country guidance in  IK  that
    Turkey was 'taking  action  in  legislative  and  structural  terms  to
    address the human rights problems that present a  serious  obstacle  to
    its membership of the European Union' was qualified thus:

         "9. ...However the use of torture is long and  deep-seated  in  the
         security forces and it will take time and continued and  determined
         effort to bring it under control in practice. It  is  premature  to
         conclude that the long established view of the Tribunal  concerning
         the potential risk of  torture  in  detention  as  per  A  (Turkey)
         requires material revision on the  present  evidence.  However  the
         situation  will  require  review  as   further   evidence   becomes
         available. For the time being as in the past,  each  case  must  be
         assessed on its own merits from the individual's  own  history  and
         the relevant risk  factors  as  described  in  paragraph  46  of  A
         (Turkey)."

    The appellant's experiences in 2014 and 2017  indicate  that  far  from
    bringing torture  under  control  in  practice,  serious  ill-treatment
    continues to be a feature of detention in Turkey.

84. The IK  guidance as to what can be accessed at the airport is not up to
    date: if any citizen of Turkey can consult the national records held on
    him, using the Turkish government app, it  is  reasonable  to  conclude
    that the same information will be available to the authorities  at  the
    airport.

85. The  appellant  cannot  be  expected  or  required  to  lie  about  his
    activities in the  United  Kingdom.  I  have  regard  to  the  Telgraph
    photograph: even if his attendance  at  that  demonstration  was  self-
    serving, the article is available publicly on the internet,  which  the
    Turkish authorities monitor.

86. I am not satisfied, on the evidence before  me,  that  there  are  good
    reasons for finding that should the appellant come to adverse attention
    at the airport on return, he would not be taken to the  airport  police
    station and ill-treated or tortured there.

87. Accordingly, he is entitled to refugee protection and  this  appeal  is
    allowed.

DECISION

88. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appellant's appeal.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      9 August
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



