
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04128/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th February 2020                |On 21st April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     FK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dixon, instructed by Braitch Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), and
    as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that the direction
    continues. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the
    appellant is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall
    directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of her
    family. This direction applies amongst others to all parties. Failure
    to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
    proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of Albania.  She arrived in the UK on 9th
    September 2015 and attempted to enter using a false Italian ID
    document.  When stopped, she claimed asylum and in February 2016 a
    referral was made to the 'National Referral Mechanism', a framework for
    identifying victims of human trafficking.  The Competent Authority made
    a positive 'reasonable grounds' decision on 1st March 2016 but
    concluded on 12th April 2019 that the appellant is not a victim of
    human trafficking or slavery, servitude or forced/compulsory labour.
    The appellant's claim for asylum was refused by the respondent for
    reasons set out in a decision dated 12th April 2019. The appellant's
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by FtT Judge McKinney for
    reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 24th July 2019.


The appeal before me


 3. Briefly stated, the appellant claimed she cannot return to Albania as
    she fears she will be liable to be re-trafficked, and fears retribution
    from ex-boyfriend who was violent towards her and forced her into
    prostitution.


 4. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First, the judge failed
    to make findings on the core of the appellant's claim and/or failed to
    give adequate reasons for her findings.  It is said that the judge
    failed to make any express finding regarding whether the appellant was
    in fact forced into prostitution by her ex- boyfriend as she had
    claimed. If, reading the decision as a whole, it is said that the judge
    rejected the core of the appellant's claim, the appellant claims the
    judge erroneously reached her decision based upon what the judge
    considered to be an implausible account of events. The appellant points
    to the decision of the Court of Appeal in HK -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ
    1037.  Second, the judge failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting
    the expert evidence of Antonia Young.  It is said the judge did not
    challenge the expertise of the expert and erred in her conclusion that
    the expert's opinion of the child suffering persecution or being
    perceived as illegitimate and suffering from extreme deprivation, is
    unsupported by evidence and authority. The expert had set out her
    expert opinion setting out the risks the appellant would face as a
    single mother with an illegitimate child, and the judge failed to
    engage with the opinion.


 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
    on 12th September 2019. In granting permission he noted that it is
    arguable that the operative credibility assessment of the judge was
    flawed, as it was arguably based on what the judge considered to be
    multiple "implausibility's" (sic).  He considered it arguable that the
    judge's subsequent assessment of the risk upon return was tainted,
    given it was based on her arguably erroneous findings of fact.  The
    matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of FtT Judge
    McKinney involved the making of a material error of law, and if the
    decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


 6. Mr Dixon adopts the grounds of appeal.  He submits the judge adopted an
    erroneous approach to her consideration of the claim.  He submits the
    judge adds up a number of aspects of the appellant's account that the
    judge found to be implausible, and then rejected the entire account.
    He submits that at paragraph [43], the judge erroneously found the
    appellant's claim that she would not inform the police about what had
    happened to her, as being implausible.  Mr Dixon refers to the record
    of the asylum interview completed on 24th February 2016.  At Question
    139, it was put to the appellant that the police in Albania are now
    better trained in dealing with victims of domestic violence.  She was
    asked why she cannot return and make use of the protection available to
    her.  In reply, the appellant referred to Albania being corrupt and
    members of parliament having trafficked women.  At paragraph 9 of her
    witness statement dated 4th June 2019, the appellant had referred to
    her own experience of the corruption within the judicial and legal
    system in Albania.  She referred to the husband of her best friend, who
    is a prosecutor in Albania, telling her ".... people can get away with
    murder by just paying a bribe.".  The claim made by the appellant was
    supported by the expert report.  At page 27 of her report, Antonia
    Young refers to the Home Office CPIN; 'Background information,
    including actors of protection, and internal relocation of July 2017.
    She cites an extract from paragraph 11.1.10 of the CPIN that confirms
    that "...public perception on spread of corruption among top police
    officials has increased. Bribery is the most widespread form of
    corruption and remains almost unchanged just like two years ago, as
    other forms of corruption have increased their presence. Cooperation
    with criminals, involvement in illegal traffics, manipulation of
    evidence, and corrupt procurements are among corruption forms with
    significant rise...".  Mr Dixon submits the judge did not consider the
    appellant's perception of matters, but it was important to understand
    why the appellant had not reported matters to the police.  He submits
    the judge simply found the appellant's account to be implausible
    without considering the explanation provided.  He submits the overall
    assessment of the claim is flawed because the judge relied heavily upon
    her own assessment as to what might be possible, rather than engaging
    with the evidence of the appellant.


 7. Mr Dixon submits the appellant is in any event at risk upon return as a
    lone woman, if her relationship with her ex-boyfriend has broken down.
    He submits the appellant would be returning to Albania as a lone woman
    and the judge failed to carry out any proper assessment of the risk the
    appellant would be exposed to.  The appellant had lived in Tirana
    previously, but she would now find herself in a different position.  Mr
    Dixon submits the judge failed to consider the impact of
    stigmatisation, and the judge did not consider the background material
    and expert report sufficiently.  He submits the judge did not consider
    the predominant cultural norms that prevail in Albania in reaching her
    decision.


 8. In reply, Mr McVeety submits that at paragraph [49] of her decision the
    judge makes it clear that she has not found the appellant to be a
    witness of truth in respect of her claim.  At paragraph [51] of her
    decision, the judge again confirms that she has not found the appellant
    to be a witness of truth in her account of why she fears her ex-
    boyfriend.  Mr McVeety submits the judge comes to the very clear
    conclusion that she does not believe anything that is said by the
    appellant, and it is clear that the judge rejected the core of the
    appellant's account.  He submits that although the judge found many
    aspects of the appellant's account to be implausible, that was not the
    only reason for rejecting the core of the appellant's claim and finding
    that the appellant is not a witness of truth. He submits that at
    paragraph [46] of her decision, the judge rejected the claim made by
    the appellant that she had not applied for a new passport because she
    did not trust the police, and the judge clearly had concerns about the
    reliability of the evidence given by the appellant.  Mr McVeety submits
    that when considering the evidence as a whole, it was open to the judge
    to conclude that the account advanced is one that is highly unlikely.
    It was open to the judge to note that the appellant had not claimed
    asylum in Switzerland. He submits that when considering the claim
    overall, the judge was entitled to note the appellant is an intelligent
    well-educated woman and that the appellant's actions damage her
    credibility in accordance with s8 of the Asylum and Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.  Mr McVeety accepts the judge's
    engagement with the expert report at paragraph [51] of the decision, is
    brief.  He submits however, that the opinions expressed by the expert
    as to the risk upon return are premised upon the appellant being found
    by the judge to be credible, and the judge accepting the core of the
    appellant's account.  The judge did not do so.


Discussion


 9. I remind myself of the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave in
    Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC).


         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary
         for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost.


10. I have also had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it  was
    stated in the head note that:


         "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal is determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if the  decision  makes  sense,
         having regard to the material accepted by the judge."


11. Dealing first with the judge's overall assessment of the claim and  the
    credibility of the appellant, in HK -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037,  the
    appellant's account had been rejected at first instance simply  because
    the facts he described were so unusual as to be thought,  unbelievable.
    The Court of Appeal held that that was not a safe basis upon  which  to
    reject the existence of events that were said to have  occurred  within
    an environment and culture that were wholly outside the  experience  of
    the decision-maker.  At paragraph [28] of  his  judgment  Neuberger  LJ
    stated:


         "Further, in many asylum cases, some, even most, of the appellant's
         story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not mean  that  it
         is untrue. The ingredients of the story, and the story as a  whole,
         have to be considered against the available  country  evidence  and
         reliable expert evidence,  and  other  familiar  factors,  such  as
         consistency with what the appellant has said before, and with other
         factual evidence (where there is any)."

12. In Y -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223, Keene LJ stated:


         "25. There seems to me  to  be  very  little  dispute  between  the
         parties as to the legal principles applicable to the approach which
         an adjudicator, now known as an  immigration  judge,  should  adopt
         towards issues of credibility.  The  fundamental  one  is  that  he
         should be cautious before  finding  an  account  to  be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that  he  will  be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or  is  not  plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been  influenced  by  his  own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of  our  own
         society. It is therefore important that he should seek to  view  an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues,  in  the
         context of conditions in  the  country  from  which  the  appellant
         comes. The dangers were well described in an article by Sir  Thomas
         Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in a passage quoted by the IAT  in
         Kasolo v SSHD 13190, the passage being taken  from  an  article  in
         Current Legal Problems. Sir Thomas Bingham said this:

             "An English judge may have, or think that  he  has,  a  shrewd
             idea of how a Lloyds Broker or  a  Bristol  wholesaler,  or  a
             Norfolk  farmer,  might  react  in  some  situation  which  is
             canvassed in the course of a case but  he  may,  and  I  think
             should, feel very much more uncertain about the reactions of a
             Nigerian merchant, or an Indian ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav
             banker. Or even,  to  take  a  more  homely  example,  a  Sikh
             shopkeeper trading in Bradford. No judge worth his salt  could
             possibl[y]  assume  that  men  of   different   nationalities,
             educations, trades, experience, creeds and temperaments  would
             act as he might think he would have done or even -  which  may
             be quite different - in accordance with his concept of what  a
             reasonable man would have done."


         26.  None of this, however, means that an adjudicator  is  required
         to take  at  face  value  an  account  of  facts  proffered  by  an
         appellant, no matter how contrary to common sense and experience of
         human behaviour the account may  be.  The  decision  maker  is  not
         expected to suspend his own judgment, nor  does  Mr  Singh  contend
         that he should. In appropriate cases, he is entitled to  find  that
         an account of events is so far-fetched and contrary to reason as to
         be incapable of belief. The point was well put in the Awala case by
         Lord Brodie at paragraph 24 when he said this:

             "... the tribunal of  fact  need  not  necessarily  accept  an
             applicant's account simply because it is not  contradicted  at
             the relevant hearing. The tribunal of fact is entitled to make
             reasonable findings based on  implausibilities,  common  sense
             and  rationality,  and  may  reject  evidence  if  it  is  not
             consistent with the probabilities  affecting  the  case  as  a
             whole".


         He then added a little later:

             "...  while  a  decision  on  credibility  must   be   reached
             rationally, in doing so the decision maker is entitled to draw
             on his common sense  and  his  ability,  as  a  practical  and
             informed person, to identify what is or is not plausible".


         27.  I agree. A decision maker is entitled to regard an account  as
         incredible by such standards, but he must take care not  to  do  so
         merely because it would not seem reasonable if it had  happened  in
         this country. In essence,  he  must  look  through  the  spectacles
         provided by the information he has about conditions in the  country
         in question. That is, in effect, what Neuberger LJ  was  saying  in
         the case of HK and I do not  regard  Chadwick  LJ  in  the  passage
         referred to as seeking to disagree."

13. The assessment of credibility is always a highly fact sensitive task.
    The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence as a whole.  In
    assessing the credibility of FK and the claim advanced by her, the
    Judge was required to consider a number of factors.  They include,
    whether the account given by FK was of sufficient detail, whether the
    account is internally consistent and consistent with any relevant
    specific and general country information, and whether the account is
    plausible.  Clearly, some of those factors may be more relevant in an
    individual case than others.  If an account is littered with internal
    inconsistencies that may be enough for a judge to dismiss the evidence
    of an appellant as incredible.  It does not follow that a judge is
    entitled to dismiss an account in the same way simply because the
    account is simply implausible.


14. Here, a summary of the claim made by the appellant is set out by the
    judge at paragraphs [3] to [10] of her decision.    As set out at
    paragraph [16] of the decision, the appellant gave evidence with the
    assistance of an Albanian interpreter. The judge considered the
    evidence before her and her findings and conclusions upon the claim for
    international protection are set out at paragraphs [38] to [51] of the
    decision.


15. The judge considered the claim made by the appellant that she had
    stayed at the house of her ex-boyfriend on the outskirts of Milan,
    where was forced into prostitution for 1� months until the appellant
    told her ex-boyfriend that she was pregnant, and they returned to
    Albania for her to have an abortion.  The judge noted the claim made by
    the appellant that following her return to Albania, she had been taken
    to a small clinic in Tirana and a Doctor who remembered her from her
    childhood in Ceronova, helped her to leave the clinic. The judge noted
    the claim made by the appellant that she got a taxi to her friend's
    house where her ID card was, before travelling to her friends' [S] and
    [A], home in Kamza on the outskirts of Tirana.  The judge considered
    the appellant's claim that she applied for a new passport and then
    travelled to Italy with her friends [S] and [A], and the claim that she
    had stayed in Milan with them, at the house of another friend.


16. At paragraph [40] of her decision, the judge states ".. there are a
    number of significant implausibility's in the appellant's account...".
     At paragraphs [40] to [43] and [48] of her decision, the judge
    identifies the various strands of the claim made by the appellant that
    she considered to be implausible.


17. At paragraph [45] of her decision, the noted there was no reason why
    the appellant did not claim asylum in Switzerland where she was
    fingerprinted two days before arriving in the UK. The judge found the
    appellant specifically chose to come to the UK and had spent months
    planning her travel. The judge found she deliberately chose to obtain a
    forged Italian ID card in order to specifically come to the UK.


18. At paragraph [46] of her decision, the judge considered the explanation
    provided by the appellant regarding the application that had been made
    by her for a new passport. The judge considered the evidence of the
    appellant in her witness statement that she had a copy of her old
    passport and her friend [A] helped obtain a fake passport, which was in
    fact a duplicate of her first passport.  The judge considered the
    appellant's account and said ".. I do consider the appellant's account
    of why she applied for a duplicate passport rather than a new one
    implausible. She admitted she was hiding in Albania for around five
    months; this is not a short period of time and there would be no reason
    to fear notifying the police for the reasons I have outlined above."


19. At paragraph [49] of her decision, FtT Judge McKinney stated:


         "Taking all of this into consideration I do not find the appellant
         has been credible at all in relation to her account as to why she
         fears persecution in Albania.... Having come to my findings above I
         do not find to the lower standard that she is at risk upon return
         for being a victim of trafficking for prostitution. I do not find
         she is a victim of trafficking.... I have not found the appellant
         to be a witness of truth in respect of her claim. I find there are
         significant implausibility's in her account, and I find it
         incredible. I do not find she would be at risk on return from her
         ex-partner or that she is at risk of being re trafficked."


20. I reject the claim that the judge failed to make findings on the core
    of the appellant's claim.  The judge noted at paragraph [36] of her
    decision, the issues in the appeal, noting that the credibility of the
    claim advanced by the appellant was central to the appeal.  The judge
    outlined the claim made by the appellant at paragraph [38] of her
    decision.  At paragraphs [40] to [49], the judge carefully engaged with
    the claim made by the appellant and concluded that she did not find the
    appellant to be a witness of truth in respect of her claim.  In the
    opening sentence of paragraph [49], the judge stated, "Taking all of
    this into consideration I do not find the appellant has been credible
    at all in relation to her account as to why she fears persecution in
    Albania ...".  The judge went on to conclude that paragraph by saying
    "I find there are significant implausibility's in her account, and I
    find it incredible. I do not find she would be at risk upon return from
    her ex-partner or that she is at risk of being re-trafficked".  Reading
    the decision as a whole, I am quite satisfied the judge rejected the
    core of the appellant's account for the reasons set out at paragraphs
    [40] to [49] of her decision.


21. In reaching her decision, the judge clearly considered the inherent
    improbability of the claims made by the appellant.  It is clear from
    the authorities that I have referred to, that the assessment of
    credibility may involve an assessment of the plausibility or the
    apparent reasonableness or truthfulness of what has been said. The
    assessment can involve a judgement as to the likelihood of something
    having happened based on evidence and or inferences. Background
    evidence can often assist, revealing the likelihood of what is said to
    be apparently reasonable when based on an understanding of the
    circumstances of life in the country of origin.


22. In my judgment, the FtT judge was entitled to draw on her common sense
    and her ability, as a practical and informed person, to identify what
    is or is not plausible, as long as the reasons for drawing the
    inferences of implausibility withstand scrutiny.


23. At paragraph [40], the judge stated; "... I found it bizarre that of
    all places for the appellant to travel to when she is claiming to fear
    persecution from her ex-boyfriend she chose to travel to the exact same
    city and country where she claims to have been exploited and forced
    into prostitution by him.".  At paragraph [41], the judge stated, "...
    I find it highly unlikely that if the appellant genuinely feared her ex-
    boyfriend she would willingly travel and stay in the 2 cities that she
    claimed he wanted to force her into prostitution.". At paragraph [42],
    the judge stated; " I also find her account of how she managed to
    escape from the abortion clinic rather incredible....I find it highly
    unlikely that [the Doctor] would be willing to risk their own safety
    and that of their other patients to permit the appellant to escape out
    of another door of the building without first ensuring the police had
    been notified and attended.". At paragraph [43], the judge stated, "I
    also find the appellant's claim implausible that she would not inform
    the police about what had happened to her...".  At paragraph [48], the
    judge stated, "... I find it implausible that she would remain with her
    ex-boyfriend for the few days after they arrived back in Italy from
    Amsterdam given she had overheard him speaking to his friend regarding
    her working as a prostitute in Amsterdam. I find it further implausible
    that the appellant waited so long to inform her ex-boyfriend that she
    was pregnant with his child; despite her claim that he was violent
    towards her, forced her to take class A drugs and work as a
    prostitute."


24. At paragraph [37], the FtT judge confirms that she has taken account of
    potentially corroborative evidence and how the Upper Tribunal assessed
    the evidence of TD and AD in the CG case of TD and AD (trafficked
    women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092.  Having made that clear, I have no reason
    to believe that the FtT judge did not take that potentially
    corroborative evidence into account.  When considering the inherent
    improbability of the claim advanced by the appellant, in my judgment,
    the judge carefully considered the appellant's claim that she fears
    retribution from her ex-boyfriend who was violent towards her and
    forced her into prostitution when they were in Italy, leading to their
    return to Albania.   It was in that context, that the judge considered
    whether it is plausible that the applicant chose to travel to the exact
    same city and country where she claims to have been exploited and
    forced into prostitution.  The judge considered the appellant's claim
    concerning her escape from the abortion clinic and accepted that it is
    possible that a doctor at the clinic would remember the appellant, but
    highly unlikely that the doctor would be willing  to risk their own
    safety and that of their other patients.  In considering the
    appellant's claim that she did not inform the police about what
    happened to her, the judge accepted the background material and expert
    report which indicates that corruption does exist within some parts of
    Albanian police, but noted also that the evidence does not show there
    is an ineffective police response to victims of trafficking in Albania.
     Furthermore, the judge noted the appellant did not approach the police
    in any of the safe European countries the appellant travelled to
    including Italy.


25. In JT (Cameroon) -v- SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  878,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    confirmed that The Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004  s.8  was  no  more  than  a  reminder  to  fact-finding
    Tribunals that conduct coming within the categories stated therein  had
    to be considered when assessing the credibility of  an  asylum  seeker.
    The FtT judge was entitled  to  have  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the
    appellant and the explanation provided. While such conduct  had  to  be
    considered and was capable of damaging credibility, the Court of Appeal
    confirmed that s8 did not dictate that damage to credibility inevitably
    resulted, and the weight to be given to  the  conduct  was  entirely  a
    matter for the judge.


26. When properly read, in my judgement, the judge reached her decision as
    to the credibility of the appellant and the core of her account by
    reference to the evidence as a whole. The judge considered the
    explanations put forward by the appellant and there is nothing in the
    background evidence or the experts report that is capable of explaining
    why the appellant acted as she did, if, as she claims, she fears
    retribution from her ex-friend who was violent towards her and had
    forced her into prostitution.  The judge was entitled to focus on what
    the appellant had said about her relationship with her ex-boyfriend,
    her claims that she had been forced into prostitution their return from
    Italy to Albania for an abortion and the subsequent events leading to
    the appellant's arrival in the UK.  It was for the appellant to provide
    evidence as to why and how matters happened in the way in which she
    said they did, in the light of the challenge to her credibility.  The
    appellant's account of events was carefully considered by the judge.
    It was the sheer improbability of the appellant's account of events
    that caused the judge to reject her account.  She was in my judgment
    entitled to do so, and to reach the overall credibility conclusion
    which she did.  The background material and expert report cannot and
    does not explain why the appellant acted as she did, and that evidence
    adds nothing here.


27. The judge went on to consider whether the appellant is in any event at
    risk on return on the basis that she claims to be a single mother of an
    illegitimate child. The judge considered the report of Antonia Young
    that was relied upon by the appellant and at paragraph [51] stated:


         "... It is not in dispute that the appellant has managed to live
         sometime by herself as a single female in Tirana without any
         issues. She is a well-educated young woman who studied for four
         years to obtain a degree in law and has worked in various jobs
         including at a law firm and electoral commission. She is well
         travelled. She claims to have a ID card with her friend in Albania
         so would not need to apply for one to obtain any social assistance
         she may require if returning with a child. The report states she
         would have to register with the local authority for her child to
         attend school. As she has her ID card this should not cause any
         difficulties. I found Ms Young's description of her child suffering
         "persecution" being perceived as illegitimate and suffering from
         "extreme deprivation" unsupported by evidence and authority.
         Further I only have the appellant's account that [J] is the
         illegitimate child of her ex-boyfriend. I have already found her
         not to be a witness of truth in her account of why she fears her ex-
         boyfriend. I am not satisfied the lower standard on the evidence
         that the appellant or [J] would suffer persecution or a breach of
         Article 3 ECHR upon return to Albania."


28. I accept, as did Mr McVeety, that  the  judge  only  engages  with  the
    report briefly.  For completeness,  I  have  carefully  considered  the
    report.  At page 42 of her report, Antonia Young sets out  her  opinion
    as to the  "Assessment  of  Future  Fear".   She  states  that  if  the
    appellant is found to be credible, she has good reason  to  fear  being
    found by her ex-boyfriend, maybe not immediately,  but  in  the  longer
    term.  The judge did not find the appellant to be credible. At page  48
    of  her  report,  the  expert  deals  with  concerns  relating  to  the
    appellant's child.  She states:


         "In order to access nursery care or education for her  child,  [the
         appellant]  would  have  to  register  with  the  local  authority,
         increasing the likelihood of being discovered by her trafficker. In
         his  schooling,  her  son  would  face  extreme   deprivation   and
         persecution  being  perceived  as  illegitimate,  with  no   father
         accounted  for,  nor  supportive  family  members  to  dispel  such
         perception (as she notes in her WS at point 17)"


29. In reaching her decision, the judge clearly had that evidence in  mind,
    and addressed it at paragraph [51] of her decision.  At paragraph  [17]
    of her witness statement dated 4th June 2019, the appellant claimed the
    respondent  had  failed  "..to  understand  that  my   son   was   born
    illegitimately which means that his father and I were  not  married  at
    the time he was born.  He  will  face  discrimination  if  returned  to
    Albania ...".  The expert appears to adopt the  concerns  expressed  by
    the appellant at paragraph [17] of her  witness  statement,  and  quite
    apart from the fact that the opinion  is  based  upon  the  appellant's
    account of events being credible, fails to set out the basis upon which
    she reaches her  opinion  that  appellant's  son  "would  face  extreme
    deprivation and persecution being perceived as  illegitimate,  with  no
    father accounted for, nor supportive  family  members  to  dispel  such
    perception..".  The expert sets out her conclusions at section 8  (page
    54) of her report.  The expert acknowledges  that  it  rests  with  the
    Tribunal to  determine  whether  or  not  the  appellant's  account  is
    truthful. The expert's opinion as to the risk upon return  is  premised
    upon the appellant being found to be credible.  The  expert  based  her
    consideration of the appellant's fear upon the  account  given  by  the
    appellant.  In my judgment the judge considered, albeit in brief terms,
    the matters set out in the expert's report in  light  of  the  findings
    made by the judge as to the credibility of the appellant and  the  core
    of her account.


30. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran) v The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982,
    "unjustified complaints" as to an alleged failure to give adequate
    reasons are all too frequent.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to give
    reasons in sufficient detail to show the principles on which the
    Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.  Such
    reasons need not be elaborate, and do not need to address every
    argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  If a Tribunal
    has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there are grounds on
    which the argument could properly have been rejected, it should be
    assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds.  It is sufficient that
    the critical reasons to the decision, are recorded.


31. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first
    instance, unless it really cannot understand the original judge's
    thought process when she was making material findings. In my judgement,
    the judge identified the issues and gave a proper and adequate
    explanation for her conclusions on the central issues on which the
    appeal was determined. The findings made by the judge were findings
    that were properly open to the judge on the evidence before the FtT.
    The findings cannot be said to be perverse, irrational or findings that
    were not supported by the evidence.  Having carefully considered the
    decision of the FtT I am quite satisfied that the appeal was dismissed
    after the judge had carefully considered the facts and circumstances of
    the claim, and all the evidence before her.


32. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT, and it  follows  that
    the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


33. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                    Date 3rd April
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


_____________________________________________________________

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email






