
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04635/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Without a Hearing         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 6 July 2020                       |On 31 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     DVT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because the appellant is an asylum seeker.

This is an appeal brought with permission  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker
against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
appeal against a decision of the respondent  on  2  May  2019  refusing  him
asylum.

A listed hearing was vacated because of  the  well-known  national  lockdown
and on 22 April 2020 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  gave  special  directions
raising the possibility of the appeal being determined  without  a  hearing.
I remind myself of my powers and obligations under Rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Most  of  the  business  of  the
Tribunal may be conducted without a hearing but before deciding not to  have
a hearing I am obliged to have regard to the wishes of the  parties.   There
was already a skeleton argument on the papers from  Ms  A  Fijiwala  of  the
Senior Presenting Officers' Unit  but  in  response  to  directions  further
submissions were sent  by  the  respondent.   The  appellant  sent  outlined
further submissions consolidating points made in the existing  grounds  but,
for present purposes still more importantly, expressly requested the  appeal
to be dealt with without a hearing.

It is well understood but for the record I make it clear that the  "Covid-19
crisis" has placed exceptional demands on the Tribunal's  resources  and  it
will be  impossible  to  arrange  "socially  distant  hearings"  or  "remote
hearings" for all the cases in the  system  without  causing  unconscionable
delay which is contrary to the obligations under Rule  2  of  the  Procedure
Rules.  I do not need the consent of the parties but the fact that there  is
overt consent from the appellant  and  no  opposition  from  the  respondent
makes it easier to decide this is a case where I should and do  exercise  my
powers to make a decision without a hearing.

At the risk of oversimplification and by  way  of  introduction  it  is  the
appellant's case that he risks persecution because he is associated  with  a
political group in Vietnam.   He  has  already  been  in  trouble  with  the
authorities there because of his support and  he  has  fled  to  the  United
Kingdom.  He fears persecution in the event of  his  return.   In  similarly
summary form it is the respondent's case that the  appellant  is  untruthful
and indeed the First-tier Tribunal did not believe the appellant.

The core of the  case  is  that  the  reasons  given  for  disbelieving  the
appellant do not stand up to  scrutiny.   When  she  gave  permission  Judge
Coker described the grounds as "just about arguable".

I begin by considering how the First-tier Tribunal analysed the case.

The judge set out, probably in full, the statement of the appellant and  the
skeleton argument of  his  representative.   There  was  a  general  adverse
credibility finding at paragraph 20 and an explanation for that  finding  in
subsequent paragraphs.

There is nothing in the Decision and Reasons to suggest that  the  order  in
which the judge sets out his findings  is  an  indication  of  the  findings
being made sequentially beginning with the finding that is recorded first.

The first point noted was the appellant's  claim  to  have  been  beaten  by
undercover police officers when he  attended  a  demonstration.   The  judge
noted there was "no evidence" to confirm that the people  who  attacked  him
were any kind of state  official,  police  officer  or  otherwise,  and  the
appellant was indulging in conjecture.

He claimed he had  been  protesting  against  the  actions  of  the  Formosa
Company as well  as  the  Vietnamese  government  but  the  judge  found  no
independent evidence to support that claim.

He was particularly unimpressed with the  appellant's  claim  that  when  he
returned home from the demonstration he was told  by  his  friend  TAN  that
mutual friends had been arrested.  The judge was concerned because  TAN  was
the person the appellant had said  had  spoken  to  him  about  the  Formosa
Company and had attended the demonstration with him and,  according  to  the
appellant, had taken the appellant to hospital to have stitches in his  head
wound.  The judge could  not  understand  how  if  the  appellant  had  been
spending his time with TAN at hospital, TAN could have been  in  a  position
to be told about mutual friends being arrested but even  if  that  were  the
case why he had to wait until the appellant went home before TAN  told  him.
If the situation were as described TAN could have told him in  hospital  and
he could have fled from there.

There were no details of the friend who the appellant said  entertained  him
before he was able to leave the country  and  after  he  left  his  parents'
home.

The judge was unimpressed with the arrest warrant.  The appellant  said  his
mother had sent it to him by post. No envelope had been kept but it  arrived
in December 2018.  He said it had been issued to the home of a friend  where
he had stayed before he left Vietnam.

He did not know how the police had found out he had stayed at that  address.
 He speculated that somebody had told them.  He could not  explain  how  the
warrant had got to the hands of his mother.   He  had  not  been  told.   He
suggested a friend must have taken it.  He did not know  what  had  happened
to the friends who had been arrested.

The judge found it revealing that  he  did  not  claim  to  have  asked  his
mother.  The judge found that a truthful person would have  been  concerned,
the  judge  found.   The  judge  noted  the  supporting  letter   from   the
Brotherhood for Democracy but noted that the author  had  not  attended  the
hearing to support the appellant.

Perhaps more significantly, the appellant could  offer  no  explanation  for
there being no address or contact details or any  other  feature  to  enable
verification.  The judge found it significant that  the  appellant  had  not
produced the warrant before the hearing  so  that  the  Secretary  of  State
could check it or investigate it.

Overall, the judge was  unimpressed  with  the  documents.   There  were  no
security marks or anything on them to stop them having been  produced  on  a
home computer.

The appellant had previously worked in the United Kingdom and found it  easy
to get work.  The judge found this gave him an incentive to return.  He  had
not claimed asylum until he had  been  arrested  and  detained  for  illegal
working.  The appellant had not claimed asylum on  his  way  to  the  United
Kingdom although he had passed through  France  and  Poland  and  the  judge
found this undermined his  credibility.   The  judge  did  not  believe  the
appellant had any kind of political profile.

The judge found nothing to support any fear that the attendance at  a  rally
in the United Kingdom being brought to the attention of the  authorities  in
Vietnam.

I considered the written submissions.

I see no  error  in  the  judge's  findings  that  the  arrest  warrant  and
supporting letter from the political party  are  not  impressive  documents.
It is rather surprising, or at least it was open to the  judge  to  find  it
rather surprising, that the appellant did not know more about the origin  of
the arrest warrant.  Somehow it had gone from  the  place  where  he  stayed
before escaping, he thought privately, to the home of his  mother  and  then
to the United Kingdom.  I do not regard it as particularly significant  that
the appellant speculated that somebody  had  handed  it  over.   Clearly  if
there was any truth in the  story  somebody  had  handed  it  over  but  the
appellant's lack of interest in the topic combined with  the  limited  value
of the document itself, entitled the judge to attach little weight to it.

Similarly, the supporting letter  does  not  say  very  much  and  there  is
nothing against which it can be authenticated.

The late production of the arrest warrant is something which the  judge  was
entitled to take note.   It  should  have  been  produced  at  the  earliest
possible  opportunity  and  that  would  have  given  the  Home  Office   an
opportunity to examine it.  If they chose to squander that opportunity  then
that is a point that could have been made in submissions but that route  was
not left open.

Clearly the late asylum claim and the failure to claim in Poland  or  France
are relevant considerations.  They cannot be determinative.  To  my  mind  a
person who has already had some experience of living in the  United  Kingdom
(albeit unlawfully) and enjoyed life there or at  least  managed  there  may
well want to claim asylum there.  I do not find that illuminates  the  claim
but the failure to claim asylum until  arrest  is  something  to  which  the
judge  was  entitled  to  and  did  attach  significant  weight.   It   does
undervalue the integrity of the claim that it was not  made  until  prompted
in such a drastic way.

I do have difficulty with the findings about the men said  to  be  attacking
the appellant.  There is  background  evidence  that  suited  people  attack
demonstrators in the presence of the police with apparent impunity.   It  is
speculation to say precisely what status the attackers have.  I do  not  see
how it can be used as a reason to disbelieve the appellant that  he  claimed
to have been beaten up in a  way  that  seems  to  be  consistent  with  the
background material.

I  am  also  concerned  about  the  finding  that  the  appellant  told   an
unbelievable story which depended on  his  friend  being  with  him  at  all
material times.  It would have been perfectly simple to have asked  him  how
that came about.  The answer raised in the pleadings,  namely  that  he  did
not stay with the  appellant  after  taking  him  to  hospital  is  hard  to
discount. It is likely  that  the  appeal  would  have  been  decided  in  a
different way even if the same conclusion  was  sustained.   It  is  not  an
error of law to resolve an ambiguity in a particular way  but  that  is  not
the complaint.  The complaint is that the judge should not  have  taken  the
point without putting it to the appellant to  give  him  an  opportunity  to
respond.  I have read paragraphs 8 and 9 of the witness statement  dated  17
June 2019.  They certainly support the appellant's contention  that  he  was
taken to hospital by TAN but he returned on his own.   It  is  not  explicit
but he refers in paragraph 8 to "we" being attacked and said that  "we"  hit
back and that "I" was taken to hospital by TAN and  "I"  left  hospital  and
went home and when "I" got home  I  was  told  "from  TAN"  that  two  named
friends had been arrested.

I am satisfied that illustrates the error in law in making findings  without
putting things to witnesses.

I now have to ask if that was material.  It was clearly part of the  judge's
reasoning that led to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  could  not  be
believed but it does not impact at all on the late claim for asylum  or  the
failure to claim on the way to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  documents  were
found to be unreliable.  That means they can be given little or no  positive
weight in the appellant's favour but that is not the same as a finding  that
they are positively discreditable.

I am satisfied that the appellant's case has many gaps that are  independent
of the impression created by the possibly wrong belief that TAN  had  stayed
with him at the hospital.

Having reflected on everything I have decided that the error that  has  been
established is not material.  It was the appellant's case that he went to  a
demonstration  once  and  was  injured  sufficiently  severely   to   attend
hospital.  He says that people get beaten up  at  demonstrations  like  that
and he drew support from background material.  He thought it  was  a  police
officer that beat him.  The background material does not  support  that  but
the fact of the beating and the lack  of  police  concern  is  what  matters
rather than the identity of the person that administered the beating.

If that had been accepted the appellant would have established  some  degree
of commitment to political activity.  There was  no  evidence  that  he  had
been identified and so risked further ill-treatment as a  result  of  things
that happened that night except the unsatisfactorily  explained  arrival  of
the summons on a later occasion.   The  judge  gave  proper  reasons  to  be
unimpressed by that document.

The evidence does not support a finding that the appellant is  committed  to
a particular cause or active in the United  Kingdom  in  a  way  that  would
support a finding that he would carry  on  being  active  in  Vietnam.   The
damaging effect of the late claim remains the same.  The evidence about  the
warrant does not become better if in fact the appellant  was  beaten  up  as
claimed.

I have decided that I am not persuaded there is any  material  error  and  I
dismiss the appellant's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 July 2020                   |



