
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04153/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2020                   |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                                    -and-
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                    M. B.
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K. Tobin of counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of Afghanistan.  He initially  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 21 July 2011 but was removed back  to  France  on
    two occasions. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 March 2015  for  a
    third time,  but  his  claim  was  subsequently  deemed  to  have  been
    withdrawn. He made further submissions on 4 February 2019 but his claim
    for asylum was refused on 3 April 2019. At no point had the  Respondent
    conducted a substantive asylum interview with the Appellant.

2.   He appealed against this decision, but  his  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Howard  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  25
    October 2019.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision and  on  5  December  2019
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien granted him permission to appeal.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  both
    made oral submissions  and  we  have  referred  to  them  below,  where
    relevant.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   Permission to appeal was primarily granted on  the  basis  that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Howard had erred in law when he failed to grant the
    Appellant an adjournment so that Dr Cutting, a consultant psychiatrist,
    could answer an additional question that arose from his expert  report,
    dated 2 August  2019.  In  this  report,  he  had  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was suffering from depression with a psychotic episode.

6.   There was a copy of a letter from the Appellant's solicitors, dated  14
    August 2019, in the Tribunal's file. It showed that it was  emailed  to
    the Tribunal on 16.48 that day and was recorded as having been received
    on 15 August 2019. The solicitors also  attached  email  correspondence
    between them and Dr Cutting, dated 8 August 2019, in which  they  asked
    him to amend his report to respond to this further question, which  was
    whether, in his  opinion,  the  Appellant  had  the  capacity  to  give
    evidence in court taking into account his poor  memory.  In  a  further
    email, dated 13 August  2019,  they  also  asked  whether  he  had  the
    capacity to give evidence.  On  14  August  2019  Dr  Cutting's  office
    confirmed that he had been away for a few  days  and  was  coming  home
    either that day or the day  after  and  provided  them  with  his  home
    telephone number. It was as a result of this email correspondence  that
    the Appellant's solicitors applied for a short adjournment.

7.   The Appellant's counsel's skeleton argument  repeated  the  application
    for an adjournment and explained that the expert report was yet  to  be
    formally filed, as it was thought to be  incomplete  and  that  it  may
    include factual  inaccuracies.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  record  of
    proceedings does not refer to the written and oral applications for  an
    adjournment, but the Home Office Presenting Officer confirmed that  the
    Respondent's record of proceedings noted that an adjournment  had  been
    requested.

8.     First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard  also  failed  to   mention   the
    application for an adjournment in his decision or provide  any  reasons
    for refusing the Appellant's application for an adjournment.

9.   In paragraph 23 of his decision, he did briefly refer  to  Presidential
    Guidance Note 2 of  2010  on  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance and reminded himself that the Appellant's mental ill-
    health may render him a vulnerable adult. However, he  failed  to  take
    into account the fact that paragraph 5.1 (viii) of the Guidance advises
    a judge to "consider whether expert evidence e.g. as to disability, age
    or mental health is required, particularly if there is a dispute or  an
    issue over ability to participate in the proceedings; consider  whether
    an adjournment would be appropriate to enable either  party  to  obtain
    reports".

10.  He also failed to take into account the guidance  provided  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  where  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284".

11.  In the Appellant's case, the existing expert report suggested that  his
    poor memory may prevent him from giving cogent oral evidence. This  was
    arguably made a more significant factor by the fact that, as he had not
    been given the opportunity to give an account of his claimed history of
    persecution in an asylum interview, this was the  first  time  that  he
    would have the opportunity to answer questions about his account.

12.  In addition, it was clear from the decision that the Appellant had  had
    difficulty replying to questions put to him. For example, at  paragraph
    25, First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard noted "...He was asked what  [sic]
    not after the first or second visits given to the family  history  with
    the Taliban. He could give no credible answer. He was  asked  why  they
    would want him to join them given  they  had  killed  his  brother  and
    father. Again, he could give no reason". It was also the case  that  in
    paragraph 23 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Howard  noted
    that "the case turns entirely on [the  Appellant's]  credibility  as  a
    witness".

13.  Furthermore, a previous application for  an  adjournment  in  order  to
    obtain an expert psychiatric report had  been  granted  in  recognition
    that the Appellant's mental ill-health may be a factor to be taken into
    account at any appeal hearing and the Appellant was only asking  for  a
    very short adjournment to ensure that all relevant psychiatric evidence
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

14.  For all of these  reasons,  we  find  that  the  failure  to  grant  an
    adjournment and the failure to provide any reasons for refusing such an
    adjournment amounted to errors of law.

15.  In paragraphs 32 and 39 of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Howard found that the Appellant would be able to obtain the  medication
    for his depression in Baghlan and  would  be  living  with  his  family
    there. However, when reaching this conclusion, the Judge failed to take
    into account the evidence contained in the  August  2018  report  UNHCR
    Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs
    of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan which indicated  that,  in  general,
    those suffering from mental disabilities had limited access to adequate
    health care in Afghanistan. This report had been  referred  to  by  the
    Appellant's counsel in paragraph 20 of her skeleton argument and it was
    also contained in the Appellant's Appeal Bundle.

16.  In addition, in the CPIN,  dated  August  2019,  entitled  Afghanistan:
    security and humanitarian situation the Respondent had  confirmed  that
    the quality of health services in Afghanistan remained poor.

17.  For these reasons we also find that there were errors of law in  First-
    tier Tribunal Howard's decision.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Howard's  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Howard and O'Brien.


Signed   Date 17 January 2020

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

