
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04878/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 June 2017                          |On 29 June 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     KKA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Kotak, Counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 2.  This  decision  re-makes  the  appellant's  asylum  and   humanitarian
    protection claim following my error of law decision issued  on  30  May
    2017. The error of law decision is appended.

 3. The accepted facts before me are that the appellant is  an  Iraqi  Kurd
    whose family originally came from Diyala but who, after a land dispute,
    relocated to Ramadi. The respondent also accepts that both  Ramadi  and
    Diyala are contested areas and that the applicant cannot be expected to
    return there but disputes his ability to relocate to either  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Region  (IKR)  or  Baghdad  in  order  to  avoid  the  risk  of
    mistreatment in his home area. It is accepted that the  appellant  does
    not have any form  of  identify  document,  including  a  Civil  Status
    Identity Document (CSID).

 4. The relevant parts of the country guidance case of AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) state:

         "A.  INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

         1.   There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

         ...

         3.   The  degree  of  armed  conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
         (including  Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give   rise   to
         indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such   serious   harm   to
         civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics, so  as
         to engage Article 15(c).

         4.   In accordance with the principles  set  out  in  Elgafaji  (C-
         465/07) and QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases  should  assess
         the individual characteristics of the person claiming  humanitarian
         protection, in order to ascertain whether those characteristics are
         such as to put that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

         B.  DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

         5.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.

         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.

         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
         and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
         Civ 1276, an  international  protection  claim  made  by  P  cannot
         succeed by reference to any alleged risk of harm  arising  from  an
         absence of Iraqi  identification  documentation,  if  the  Tribunal
         finds that P's return is not  currently  feasible,  given  what  is
         known about the state of P's documentation.




         C. POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

         8.   It will only be where  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
         return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged  risk  of
         harm arising from an absence of Iraqi identification  documentation
         will require judicial determination.

         9.   Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is one  of  the
         ways in which it is possible for an Iraqi national  in  the  United
         Kingdom to obtain a  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.   Where  the
         Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a  passport  or
         laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to the Tribunal
         what,  if  any,  identification   documentation   led   the   Iraqi
         authorities to issue P with the passport or laissez passer  (or  to
         signal their intention to do so).

         10.  Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport or other  current
         form of Iraqi identification document.

         11.  Where P's return to Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID.

         12.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         13.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

         D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN  THE  IRAQI  KURDISH
         REGION)

         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

         (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part  C
         above);

         (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely to
         find employment);

         (c) whether P has family members or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
         accommodate him;

         (d) whether P is a lone female  (women  face  greater  difficulties
         than men in finding employment);

         (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or  rent
         accommodation;

         (f) whether P is from a minority community;

         (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind  there
         is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers  are  provided
         with the support generally given to IDPs.

         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
         from  Baghdad  airport  to  the  southern  governorates,  suffering
         serious harm en route to such governorates  so  as  engage  Article
         15(c).

         E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         17.  The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

         19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
         entry for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission
         for a further 10 days. If K finds  employment,  K  can  remain  for
         longer, although K will need to register with the  authorities  and
         provide details of the employer. There is no evidence that the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.

         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
         to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
         to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
         assessment of (a)the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR
         (such as to Irbil  by  air);  (b)the  likelihood  of  K's  securing
         employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
         family and friends in the IKR.

         21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home
         area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR."

 5. I was also referred to [177], [202] and [203] of AA (Iraq):


         "177. In summary, we conclude that it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
         national living in the UK to obtain a  CSID  through  the  consular
         section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able to
         produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and  page
         number for their family registration details. For  persons  without
         such a passport, or who are unable to produce the  relevant  family
         registration details, a  power  of  attorney  can  be  provided  to
         someone in  Iraq  who  can  thereafter  undertake  the  process  of
         obtaining the CSID for such person from the  Civil  Status  Affairs
         Office in their home governorate. For  reasons  identified  in  the
         section that follows below, at the  present  time  the  process  of
         obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the
         person wishing to obtain the CSID is from  an  area  where  Article
         15(c) serious harm is occurring.


         ...


         202 It is clear from the evidence before us  that  Arabic  speaking
         males with family connections to Baghdad and  a  CSID  are  in  the
         strongest position. At the other end of the scale,  those  with  no
         family connections in Baghdad who are from minority communities and
         who have no CSID are least able to provide  for  themselves.  There
         are a  wide  range  of  circumstances  falling  between  these  two
         extremes. Those without family connections are more vulnerable than
         those with such connections. Women are more  vulnerable  than  men.
         Those who do not speak Arabic are less likely to be able to  obtain
         employment. Those from minority communities are less likely  to  be
         able to access community support than  those  from  the  Sunni  and
         Shi'a communities.


         ...


         203. On the evidence before us, whilst we accept that for a  person
         who has no family or other support in Baghdad and who also does not
         have a CSID, and cannot obtain one reasonably soon  after  arrival,
         it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to relocate  to  Baghdad,
         for the generality of Iraqis,  despite  difficulties  that  may  be
         experienced in respect of such matters such  as  access  to  health
         care, education and jobs, we consider that relocation to Baghdad is
         safe and not unreasonable or unduly harsh - one reason being that a
         person can only be returned to Baghdad if such person has a current
         or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez-passer."

 6. The appellant's case is that his family were  murdered  by  Daesh  when
    they took over Ramadi. He maintains that he cannot obtain a CSID as  he
    cannot return to his home area and he has no family or friends in  Iraq
    to assist him to do so. His evidence is that the  uncle  who  lived  in
    Khanaqin and assisted him to leave Iraq has himself left the country.

 7. The appellant also submits that as someone with no means of obtaining a
    CSID he cannot be expected to relocate to either the  KRI  or  Baghdad,
    relying on the passages set out above from AA (Iraq). He argues that he
    cannot live in the KRI as he has no CSID to assist  him  to  get  there
    from Baghdad or allow him to remain there. He has no employment  skills
    to assist him to remain longer than the  10  days  allowed  to  non-KRI
    Iraqis. He has no family or friends there. He maintains that he  cannot
    relocate to Baghdad as he has no family or friends there, has no CSID.

 8. The outstanding factual  issue  that  I  must  decide  is  whether  the
    appellant has family who can assist him to obtain a CSID so  as  to  be
    able to travel to and relocate  in  the  IKR  and  whether  he  can  be
    expected to relocate to Baghdad.

 9. Mr Singh accepted that if I found for the appellant on the issue of his
    having no family in Iraq to assist him on return to obtain a CSID  then
    the appeal would have to be allowed, following AA (Iraq).

10. I did find the appellant credible on having no family in Iraq to assist
    him on return.

11. The appellant has been consistent as to his family having been murdered
    and his uncle leaving Iraq. He stated at 4.1 of his screening interview
    that his family had been killed by Daesh two to three  months  earlier.
    He stated at question 7 of the asylum interview (AIR) that Daesh killed
    his family. He stated at question 9 that he believed that his uncle had
    left the country. His uncle had told him this when  the  appellant  was
    leaving Iraq. He gives details of his family  being  killed  in  August
    2015. He describes in questions 33 to 48 how he was at a friend's house
    when Daesh went to the family home and killed his parents and siblings.
    A friend telephoned him there to tell him what happened. The  appellant
    gives a detail at question 44 as to the family not having  left  Ramadi
    when Daesh came because his brother was disabled.

12. The account at [6]  of  the  appellant's  witness  statement  dated  21
    September is consistent with the account given in  his  interview.   He
    stated at [10] that he spoke to his uncle by telephone when he  got  to
    Turkey and his uncle told him that he was also leaving Iraq.

13. The appellant was not cross-examined before me about what  happened  to
    his family in Ramadi. I noted the evidence he is stated to  have  given
    in the First-tier Tribunal hearing which is at [13], [14] and  [20]  of
    that decision. He told the First-tier Tribunal that he found out  about
    what had happened whilst at a  friend's  house.  The  friend's  brother
    telephoned to inform him of what had  occurred.  The  appellant  stated
    that the confusion about whether his friend told him  or  his  friend's
    brother told him arose because the brother was also his friend. In  re-
    examination he clarified  that  the  friend  was  called  Mohammed  and
    Mohammed's brother was called Ali. Set against the overall  consistency
    of the appellant's evidence and the account being consistent  with  the
    country evidence of the extreme brutality of  the  regime  operated  by
    Daesh in the areas they occupied, it was not  my  conclusion  that  the
    evidence  given  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  sufficient  as  to
    undermine the  credibility  of  his  account.  Indeed,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not find his account of what happened  to  his  family  to
    lack credibility, failing to make a finding on this point.

14.  Mr  Singh's  cross-examination  of  the  appellant  focussed  on   the
    possibility of the  appellant's  uncle  still  being  in  Iraq  in  his
    questioning and submissions, referring me to  the  discussion  of  this
    part of the case in the First-tier Tribunal decision at [49]. The First-
    tier Tribunal found at [49] that the uncle  "may  be  "in  Turkey.  The
    appellant stated before me that he spoke to his  uncle  once  after  he
    left Iraq and this is consistent with  his  earlier  evidence.  It  has
    never been his claim  that  he  had  no  contact  after  he  left.  The
    suggestion that the agent would have kept in contact with the uncle  so
    as to be able to report the appellant's safe arrival in the UK appeared
    to me to be speculative. On the basis of the  consistent  evidence  set
    out above and the country evidence on  the  violence  in  the  northern
    regions of Iraq in 2015, the appellant's account of his  uncle  leaving
    Iraq was, in my judgment, credible to the lower standard.

15. For all of these reasons I accepted  the  appellant's  claim  that  his
    family was killed in Ramadi in 2015 and that he has no other  relatives
    now living in Iraq.

16. It follows, as set out above and conceded for the respondent,  that  he
    has therefore shown that he cannot return to his home area  because  of
    the risk from Daesh because of his imputed political opinion as someone
    opposed  to  Daesh  and  his  Kurdish  ethnicity.  He  cannot  relocate
    internally. The appellant has therefore shown that he  is  entitled  to
    asylum.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed error on a  point  of
    law and is set aside.

18. The asylum appeal is re-made as allowed.

Signed: [pic]                                         29 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt







                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04878/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 May 2017                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     KKA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Short, Counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


19. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

20. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 23 December  2016
    of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach  which  refused  the  appellant's
    protection and human rights appeals.

21. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  It is not disputed that he  is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity. It is also common ground that before coming  to  the
    UK he was  living  in  Ramadi  which  is  one  of  the  disputed  areas
    identified as unsafe in the country guidance case of AA (Article 15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) because of the presence of Daesh.

22. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that his family
    had been murdered by  Daesh  after  they  took  over  Ramadi.  He  also
    maintained that, following AA, he did not have the  requisite  identity
    card  and  could  not  be  expected  to  relocate  to  Baghdad  or  the
    Independent Kurdish Region (IKR).

23. At [49], Judge  Beach  declined  to  make  a  finding  on  whether  the
    appellant's family had been murdered by Daesh. She also found  at  [48]
    and [49] that the appellant could be expected to relocate to  the  IKR.
    She refused the appeal on all grounds as a result.

24. The appellant submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    failing to make a finding on whether his family was murdered by  Daesh.
    A finding on this point was  required  as,  in  addition  to  being  of
    intense personal importance to the appellant, it was  relevant  to  the
    issue of  whether  he  could  obtain  an  identity  document  with  the
    assistance of family or friends and so  be  in  a  better  position  to
    relocate to the IKR.

25. The appellant also maintained that  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  the
    internal relocation assessment, had proceeded on a mistake of  fact  as
    to his family having come from the IKR. He had never maintained that he
    or his family had ever lived in or came from the IKR.

26. Before me,  the  respondent  accepted  that  he  First-tier  Tribunal's
    mistake as to the appellant or his family coming from the IKR  amounted
    to an error of law such that the internal flight assessment to  be  set
    aside to be remade.

27. There was also agreement  that  a  finding  on  what  happened  to  the
    appellant's family had to be made in  order  for  the  internal  flight
    assessment to be re-made correctly.

28. In light of the respondent conceding the merits of  the  error  of  law
    appeal I found that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  disclosed
    an error on a point of law such that it  should  be  set  aside  to  be
    remade.


Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

30. It was not possible to remake the appeal on the day of the error of law
    hearing because an interpreter was not present.

31. The appeal  will  be  re-made  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  on
    Wednesday 28 June 2016.

32. A Sorani Kurdish interpreter is required.



Signed: [pic]                                Date: 24 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
