
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04723/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2020                   |On 3 June 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    C F R
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Counsel, instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker and is entitled to privacy.

2. This is the resumed hearing of an  appeal  by  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka
against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal
against the decision of the respondent on 26 March 2018 refusing her asylum
or leave to remain on any other basis.   The  appeal  has  been  determined
unsatisfactorily by the First-tier Tribunal.  I found an error of  law  and
gave my reasons in a decision dated 4 March 2020 and the case  came  before
me to be redetermined.

3. It is for the Appellant to prove her case but it  is  sufficient  if  she
shows that there is a real risk of her being persecuted or  seriously  ill-
treated for other reasons in the event of her return  or  that  removal  is
contrary to her human rights.

4. Appropriately, Mr Martin relied heavily on  the  skeleton  argument  that
had been served on the Tribunal.

5. I am not sure that the details of  the  Appellant's  immigration  history
are a particularly important to my reasoning but it is part of the  overall
history and I set out a summary. It shows that the  Appellant  entered  the
United Kingdom in 2009 travelling on her own passport with the advantage of
a student visa.  She applied for leave to remain  in  April  2010  but  the
application was rejected.  She made a similar application in May 2010.  The
application was refused with no right of appeal on 22 June 2010.  On 7 July
2010 she applied successfully for leave to remain as a student so that  she
had leave to remain as a  student  until  31  May  2012,  extended  on  her
application until 23 August 2015.

6. The Appellant says that on 17 March 2013 she returned to  Sri  Lanka  and
re-entered the United Kingdom just over a month later on 23 April 2013.

7. On 22 August 2015, that is the day her  leave  to  remain  as  a  student
expired, she applied for leave to remain  on  compassionate  grounds.   The
application was refused subject to an in-country right of appeal which  she
does not seem to have exercised.  On 4 March 2016 she applied for leave to
remain on outside the Rules and the application  was  rejected  on  13  May
2016.  On 24 May 2016 she applied for leave to remain outside the Rules  on
compassionate grounds and that was refused on 18 January 2017.

8. On 29 March 2017 she made a human rights  application  that  was  refused
with no right of appeal on 18  August  2017.   On  25  September  2017  she
claimed asylum.

9. In her screening interview on 24 October 2017 she gave her full name  and
her date of birth which is in March 1978.  She said that she was  Sinhalese
and followed the Buddhist religion.

10. She said she left Sri Lanka in June 2006 for Heathrow Airport coming  to
the United Kingdom to study.

11. She lived with her brother (she identifies  him  by  his  name  and  the
family name is the same as hers but she is not recorded as saying  that  he
is her brother) who was originally from Sri Lanka whose wife is British.

12. Asked to explain in outline her reasons  for  her  claim,  she  said  in
answer to question 4.1:

  "I received threats from my ex-boyfriend because I  separated  from  him.
  They started since 2009, he warned if I go back to Sri Lanka  I  will  be
  killed.  Both of my parents have been threatened by him."

13. The Appellant then indicated that in  future  she  would  prefer  to  be
interviewed by a woman.  She sent by letter corrections to answers given at
her screening interview.  She added that she had scars on her body  because
of injuries done by her ex-boyfriend.  She  said  she  entered  the  United
Kingdom in June 2009, not 2006 as recorded in her screening interview.

14. On 19 March 2018 the Appellant was interviewed  about  her  claim  by  a
female officer.

15. She said that she had parents and a married elder brother living in  Sri
Lanka. Her relatives lived at different addresses in Bandaragama.  She  had
recently been in contact with her parents and her brother.

16. Her father was a farmer but he had been  injured  when  her  mother  was
pregnant carrying her and had not worked again.  Her mother had worked as a
housekeeper in Kuwait, Jordan and Saudi Arabia.

17. The Appellant said that she had relatives in the  United  Kingdom.   She
was educated to A level standard in Sri Lanka and left school at 19.

18. The Appellant said she had a partner  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  had
himself claimed asylum but she was coy about identifying him.

19. The Appellant had worked in Sri Lanka as  a  data  entry  operator  then
came to the United Kingdom in 2009 openly on her own passport.

20. The Appellant had returned to  Sri  Lanka  in  March  2013  because  her
father had severe backpains and she wanted to visit  him  and  her  mother.
She stayed in Sri Lanka for a month and returned  to  the  United  Kingdom.
That was her only return visit to Sri Lanka.

21. Starting at question 44 the Appellant outlined the events that she  said
made her frightened to return to Sri Lanka.  In  summary,  she  had  become
friendly with a police officer in the Sri Lankan Special  Taskforce  (STF).
She explained how their relationship developed and they spent time together
and how on one occasion he clearly wanted to have sexual  intercourse  with
her and had arranged time  away  together  at  private  accommodation.  The
Appellant did not want intercourse with him.  He forced himself on her  and
raped her.  After that they talked and  argued  and  he  took  her  on  his
motorbike.  He said he intended to go home but  she  was  still  "fighting"
with him and they became angry and she fell off the  motorbike.   He  drove
off.  She  lost  consciousness.  When  she  regained  her  senses  she  was
surrounded by a crowd of people and she was taken to hospital  and  treated
there for about a week for  injuries  sustained  when  she  fell  from  the
motorbike.

22. The Appellant was asked "Who exactly do you fear?", and she  replied  "I
am in fear of my boyfriend".

23. She was asked at question 48 what she believed would happen  to  her  in
the event of her return to Sri Lanka.  She said that in  2005  she  started
working for a year.  There were no problems.  Her assailant was working  in
Batticaloa.  She  understood  from  friends  that  he  had  transferred  to
Colombo.

24. On a day in 2006 she was at work and  had  a  call  informing  her  that
someone was waiting and at about 9 o'clock in  the  morning  her  assailant
came into the office with two other people who were  waiting  outside.   He
was in uniform carrying a machinegun.  I find the rest of  the  answer  to
question a little confusing because it is on punctuated but the meaning  is
clear enough.  It is recorded in the following terms:

  "He came and told me at that time we were  separated  because  after  the
  incident he frightened me and told me we will go outside in forcing  way,
  by force.  I was frightened so I said no if I don't go with him  he  will
  leave a problem for my family, still I didn't want to go so I didn't  go.
  Normally I finish work at 4:30, when I came out I saw him standing there,
  he was standing outside with another four people saying  he  was  wearing
  the uniform and with weapons also with him that the  three  other  people
  were with him in uniform."

25. She was pressed  to  explain  what  she  thought  would  happen  if  she
returned.  I remind myself that the interview was on 19  March  2018.   The
Appellant said:

  "Last December he had come over to my house and told my parents  that  if
  she returns back you have to hand her over to me and threaten them and  I
  will give problems for you also the whole family if you  don't  hand  her
  over when she returns to Sri Lanka."

26. She then described herself as "scared and worried".   Her  parents  were
too old to do anything to protect her.

27. She was then asked about her assailant described as an ex-partner.   She
named him and gave his date of birth.  He was born in 1974.   He  lived  in
Sri Lanka in Mathugana.  She believed him to be a  member  of  the  Special
Taskforce.  He had gone  to  Colombo;  she  assumed  that  was  because  of
promotion.

28. The Appellant  was  questioned  about  her  chronology.   She  said  the
relationship was suggested in 2002 but she was not interested but  in  2003
they did become more friendly and that is when she thought the relationship
started.  The "accident" happened on 19 December 2004. They had had nothing
to do with each other since then. She did not want any kind of contact  but
said that her assailant did want to resume the relationship (question 58).

29. They had not lived together.

30. He proposed a relationship in April 2002.  She outlined the  development
in their relationship from disinterest on  her  part  to  friendliness,  to
starting to trust him and then beginning to fall in love.

31. The Appellant said he had not contacted her since she had  been  in  the
United Kingdom but he had spoken with her parents.  She did not know if  he
was presently involved in a relationship, she had no dealings with him.

32. The Appellant indicated that she did not want her  mother  to  meet  him
because her mother did not trust people in the Special Forces Taskforce.

33. The Appellant then explained that he visited her three times  after  the
breakup and on each of those occasions he was  wearing  uniform  which  she
described.  In answer to question 89 she said that after he raped her:

  "I told him I was going to  complain,  then  he  said  even  if  I  don't
  complain I won't get frightened, nothing will happen to me.  And then  he
  said that even if I go to report I will punish you again."

34. She explained that he said this in anger but his message  was  that  she
would have more trouble if she went  to  the  police.   She  believed  that
police officers, especially in the Special Taskforce, could do anything.

35. She said that her father had reported him to the police  for  harassment
when he gave the family problems.

36. She said that she did not report the matter to  the  police  because  he
had threatened her.  He said that what he did "today"  would  happen  again
and he would make problems for her family.  She regarded this as common  in
Sri Lanka but the police force does nothing  in  response  to  a  complaint
about a police officer.

37. Her father had complained in 2007 but she could not  remember  the  date
or did not know the date.  Her father's account was that he was visited  by
the assailant and two others.  They were not wearing uniform.  They treated
him roughly.  Her assailant told her mother in the presence of  her  father
that he wanted their daughter and would give the whole family problems.

38. She said they had visited on two previous occasions but she was  scared.
 She lived with relatives for a while.  On each of the three  occasions  he
visited the home he was threatening.

39. She did not tell her family until 2006 what had happened to her and  her
parents did not know about her accident (see question 102).

40. She then explained how her assailant had visited her parents  some  time
in 2006 and threatened them and that prompted her to say what had happened.
 She was not sure when he came a second time, it was in 2006 or  2007,  but
that was when her father complained to  the  police.   They  took  detailed
notes but did nothing and he only complained once.

41. He visited again in December 2017.  Again I find the recorded  answer  a
little confusing and I set it out below. This is  the  answer  to  question
109:

  "they told my parent the day I am coming and they wanted to  find  out  a
  contact number of myself and my parents said that she has  moved  out  of
  the place and we have no contact and  they  were  really  frightened  and
  scared."

42. It seems that in answer to question 105 and 106 the Appellant said  that
her father had explained to the police that she  had  been  raped  but  the
police took no action.

43. In answer to question 110 she said:

  "Because my father went and complained, the police threatened us all  the
  time and he said my daughter has no  peace  and  then  he  said  that  my
  daughter's life is ruined and in danger.  That is what the  complaint  he
  made to the police."

44. She did not know if the assailant knew that there had been  a  complaint
when he visited.  She confirmed that her father complained in 2007.   After
that:

  "... they used to call the landline and my mother  used  to  answer  only
  because my father can't hear and they used to ask where I was.  They used
  to phone and ask but they never visited my house, only in December  2017.
  They used to call and ask where I am, when I'd be coming, the address  in
  the UK and I want the phone number as well."

45. There were phone calls once in three or four months.   Her  mother  told
her that the calls were  always  from  her  assailant.   Her  mother  would
recognise his voice.

46. After a short break she confirmed that she went back to Sri Lanka for  a
short visit in 2013.  It was explained that she had stayed at her  mother's
home for two weeks. During the course of that visit while she was  "outside
with my mother" her assailant  visited  her  father  and  asked  where  the
Appellant was living.  Her father does have hearing  difficulties  but  did
unwisely tell her assailant that she was staying with  them  and  had  gone
with her mother but he did not know where.  In fact  she  stayed  with  her
friend after that because she was scared.

47. She confirmed that the visit in 2013 was because her father  had  severe
backache and she wanted to see her parents.

48. She stayed with a friend in Wellamapitiya.  Her assailant  accepted  her
father's explanation that she was not there and did not wait.

49. The Appellant had no problems at the airport.

50. It was put to her that the fact she was able to travel freely  suggested
that the assailant did not have the authority that she suggested.  She said
that he did not know that she had arrived or when she left.   She  did  not
know what powers he would have.

51. She was asked  to  explain  how,  if,  as  she  had  suggested,  he  had
sufficient power to make a complaint  pointless,  how  he  would  not  have
sufficient power to know who was coming and leaving at  the  airport.   She
did not think he had that much power.

52. She was asked why she returned to Sri Lanka in 2013 if she  thought  her
life was in danger.  She replied:

  "because I was thinking that in 2013 it is a  long  period  and  then  he
  would forget about me, I thought he would have a partner and get  married
  and another thing he didn't know when I  was  going  to  come  and  so  I
  thought I wouldn't have any problem."

53. She said a photograph had been taken to show her scars.

54. She was asked why she did not claim asylum when she  first  entered  the
United Kingdom.  She said she had come  for  her  education  and  no  other
reason.  Her younger brother was living in the United Kingdom and that made
things easier.

55. The Appellant was pressed to explain why she did not claim  asylum  when
she returned in 2013.

56. She said she went to two solicitors when her visa expired and  explained
to them she had problems and they invited her to get a student  visa.   She
was asked why she could not return to Sri Lanka  and  relocate.   She  said
that if she went to Sri Lanka her parents and friends would have  problems.
She said her friend would have problems too (I assume this is  a  reference
to her present partner).  Her friend could not  go  back.   She  could  not
explain how anybody would know they had relocated but she would  be  found.
She insisted that the only person she feared was her previous boyfriend.

57. In answer to a general question at the end about anything she wanted  to
add, she said that on an occasion in 2006 her assailant  and  three  others
were waiting for her when she came out  of  work.   They  were  armed.   He
pulled her into a jeep and threatened her that if she informed anybody what
had happened to her "all my colleagues will do the same thing as I  did  to
you, me and all my friends".  He then told her she should not tell  anyone,
including her parents and if she did "your life will be under threat and  I
will ensure you don't leave."

58. Finally she said that another  reason  for  wanting  to  remain  in  the
United Kingdom was to be with her younger brother who had always taken care
of her and she wanted to be with him.

59. I have a bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal.   It  is  dated  9
August 2019 and includes photographs of scars on the Appellant's body,  her
general  medical  notes  and  a  psychiatric  report  from   a   consultant
psychiatrist that I  consider  in  more  detail  below.   There  are  other
supporting documents in that bundle and I have considered them.

60. The psychiatric report is prepared by Dr Robin Lawrence  whose  relevant
specialist qualifications include his being a member of the  Royal  College
of Physicians and a member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists.   He  has
been a consultant at St Thomas's Hospital in the National  Health  Service.
The report is dated 9 June 2018 and is based on an examination  on  24  May
2018.

61. The report includes the appropriate expert directions.   I  am  entirely
satisfied that Dr Lawrence is competent to give  opinions  on  the  matters
that he does and directed  himself  properly  before  preparing  an  expert
report.

62. He began the report by saying how the Appellant had told him at the  end
of the interview that she had told him things she had not told anyone else.
 Dr Lawrence said:

  "she knew that the purpose of the assessment was in order  to  prepare  a
  court report and waived her right to confidentiality to the Court but  in
  view of the sensitive nature of the content of  this  report,  I  request
  that this report is not made public."

63. Under the heading of collateral information  he  noted  an  e-mail  from
Counsel following a conference where  concerns  were  expressed  about  the
Appellant's ability to give instructions.   The  conference  had  not  been
fruitful and Counsel offered the opinion that it would be wrong to question
her extensively without knowing she was fit to give evidence.

64. Documents given to Dr Lawrence  included  a  letter  dated  8  May  2018
addressed to the "honourable judge" and written by the Appellant's  mother.
It was in Sinhalese but in translation it  said  "lover  making  a  lot  of
problem to her life by distrusting her" and "He  has  threatened  her"  and
"Presently on and off he is threatening our family".

65. In summary Dr Lawrence found symptoms that were "highly consistent  with
post-traumatic stress disorder".  He then outlined the history as given  to
him.  Dr Lawrence noted that the Appellant gave an account of  being  raped
and then of the assailant trying to re-establish a relationship (page 20 in
the bundle, page 17/66 in the report), of her  being  forced  into  a  jeep
where he threatened her and then having  given  that  account  Dr  Lawrence
noted that the Appellant:

  "was hyperventilating, pale, she felt sick and was trembling.  This was a
  further PTSD response, which is diagnostic of PTSD (again, it  is  almost
  impossible to simulate)."

66. The Appellant explained that when she applied for a study visa  in  2008
her doctor had advised her to  leave  Sri  Lanka  because  she  was  scared
everywhere and her parents were worried for her and  thought  it  would  be
good for her to study and to live with or near her younger brother who  was
lawfully in the United Kingdom.  She was not a successful  student  and  Dr
Lawrence suggested that her failure was "possibly" the result of PTSD.

67. The Appellant repeated her claim that when she returned to Sri Lanka  in
2013 for a brief visit her assailant (Dr Lawrence used the word "boyfriend"-
 page 22 and 19/66) came and threatened her parents and she was afraid.

68. The Appellant talked of her family history  and  her  father's  accident
before she was born.  She explained that when  she  was  6  years  old  her
mother went to be a housekeeper in the Middle East and it was her  father's
relatives, particularly his parents who brought up the Appellant.

69. She then explained how she had been abused by a cousin when  she  was  8
or 9 years old.  She described the abuse as "it was kind of rape.  Four  or
five times, I'm not  sure".   Again  the  description  was  accompanied  by
hyperventilation of the type seen before.  The Appellant explained how  she
was something of a loner and had just two or three friends at her place  of
work and always wanted to stay away from people  and  wanted  to  be  alone
which Dr Lawrence described as  "highly  consistent  with  her  history  of
childhood sex abuse".

70. The Appellant talked about her relationship  with  her  boyfriend  which
was not  sexual  although  they  enjoyed  some  intimacies.  She  had  been
prescribed a very mild sleeping pill.

71. Dr Lawrence said that the Appellant:

  "was one of the most frightened and ashamed patients I have ever seen.  I
  do not think there is any doubt that she is suffering from PTSD and  that
  this is a  consequence  of  having  been  raped.   She  is  clearly  also
  traumatised by her experiences as a child."

72. The  report  shows  that  Dr  Lawrence  considered  the  possibility  of
malingering, not because it was suggested but because it  is  something  he
has to consider and discounted  it.   The  extreme  shame  was  a  powerful
diagnostic symptom  of  rape  and  other  physical  signs  indicated  post-
traumatic  stress  disorder  with  severe  secondary  depression.   He  was
concerned that the Appellant was not being treated appropriately (there was
no reason to think her medical advisors had been told much of  the  matters
that concerned Dr Lawrence) and he suggested certain things to be done.  He
said the treatment would not be  fully  effective  if  she  was  afraid  of
returning to the source of the threat.

73. He addressed his mind to the possibility of her taking her life  in  the
event of return to Sri Lanka.  He said that "she would be  placed  at  very
high risk if she were to be forcibly returned to Sri Lanka."

74. He then directed his mind specifically to questions asked by  the  legal
representatives.  I found questions 5 and 6 and their answers  particularly
illuminating.  I set them out below:

  "5.    The Home Office is proposing to remove  her  to  Sri  Lanka,  what
  would be your view of the likely impact to her mental health if this were
  to happen?

  This young woman  is  extremely  vulnerable.   She  experienced  maternal
  abandonment when  she  was  6.   An  older  cousin  sexually  abused  her
  repeatedly when she was 8 or 9.  She has always kept quiet, withdrawn and
  shy and this made her particularly vulnerable to rape at a  later  stage.
  She describes the rape very  clearly  and  she  describes  the  continued
  terror at meeting her assailant or any of his police cronies.   The  fear
  has generalised to everywhere and every authority/policeman in Sri Lanka.
   Therefore if she were to return to Sri Lanka in order to live, I  expect
  her  to  become  a  recluse  at  best.   Her  PTSD  would  certainly   be
  retriggered, her mental health  would  deteriorate  and  it  is  entirely
  possible that she could develop psychotic symptoms (paranoia, her  belief
  that she is being followed or stalked, hearing the voice of her assailant
  or other severe symptoms).  This has to be taken especially seriously  in
  view of the fact that her doctor in Sri Lanka called this  post-traumatic
  psychosis.

  'What is your knowledge, if any, of the services available in  Sri  Lanka
  and the likelihood of assessing the same?'

  Services are detailed in the body of my report.  It  is  highly  unlikely
  that she would access these services.  She  is  very  afraid  that  other
  people in Sri Lanka would know that she has been raped because she  feels
  extreme shame and she would not disclose her trauma."

75. Dealing with the question of suicide Dr Lawrence said:

  "She would be placed at very  high  risk  if  she  were  to  be  forcibly
  returned to Sri Lanka.  Even  the  act  of  treating  her  depression  is
  associated with an increased risk of suicide because of  an  increase  in
  the patient's  energy  levels.   Any  form  of  detention  is  definitely
  associated with increased risk of suicide."

76. There is an addendum to that report dated 3  August  2020  following  an
examination on 28 July 2020.

77. It seems that the Appellant is  receiving  benefiting  from  appropriate
medical treatment but is still far from well.  The Appellant still believed
that in the event of her return to Sri Lanka her assailant  would  want  to
hurt her and she was scared.

78. Additionally she said that her parents would want  her  to  go  into  an
arranged marriage and  she  did  not  want  that.   She  was  developing  a
relationship with a kind man in the United Kingdom.

79. The Appellant was vague about the degree of  physical  intimacy  between
her and her friend and I see no  reason  for  me  to  know  more  than  the
Appellant was able to say. What is clear, on the Appellant's case, is  that
she is not able to enjoy a relationship with a man of a kind that would  be
regarded by many people as ordinary and wholesome and there were  occasions
when she has "pulled away" from him,  which  behaviour  Dr  Lawrence  found
typical of a person who had been sexually abused.

80. The Appellant and her friend are not able to marry because of "the  visa
situation" (I think this means that neither of them has any clear right  to
be in the United Kingdom). They had planned a temple marriage but that  was
not possible during lockdown.

81. The Appellant was very concerned how she would be able to manage in  the
event of a return to Sri  Lanka.   Her  family  would  want  to  arrange  a
marriage for her which she did not want but she did not understand how  she
could live independently in Sri Lanka.

82. The  papers  served  on  the  Secretary  of  State  include  a  hospital
"diagnosis ticket" dated 27 September 2004 referring to a date of admission
of 19 September 2004 relating to the Appellant and recording lacerations to
her scalp, right and left elbows, chest  wall  and  elsewhere.   I  have  a
letter from the Appellant's mother in Sri Lanka dated  8  May  2018.   This
includes copies of her diary. The diary is said to be 2004 although  it  is
printed for 2000 and the printed date is  struck  out  and  overwritten  in
manuscript confirming hospital visits.  I set out the two  most  important
paragraphs from the letter:

  "My daughter left our country in the year 2009 because her lover  made  a
  lot of problem to her life by distrusting her.   He  has  threatened  her
  life by using cruel words and therefore she had to hide somewhere out  of
  our residence.  Further presently on and off he is threatening our family
  members by inquiring my daughter and he is saying when she comes  to  Sri
  Lanka he will kill her.  Therefore as a mother I am very scared about  my
  daughter's life.

  If my daughter comes to Sri Lanka, it will be  a  trouble  for  her  life
  again and also a problem for our family also.  There are no any  suitable
  protection for her life other than stay in your country."

83. There is also a letter from the Appellant's brother dated 11  May  2018.
He was very anxious that she was able to  speak  to  a  suitably  qualified
medical practitioner because he was doubtful about her ability to tell what
had happened.  He said that he had been looking after  her  in  the  United
Kingdom.  He had been looking after her in Sri Lanka when their mother  was
away working as a housemaid.  He was clearly fond of her and  said  he  was
like a father and mother to her, as well as a brother.  He referred  rather
obliquely to coming to understand  that  the  road  traffic  injuries  were
really involving her boyfriend.  He did not know the cause of the  injuries
when he was in Sri Lanka and it had only recently been  explained  to  him.
His sister was frightened of returning to Sri Lanka  and  he  feared  might
kill herself if she went.

84. Of particular interest is the letter  from  the  Sahana  Sevana  Medical
Centre dated 7 May 2018 and signed by a Dr W S Shanth.  Dr Shanth said  the
letter is to certify that the Appellant was taking treatment from him  from
2005 to 2008 and that she suffered from  severe  depression  "due  to  road
traffic accident and some  personal  issues"  and  he  referred  her  to  a
consultant psychiatrist.  There was then a letter dated  15  December  2004
from a medical centre signed by a doctor  saying  that  the  Appellant  had
"post-traumatic psychosis" after she met with a road  traffic  accident  in
September 2004.

85. I have considered Mr Martin's skeleton  argument  and  the  Reasons  for
Refusal Letter and the submissions of both Mr Martin and Ms Cunha.

86. I reject Mr Martin's contention that the Appellant case  is  capable  of
supporting a finding that she is a refugee.  She has identified  one  enemy
and that is a former lover who treated her badly and, she says, wants to do
her harm.  Mr Martin has  suggested  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a  group
identified as "people who  have  had  relationships  with  members  of  the
security forces".  He may be right that is a social group but, if her story
stands up to analysis, the Appellant claims  to  fear  violence  and  other
oppressive treatment at the hands of a personal enemy. Any  fear  that  she
might have or risk that she might run is solely because  of  that  personal
enemy and not because of membership of a particular social group.

87. Refugee protection is not there for people with  personal  problems  but
because they attract ill-treatment for things they are or believe.

88. Neither do I accept that the Appellant will be portrayed as an enemy  of
the state presumably by reason of untruthful representations by  reason  of
her assailant. I follow the argument that  the  Appellant's  assailant  has
sufficient status in the Special Police Force to somehow  "mark  her  card"
but the fact is that on her version of events he bore her a grievance  that
had not gone away but rather rekindled when she returned to Sri  Lanka  and
remains a threat now but she was  able  to  enter  and  leave  the  country
freely.  Even if that fear is well genuine it is not well founded.

89. I have re-checked Mr Martin's skeleton argument  and  my  notes  of  the
hearing to make quite sure that the Appellant was not relying on a risk  of
"honour killing" (to use a convenient but hideously  inappropriate  phrase)
because this suggestion does lurk in correspondence. This  was  not  argued
before me and I see no reason to think that it should have been.

90. That said I am impressed with Dr Lawrence's reports.  Ms Cunha is  right
that Dr Lawrence does not actually say in terms that the Appellant was  not
fit to give evidence but it was  clearly  going  to  be  a  very  traumatic
experience for her.  It is a matter of fact that I have not had the benefit
of hearing her cross-examined, but given her state and history, almost  any
adverse indicator could have been attributed to her state of health, rather
than her underlying integrity.  I certainly do not disbelieve her because I
have not heard her give evidence but the fact is that I have not  and  that
necessarily weakens her case.

91. I do accept that the Appellant was raped in the circumstances  that  she
explained.  The evidence that she has been subjected to  trauma  which  has
left a significant mark that was detected by Dr Lawrence is compelling.   I
give a great deal of weight to his observations about her  state  when  she
was recounting some of her story and his opinion  that  she  could  not  be
feigning the things that he saw.  She is a very upset woman.  If I may  say
so life has not been kind to her.  Her mother  left  her  when  she  was  a
little girl. Her mother no doubt acted for the most commendable of reasons.
 The Appellant's father was not able to earn a living and so her mother did
all that she could to earn money. She is not to be criticised  leaving  the
Appellant as a young child may well have made its mark.  I do not  need  to
know the details but I accept that she did have sexual experiences with her
close relatives when she was a child she ought not to have  had.   Again  I
accept Dr Lawrence's evidence about how her behaviour now,  as  a  "loner",
fits in with his expert expectations about  how  a  victim  of  such  abuse
should behave. That, coupled with his expert observations about her extreme
physical reaction to telling her story persuades me that the  Appellant  is
truthful and substantially reliable in her account of past trauma.

92. I also found the Appellant's account of  slowly  developing  a  trusting
and then loving relationship with a person who raped her to have been  told
powerfully.  I concentrated on what was said to the Secretary of  State  in
answer to questions in interview because that had the  advantage  of  being
unfiltered by anyone who may have had any desire to present it in the  best
possible  light.   The  story  of  a  woman  sexually   inexperienced   and
disinterested or reluctant to involve in sexual activity and a partner  who
had different intentions and, perhaps,  expectations,  and  was  profoundly
disappointed and angry when she would not cooperate is, I suspect, familiar
to all but the most inexperienced lawyers and others. There is an  inherent
plausibility about that part of her story.  Further there is clear evidence
that she was indeed admitted to hospital after a motorbike accident  and  I
find the deliberately vague reference to "personal matters" in one  of  the
medical notes to be significant.  It does not obviously  refer  to  sprains
and bruising from falling off a motorcycle although  she  clearly  did  and
that was a convenient excuse for a lot of distress. I am entirely persuaded
that something else happened to her that was very horrible and  should  not
have happened and has done her damage.

93. I further accept that the Appellant has a close  relationship  with  her
brother and family in the United Kingdom and when she came  to  the  United
Kingdom as a student she wanted to look to her brother for support  as  she
had done as a child and beyond.  This is not in any way  inconsistent  with
the genuine desire to study and I am not suggesting she was not entitled to
entry as a student but she wanted away from Sri Lanka and with her  brother
and that remains the case.

94. However, I do not accept the Appellant's claim  that  her  assailant  is
looking out for her in Sri Lanka.  There is actually little  evidence  that
that is so.  She has little or no direct evidence of that and  such  direct
evidence as there is from her mother is decidedly thin.

95. Clearly the Appellant was not expecting problems when  she  returned  to
Sri Lanka.  Although it is very human and understandable that she wanted to
see her parents, she was not going back in anticipation of it being a  last
visit or something as compelling as that.  She would not have gone back  if
she had had a reason to suspect that  she  would  be  sought  out  for  bad
reasons.

96. It just makes no sense to me that a person who had  had  a  relationship
with her many years before that was unhappy would want to be a nuisance  to
her.  He might at the time have wanted to frighten her to  protect  himself
from the complaints and if that was his intention he succeeded.   It  might
suit his purposes very well that she is out of Sri Lanka but her  returning
would not be a reason to frighten her but a reason to keep right out of the
way.  It is not a case of him pestering her after the attack until she  had
to leave the country.  The story was not told that way.

97. I remind myself that the standard of proof is low and  that  bad  people
do not necessarily behave in a way that I or any other judge would consider
rational and I recognise the Appellant's genuine fear of being returned.

98. I also find that the Secretary of State was right  when  she  contrasted
the clear and, I found, extremely  persuasive  account  of  her  developing
relationship with her vagueness about her then partner's job  and  role  in
the police.  The part of the story necessary to show there was a continuing
risk was much less persuasively told  than  the  part  of  the  story  that
established there was a seriously unpleasant and criminal  incident.  I  am
not diminishing the seriousness of what happened.  I do not accept that the
Appellant is at risk from her former friend in the event of her  return,  I
find that part of the evidence to be untrue.

99. Little has been said about alternative arrangements  within  Sri  Lanka.
I have seen nothing to show that the police are completely unaccountable so
that effective protection is unavailable if there is a kernel of  truth  in
her story but I do not accept there is a kernel in truth in  that  part  of
her story.

100. What we are left with then is a  damaged  woman  happy  in  the  United
Kingdom and does not want to return to Sri Lanka  where  her  circumstances
would be difficult.  She clearly wants to develop  a  relationship  with  a
person in the United Kingdom but she would not give details about that.   I
do not criticise her for that because I do not know the reasons;  they  may
be deeply personal; they may be cynically tactical.  I  do  not  know;  the
fact is I am not told about that relationship except that it is there and I
cannot give much thought or weight to it.

101. I do accept that the Appellant would be under some pressure  to  marry.
She is not a youngster and her parents are ageing and want her to be  happy
and settled.  This is  not  a  case  where  there  is  a  risk  of  "forced
marriage", it was not argued that way  nor  made  out.  The  understandable
social and personal pressure does not amount to something the entitles  her
to remain in the United Kingdom.

102. I am very aware of the need for suitable  medical  treatment  for  this
Appellant and particularly of Dr Lawrence's  concerns  that  removal  could
cause her to take her own life. However I do not accept that the  Appellant
would not get proper medical treatment. As  indicated,  the  Appellant  has
produced  evidence  that  a  mental  health  problem  was   diagnosed   and
arrangements made to see a consultant  in  Sri  Lanka  and  the  background
evidence shows that she can be treated in Sri Lanka.

103. I accept that the Appellant has a  subjective  fear  or  returning.   I
noted that Dr Lawrence referred to a risk of the Appellant feeling that she
was being followed or pursued even if that was not rationally so.  She  has
not established a well-founded fear and she has not shown that  her  needed
for mental health treatment cannot be met. She has not shown  that  removal
would be contrary to her rights under article 3 of the European  Convention
on Human Rights.

104. I appreciate that the Article 8 balancing exercise is generally  easier
to resolve in an appellant's  favour  but  this  Appellant  has  no  strong
"private and family life". I do not know enough about her relationship with
her present partner to make clear findings. I accept that her  relationship
with her brother is probably at the "family life" end of the  "private  and
family life continuum. Certainly there is strong emotional support for  her
in that relationship but she has no leave to be in the United  Kingdom  and
it is in the public interest to maintain immigration control.

105. There are not very serious obstacles in the way of  reintegration  into
life in Sri Lanka. Her parents are there. It is her country of  nationality
and medical treatment is available.

106. She speaks adequate English and has the wit  to  earn  her  living  but
these are not weighty points in the balancing exercise.

107. Case such as this are difficult.  I do  not  accept  the  Secretary  of
State's version that the Appellant is a dishonest woman  in  every  respect
whose story is to be swept aside as self-serving nonsense.  I find that she
has had a very traumatic experience in life and that has  damaged  her  and
she remains damaged and wants to settle with  her  brother  in  the  United
Kingdom who has long been her friend and supporter.

108. I do not accept that she is at risk now of serious  ill-treatment  even
if she thinks she is and I do not accept she needs international protection
of any kind.  It follows therefore that I dismiss this appeal.



Notice of Decision

109. I dismiss this appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 26 May 2021                    |



