
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/04137/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 5 June 2017                       |On: 17 August 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                   MR A N
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr N Avery of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Albania born on [ ] 1998. His  application
   for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  under  paragraph  336  of  the
   Immigration Rules HC 395 was refused including his claim for humanitarian
   protection pursuant to paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
   appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  was  dismissed  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker on 12 October 2016.


2. Permission to appeal was at first refused by the first-tier  Tribunal  on
   17 November  2016  and  subsequently  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   McWilliam on 14 March 2017 stating that it was arguable  that  the  judge
   erred in respect of sufficiency of protection  in  light  of  the  expert
   evidence provided by the appellant.


3. Thus, the appeal came before me.


4. The Judge in his decision made the following findings which I  summarise.
   The appellant's claim is that he lived in Albania with  his  family,  his
   parents and three younger sisters aged 13, 11,  and  3.  The  appellant's
   father was abusive towards him. He forced him to work  in  various  jobs.
   When he was 12 years old, he worked in a  mine  for  some  two  or  three
   months. When he was 13 or 14 he was made to work in a car wash  and  when
   aged 14, he worked as a waiter. All the jobs were found by his father who
   forced him to take them.


5. His father prevented him from going to school and made him  work  against
   his will. When he refused to work and told his father that he  wanted  to
   go to school, he was beaten by him. His father  would  threaten  him  and
   tell him that he would not be allowed to eat in the house  and  would  be
   kicked out if he did not do as he was told.


6. The appellant did not go to the police to complain because he was  afraid
   of his father. The appellant continued to study until he  was  15  or  16
   years old and was forced to work  when  he  was  not  at  school  and  at
   weekends he had to work until 7 PM.


7. About 10 days before he left Albania, the  appellant  skipped  work.  The
   owner of the business spoke to the appellant's father who beat  him.  The
   appellant left the house and went to stay with  friends  and  decided  to
   leave Albania. He left Albania with a friend and they travelled  together
   from Hungary to Belgium where they stayed for  approximately  one  month.
   They then managed to get on a lorry to the United Kingdom. The  appellant
   fears his father who beat and  forced  him  to  work  whilst  taking  his
   earnings. He also feels that his father could kill him.


8. It has been accepted by the respondent that the  appellant  falls  within
   the definition of a victim of trafficking. The NRM decision  made  on  29
   March 2016 concluded that the appellant was a victim of human trafficking
   or slavery,  servitude,  or  forced/compulsory  labour.  The  appellant's
   circumstances demonstrate  that  his  trafficking  constituted  of  being
   forced to work by a violent father and to  become  the  only  breadwinner
   whilst still a teenager. The appellant was not trafficked  to  any  third
   party or by any criminal gang or away from his home area.  The  appellant
   has been a child victim of parental domestic abuse.


9. The first issue is whether the appellant is  a  member  of  a  particular
   social group and while some victims of trafficking are considered  to  be
   members of a particular social group where the trafficking has  been  for
   the purpose of criminality and is dealt with in the case of SB Moldova CG
   [2008] UKAIT 00002. It is not accepted that the appellant  together  with
   others in similar positions have a distinct identity in Albanian  society
   and which is perceived as being different to that of surrounding society.
   The appellant is aged 17 and will be 18 in two months' time. He presented
   as a fit, healthy and mature young man. He looked  more  mature  than  17
   years of age. In the circumstances, the appellant is not a  member  of  a
   particular social group and as such is not entitled to the protection  of
   the 1951 Convention.


10. The second issue  to  determine  is  whether  the  appellant  should  be
   granted humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.  The  only  person
   that the appellant fears is father in Albania. It is  not  accepted  that
   his father will be able to find him as  claimed  by  the  appellant.  The
   appellant's evidence is that his father was a poor man, out of  work  and
   who relied upon the appellant's  part-time  earnings.  This  is  not  the
   profile of a person with influence and the ability to find the  appellant
   in other parts of Albania. The appellant would not be at risk in any  way
   from his father anywhere in Albania other than perhaps in  his  immediate
   home area. Given the appellant's  profile  as  a  mature  young  man  who
   settled well with his foster carer, attending college as well as being  a
   member of a boxing club,  it  is  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  is
   intrinsically vulnerable to being re-trafficked. He  was  only  used  and
   abused by his own father and was never involved in  any  criminality.  As
   long as he does not return to his home area then I do not believe he will
   be at risk.


11. The expert report by Christine Beddoe has been considered who based  her
   report on relevant written evidence but did not meet the  appellant.  The
   expert details the objective information and situation in  Albania  about
   trafficking. She deals with  the  more  serious  aspects  of  trafficking
   including  international  trafficking,  criminality,   prostitution   and
   pornography.


12. The appellant was thankfully not involved or forced to  be  involved  in
   these much more serious aspects of trafficking. The expert deals with the
   appellant's mental health concerns  but  it  is  noted  that  he  is  not
   receiving, nor has requested any treatment for  any  physical  or  mental
   ailments. The only reference is from his foster carer, who suggested that
   the appellant ought to see a counsellor but this  was  something  decided
   against by the appellant  himself.  The  appellant  is  not  seeking  any
   treatment for health in  the  United  Kingdom  where  such  treatment  is
   readily available than it is believed he will not need it in Albania.


13. There is sufficiency of protection for the  appellant  in  Albania.  The
   appellant can avoid his father in his home area and could  avail  himself
   of the protection afforded by the authorities and the police even if  the
   efficiency standards fall far short of the standards found in the  United
   Kingdom there nevertheless is an  operating  judicial  police  system  in
   Albania. The appellant has  not  demonstrated  that  the  authorities  in
   Albania would be unable to or unwilling to offer  him  protection  if  he
   sought it. In respect of the appellant's accommodation in  Albania  as  a
   minor, there is evidence of help and assistance being available with  one
   State run shelter and three others, operated by NGOs.


14. The appellant has shown himself  resourceful  enough  to  travel  across
   Europe to the United Kingdom. He has travelled through  Kosovo,  Hungary,
   Germany and Belgium. He has travelled through countries where he does not
   speak the language whereas if he returned to Albania  he  would  have  no
   problems with the language and culture. The appellant is  still  a  minor
   but he will be removed to Albania when he is an  adult.  The  appellant's
   appeal for humanitarian protection was dismissed.


15. At the hearing, I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
   there is an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


   Decision as to whether there is an error of law.

16. I have  given  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and have taken into  account  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
   documentary evidence provided by the appellant. The gist of  the  grounds
   of appeal is that the Judge  did  not  take  into  account  the  expert's
   opinion about sufficiency of protection.


17. The appellant claims to have  been  a  victim  of  trafficking  and  the
   Council of Europe Convention  on  Action  against  Trafficking  in  Human
   Beings applies to him. If she is or has been a victim of trafficking,  he
   may be entitled to a temporary renewable  residence  permit  and  may  be
   entitled to other assistance  from  the  United  Kingdom  authorities  as
   decreed by law. The appellant claims that he fled Albania and came to the
   United Kingdom travelling through various European  countries  to  escape
   his abusive father who would make him work when he was not studying.


18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge took all the  evidence  into  account  and
   found that the appellant does not belong to a particular social group and
   this finding is without arguable error.


19. The Judge correctly identified that the only person that  the  appellant
   fears is  his  father  in  Albania.  He  correctly  identified  that  the
   appellant was not a victim of gangs or of being  trafficked  outside  the
   country. The Judge found that the appellant  was  a  victim  of  domestic
   abuse and forced labour by his  father  who  lived  off  the  appellant's
   earnings from his part-time work because his father did not  work.  There
   is no error of law or fact in this finding. The Judge particularly  noted
   that the appellant also went to school and was only required to work part-
   time.


20. The Judge further identified that the appellant  could  relocate  within
   Albania away from the area where his  father  lives.  He  also  correctly
   found that the appellant's father is a poor man, out of work and  without
   influence and would not be able to find the appellant if he returned  and
   lived in another area of  Albania.  The  Judge  further  noted  that  the
   appellant will be an adult when he returns to Albania  and  therefore  no
   longer a vulnerable child who would be at the mercy of his father or  any
   other adult. The Judge found that the appellant is a mature young man who
   has been able to travel to different countries where  he  does  not  even
   know the language or the culture. The Judge found that the  appellant  on
   his return to Albania, would be familiar with the language  and  culture.
   These findings are on the evidence before  the  Judge  and  there  is  no
   perversity in the conclusions that he drew from the evidence.


21. The Judge considered the expert report and said that  the  expert  talks
   about background evidence of a more serious  type  of  trafficking  which
   involves criminality and being trafficked outside the country. The  Judge
   was entitled to find that the appellant's father who forced him to  work,
   for the family to live of his earnings, is not  at  the  serious  end  of
   trafficking.


22. The Judge notes that the expert did  not  meet  the  appellant  and  her
   expert report  is  more  concerned  with  the  more  serious  trafficking
   including  international  trafficking,   criminality   prostitution   and
   pornography. The Judge correctly noted that this did  not  apply  to  the
   appellant. The Judge did consider the expert report and there is no merit
   in the argument that he did not. He was entitled to  place  the  reliance
   that he did on the  expert  report  and  gave  adequate  reasons  in  the
   decision.


23. The Judge also considered that there was sufficiency of  protection  for
   the appellant in Albania. The Judge found  that  the  appellant  did  not
   report his father to the authorities but ran away to the United  Kingdom.
   He considered the appellant's explanation for why he did not  report  his
   father to the police which was that he  was  scared  of  him.  The  Judge
   considered that when he was in Albania, he was a child but now that he is
   an adult he can avail himself of the protection  of  the  authorities  in
   Albania. This is consistent with Judge's finding that the appellant is  a
   mature individual who has managed to travel through various countries  to
   come to the United Kingdom as a child. There is no material error in this
   finding that the appellant who will  be  an  adult  when  he  returns  to
   Albania will not be at risk of being re-trafficked given that he  is  not
   vulnerable and was only a victim of forced labour by his father  to  feed
   his family because his father was not employed.


24. The evidence before the Judge was also that  the  appellant  did  go  to
   school as well as working part-time which is not entirely consistent with
   the appellant's claim that he was forced to work with he wanted to study.
   The appellant claims that he ran away to the United  Kingdom  because  he
   did not want to work and his father threatened him that he will not  eat,
   and be thrown out of the house. If the appellant had run away to  another
   part of Albania, he would have achieved the same result.  The  Judge  did
   not find credible that  the  appellant's  father  had  any  resources  or
   influence to find the appellant in another part  of  Albania.  These  are
   sustainable findings on the evidence before the Judge.

25.  I  find  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  and  required  to  reach  his
   conclusions based on the evidence in determining the appellant's  appeal.
   The Judge has taken into account all the evidence including  the  medical
   and expert evidence. The Judge found that despite the  appellant's  claim
   that  he  has  a  medical  condition,  he  has  not  sought  any  medical
   intervention in this country where it is available and therefore will not
   need it on his return to Albania. I find there is nothing unreasonable or
   perverse in the conclusions reached by the Judge. I find on the  evidence
   in this  appeal,  no  differently  constituted  Tribunal  would  reach  a
   different conclusion.

26. I find that there is no material error of law in respect of the  Judge's
   findings that the appellant cannot be  recognised  as  a  refugee  or  be
   granted humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is dismissed

Anonymity direction has been made

There can be no fee award in this case


      Dated this 19th day of July 2017

Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Mrs S Chana

