
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04819/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2019                           |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     Y M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the case involves protection issues. I find that it  is  appropriate
to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr P. Anderson, instructed by Virgo Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 29  March  2018
    to refuse a protection and human rights claim.


2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 31 August 2018. The judge  summarised  the
    appellant's immigration history and the basis of her  protection  claim
    [2-4]. He went on to summarise the respondent's reasons for refusal [5-
    6]. The judge summarised the evidence given by  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing and the submissions made by the legal representatives [7-11].


3.    The judge outlined the correct  burden  and  standard  of  proof  [13]
    before going on to  make  his  findings.  He  bore  in  mind  that  the
    appellant was not required to provide corroborating evidence  and  that
    the evidence must be considered in the round [16]. He reminded  himself
    of the low  standard  of  proof.  He  considered  that  the  "objective
    evidence shows that there have been prolonged protests in Ethiopia over
    the political, economic, social and cultural conditions in which people
    have to live. Unfortunately, these  are  met  with  arbitrary  arrests,
    torture and ill-treatment by the authorities..." [17]. The  judge  went
    on to give the following three reasons for rejecting the credibility of
    the appellant's account "among the many discrepancies identified by the
    respondent":


    (i)    He did not accept the appellant's  explanation  for  failing  to
         claim asylum at the earliest opportunity in a  safe  third  country
         i.e. France. He rejected her claim that she was under  the  control
         of the agent because she said in interview that she was not  afraid
         of the agent [19].


    (ii)   The judge found that it was  implausible  that  the  appellant's
         father would have been able to continue work as a  teacher  if  his
         son was suspected of activities with PG7 or Ginbot 7. He noted that
         the appellant claimed that her brother was arrested as long ago  as
         November 2013. He found that it "seems highly  unlikely  that,  for
         example, the appellant's brother's wife would  have  been  able  to
         live in Ethiopia  following  the  arrest  of  her  brother  by  the
         authorities." [20].


    (iii)  The judge also found the appellant's account of  having  escaped
         from custody inherently implausible. He found that it was  unlikely
         that she would be able to escape on payment of a bribe if  she  had
         been arrested because of her brother's activities [21].


4.    The judge was not satisfied, even on the low standard of  proof,  that
    "the events the appellant says  took  place  in  fact  took  place  and
    believe that [they]  are  internally  inconsistent  as  stated  by  the
    respondent and that this severely damages the appellant's credibility."
    [22]. Having already rejected her account of  past  events,  the  judge
    went on to consider the evidence relating to  the  appellant's  claimed
    activities for PG7 in the UK. He was not satisfied  that  the  evidence
    showed that the appellant had been active for PG7 in the UK or that her
    profile was such that it was likely to have come to  the  attention  of
    the Ethiopian authorities [23-24].


5.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:


      i) The judge erred in attaching undue weight to his own opinion of the
         plausibility  of  the  appellant's  account  without  reference  to
         background evidence: HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 referred.


    (ii)   The judge erred by  starting  his  credibility  assessment  with
         reference to section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of
         Claimants etc.) Act 2004 ("the AITC Act 2004")


    (iii)  The judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  credibility
         findings.


6.    Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  granted  permission  to  appeal  in  the
    following terms:


         "2.      Grounds 1 and 3 are arguable. First, it  is  arguable,  on
             the basis of the grounds, that the judge placed undue reliance
             upon the implausibility of her account when not accepting  the
             truth of [that] account. It is arguable that the reasoning  is
             not objectively sustainable. Secondly, the judge arguably does
             not clearly identify the  inconsistencies  relied  on  by  the
             respondent and give adequate reasons for accepting them.


         3. Ground 2 is not arguable. The judge properly dealt with  s.8  of
             the  2004  Act  at  [19].  He  was  entitled  to  regard   the
             appellant's failure to claim asylum in France as  damaging  of
             her credibility."


Decision and reasons


7.    After having considered the grounds  of  appeal  and  the  submissions
    made by both parties I conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error of law.


8.    It was open to the judge to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant did not claim asylum in a  safe  third  country,  but  it  is
    unclear what weight he placed on this issue given that it did not go to
    the core elements of her account of past events:  see  SM  (Section  8:
    Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116.


9.    It is unclear on what basis the judge concluded that  the  credibility
    of the appellant's account was undermined by the fact that  her  father
    was able to continue working as a teacher and that her  brother's  wife
    could remain in Ethiopia after his alleged arrest. The judge noted that
    the background evidence showed that political opposition was  met  with
    arbitrary  arrests,  torture  and  ill-treatment   by   the   Ethiopian
    authorities but that does not lead to the  inexorable  conclusion  that
    all family members  of  those  who  are  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities must be at risk in order for the appellant's account to  be
    found credible. The appellant only had to  prove  her  case  to  a  low
    standard of proof.  No  assessment  was  made  as  to  whether  it  was
    plausible that the appellant's brother  might  have  been  arrested  as
    claimed in light of the background evidence. The fact that  her  father
    and her brother's wife did not appear to have  had  problems  might  be
    relevant but was not necessarily determinative given the  low  standard
    of proof.


10.    The  third  reason  given  for  rejecting  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's account of past evidence was the  "inherent  improbability"
    of her account of having escaped from custody. Again, this  appears  to
    have been drawn from the judge's own view of what was plausible without
    reference to whether it might be plausible to be released from  custody
    on payment of a bribe in context of the conditions in Ethiopia. In Y  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 Lord Justice Keene emphasised  that  a  judge
    "must look through the spectacles provided by the  information  he  has
    about conditions in the country in question."


11.   Even if those  findings  were  open  to  the  judge  to  make,  it  is
    concerning that there is no balanced analysis of whether there was  any
    evidence to support  the  appellant's  claim.  The  judge  adopted  the
    reasons  given  in  the  decision  letter  without  analysing  them  or
    considering whether the appellant's response to those points adequately
    addressed them. At [22] the judge concluded that he was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant had given a credible account of events before  going
    on to consider the evidence relating to her claimed activities  in  the
    UK. The evidence of her activities in the UK should have formed part of
    a holistic assessment of all the evidence before coming to  a  balanced
    conclusion about the credibility of her account.


12.   While some of  the  findings  clearly  were  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to make, others relied unduly on the judge's own view  of  the
    plausibility of the account without assessing whether it was  plausible
    in the context of the background evidence  relating  to  Ethiopia.  The
    First-tier Tribunal failed to consider whether there was  any  evidence
    that might support the appellant's  account.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    adopted the reasons for refusal  without  considering  the  appellant's
    response. For these reasons, I conclude that the  credibility  findings
    did not  follow  a  sufficiently  structured  approach:  see  KB  &  AH
    (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 00491.

13.   The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a
    point of law. The nature and extent of any judicial fact finding  which
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such that, having regard to the overriding objective, it is appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION


The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
      of law


The decision is set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      fresh hearing




Signed   [pic]   Date 28 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




