

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/04234/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons            |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 04 September 2017                  |       On 11 September 2017          |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms Z. Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Mr J. Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
original appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
direction applies both to the original appellant and  to  the  Secretary  of
State.






                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  19
    April  2017  to  refuse  a  protection  and  human  rights  claim.  The
    respondent rejected the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  of
    abduction by Al Shabaab because of a number of inconsistencies  in  the
    dates and his description of the events. She concluded that it would be
    reasonable for the appellant to relocate to Mogadishu.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge T. Jones ("the judge")  allowed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated  on  27  June  2017.  His  findings  were  as
    follows:

              "33.     On the  totality  of  the  evidence  before  me,  and
                 applying  the  appropriate  standard,  I  find   that   the
                 Appellant is credible in connection with  the  events  from
                 2009 and 2010, though the Respondent, I find, is  right  to
                 reflect upon the differing estimates of date or  time  that
                 the Appellant has given variously  as  to  when  the  first
                 event occurred and then for how long he was detained before
                 the Appellant was able to escape.
                34.    I am prepared to accept the account  that  an  escape
                 was engineered, though it may well have been facilitated by
                 way of payment of a bribe, the circumstances of  which  the
                 Appellant  is,  seemingly,  in   ignorance   of.   To   the
                 appropriate standard though, I am prepared  to  accept  the
                 Appellant's lack of education and how he struggles even  to
                 this day with basic maths, to be a truthful account  an  in
                 all of the  circumstances,  allowing  for  the  appropriate
                 standard and the length of the interview time (9am to 4pm),
                 I am prepared to find for him.
                35.    Equally, there is a criticism that he has  failed  to
                 mention  the  second  event  of  2010  in   his   screening
                 interview, but I do note  the  contents  of  paragraph  4.1
                 thereof which is an exhortation to  an  Appellant  to  keep
                 matters brief. The Appellant has understood that  he  would
                 be able to explain things further and in more detail in  an
                 interview which he had anticipated might take place over  a
                 period of some two hours.
                36.    At  the  time  and  events  in  question,  background
                 material would suggest that they  support  the  Appellant's
                 claim in terms of abduction and an attack on  his  property
                 as claimed, and applying the appropriate standard, though I
                 consider the two paragraphs the respondent  has  placed  in
                 the  Refusal  Letter  as   to   the   Appellant's   claimed
                 mistreatment at the hands  of  rogue  officials  in  Kenya,
                 applying the appropriate standard, I am  prepared  to  find
                 for the Appellant in all of the circumstances of his claim.
                 37.   That  said,  much  has  changed  since  then  and  Al
                 Shabaab is no longer the force  or  presence  that  it  was
                 considered to be. Mr Collins has wisely reflected upon this
                 with his instructing solicitors, and  has  certainly  said,
                 they do not seek to distinguish MOJ even  though  there  is
                 further information instance at the hands of Al Shabaab  in
                 Mogadishu as recently as the end of May 2017 in the  public
                 domain.
                      38.    What  is  in  essence  here,  I  find,  is  the
                 question of whether or not the appellant could relocate  to
                 Mogadishu, as has been claimed. I have contrasted paragraph
                 50 onwards in  the  Refusal  Letter  with  the  appellant's
                 response, a detailed  response  at  that,  in  his  witness
                 statement at paragraphs 21 to 34. Therein  the  paragraphs,
                 certainly from the headnote as drawn to my attention by  Mr
                 Collins in his closing submissions, are expanded upon  with
                 some care and clarity.
                      39.      For  my  part  in  carrying  out  a  detailed
                 assessment of the Appellant's individual  circumstances,  I
                 find he does not have a support network in  Mogadishu;  his
                 family has long since fled  from  Somalia.  I  accept  that
                 which he has claimed as regards his aunt  being  unable  to
                 assist him financially, such that he faces the prospect  of
                 return to Mogadishu, not in fear of clan  violence  but  in
                 fear  of  destitution  and  in  all  likelihood,   to   the
                 appropriate standard, placement in an IDP  camp.  I  accept
                 the Appellant has no  ties  to  Mogadishu  or  transferable
                 skills and in light of this, and for the  reasons  outlined
                 in  his  detailed  witness  statement  and   the   succinct
                 submission made by Mr Collins, I find that return  for  the
                 Appellant in these circumstances would  render  the  United
                 Kingdom to be liable to breach its  obligations  under  the
                 1950 Convention Article 3, or that return at this time  for
                 the Appellant, as is proposed, is  unreasonable  or  unduly
                 harsh."

4.    The Secretary of State argues that the judge made bare statements  and
    that he accepted the appellant's  account  without  providing  evidence
    based reasons for his findings. The judge failed  to  explain  why  the
    appellant's evidence in his witness  statement  was  accepted  and  the
    reasons given in the decision letter for refusing the application  were
    rejected. The Secretary of State relied on the decision in MK (duty  to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641. The headnote states:

               (1)      It  is  axiomatic  that  a  determination  discloses
                 clearly the reasons for a tribunal's decision.
                      (2)     If  a  tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be
                 implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be
                 worth no weight whatsoever, it is necessary to  say  so  in
                 the determination and for such findings to be supported  by
                 reasons. A bare statement that a witness was  not  believed
                 or that a document was afforded no weight  is  unlikely  to
                 satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

5.    The Secretary of State also  relies  on  the  decision  in  Budhathoki
    (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  00341.  The  headnote  states:




            It  is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier
            Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised  in
            a case. This  leads  to  judgments  becoming  overly  long  and
            confused and is not a proportionate approach to deciding cases.
            It is, however, necessary for judges to  identify  and  resolve
            key conflicts in the evidence and explain in  clear  and  brief
            terms their reasons, so that the  parties  can  understand  why
            they have won or lost.

6.    On behalf of the  appellant  it  is  argued  that  the  findings  were
    adequate. The judge outlined  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for
    refusal in the decision letter and took it into  account.  The  central
    issue was return to Mogadishu in the context of paragraph (xii) of  the
    headnote in MOJ & Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT
    442. Even if the judge had not given sufficient reasons in relation  to
    the appellant's core account of abduction by Al  Shabaab,  his  reasons
    for finding that the appellant would be  at  risk  of  Article  3  ill-
    treatment in Mogadishu were sustainable. He contrasted the  appellant's
    witness statement with the reasons for refusal letter. It was  open  to
    the judge to find that he had no support network in Mogadishu and  that
    his other relatives abroad were not able to provide him with  financial
    support. The judge was not required to make findings on each and  every
    aspect of the evidence.

Decision and reasons

7.    Having considered the grounds of appeal and the  submissions  made  by
    both parties I find that there  is  some  force  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's argument that the judge failed to give  sufficient  reasons  to
    explain why he accepted the appellant's  account  of  the  core  events
    relating to persecution by Al Shabaab, which  was  an  issue  that  was
    disputed in the decision letter.

8.     Paragraphs  33-36  of  the  decision  contain  the  judge's  findings
    relating to the key aspects of the appellant's account. The reasons why
    the judge accepted the account appeared to be: (i) he accepted that the
    appellant's lack of education might mean that he struggles  to  provide
    accurate dates; (ii) he accepted that failure  to  mention  the  second
    incident in 2010 in the  screening  interview  did  not  undermine  the
    credibility of his  account  because  of  the  limited  nature  of  the
    interview; and (iii) the appellant's  account  was  broadly  consistent
    with the background evidence.

9.    Although the judge  acknowledged  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    "right to reflect upon the differing estimates of date or  time"  there
    is  no  analysis  of  the  other  credibility  issues  raised  by   the
    respondent, which included an allegation that the appellant  had  given
    differing descriptions of the place he was held and the way in which he
    escaped.  I  note  that  the  appellant  prepared  a  detailed  witness
    statement responding to the reasons for refusal. The judge  made  clear
    that he had considered that statement. However, what  is  missing  from
    the relevant paragraphs of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is  any
    analysis of the reasons for refusal and any reasons to explain why  the
    judge was willing to accept the appellant's  account  of  events.  Some
    credibility issues raised in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  might
    reasonably be explained by the appellant's lack of education,  but  not
    all of the credibility issues were explained by his lack of  education.
    These were matters that needed  to  be  considered  and  resolved  with
    adequate reasoning. I conclude that this aspect of the decision  lacked
    the level of reasoning required given the credibility issues raised  in
    the decision letter.

10.   It is argued on behalf of the appellant  that,  even  if  the  judge's
    reasoning in respect of the account of past  persecution  was  lacking,
    his reasons for concluding that the appellant would face Article 3 ill-
    treatment as a minority  clan  member  without  a  support  network  in
    Mogadishu are sustainable. In relation to this aspect of the  case  the
    judge made clear that he had considered the reasons for refusal and the
    appellant's detailed response [38].

11.   In interview, the appellant was asked  a  large  number  of  questions
    about the location of various  family  members.  It  appears  that  the
    respondent accepted the appellant's evidence regarding the location  of
    family members in the decision letter [49].  The  evidence  before  the
    respondent at the date when the decision was  made  was  outdated.  The
    interview took place in 2015 and the letter from the appellant's  legal
    representatives referred to in [49] of the decision letter was dated 06
    March 2015. The credibility of the appellant's evidence  regarding  the
    location of various family members did not appear to  be  a  matter  in
    dispute.

12.   The appellant updated the position in the detailed  witness  statement
    prepared for the hearing. In 2015, the only family  member  he  had  in
    Mogadishu was a sister, who he said was divorced and was struggling  to
    survive [qu.406-408 interview]. He said that she could not even support
    herself [qu.414]. In his statement the  appellant  said  that  she  had
    passed away [18]. His evidence at the hearing was that he did not  have
    any  relatives  or  connections  in  Mogadishu  [20].  The  appellant's
    evidence on this issue did not appear to be disputed by the  respondent
    at the hearing.  Instead,  it  was  suggested  that  he  had  relatives
    elsewhere who might be in a position to  provide  financial  assistance
    [25].

13.   It seems clear that the judge was referred to evidence  to  show  that
    the appellant's aunt in the USA was reliant on social security payments
    and was not in a position  to  provide  financial  support  if  he  was
    removed to Mogadishu [20 & 29]. Similar evidence was produced  relating
    to his siblings in the UK. Although the judge  could  have  given  more
    detailed reasons to explain his conclusions  at  paragraph  39  of  the
    decision, I find that this is not fatal to his findings given that  the
    credibility of the appellant's account of the whereabouts of his family
    members did not appear to be in dispute. The fact  that  his  remaining
    family members outside Somalia could not afford  to  provide  him  with
    financial support was sufficiently supported by evidence.

14.   In circumstances where the respondent accepted that the  appellant  is
    from a minority clan, and that his home area is Brava, I find  that  it
    was open to the judge to accept the appellant's evidence that he had no
    support network in Mogadishu. Regardless  of  the  judge's  failure  to
    provide sufficient reasons to explain  his  findings  relating  to  the
    appellant's account of persecution  by  Al  Shabaab,  the  Home  Office
    County  Information  and  Guidance  on  Minority  Groups  (March  2015)
    indicated that minority groups in south and central Somali  are  likely
    to face discriminatory treatment  and  human  rights  abuses  including
    harassment and violence  as  well  as  looting  of  land  and  property
    [1.3.9]. In light of the background evidence, any  errors  relating  to
    the appellant's core account of events in Brava  were  unlikely  to  be
    material because, as correctly identified, the key issue was whether it
    would be unduly harsh or amount to a breach of human rights  to  remove
    the appellant to Mogadishu.

15.   In respect of those findings, I conclude that  the  judge's  reasoning
    was adequate in the circumstances  outlined  above.  I  conclude  that,
    despite the error of law relating to lack of  sufficient  reasoning  in
    paragraphs 33-37 of the decision, the error was  not  material  to  the
    overall outcome of the appeal. For the reasons given above, I  conclude
    that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making  of  a
    material error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a material error on  a
point of law


Signed

[pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Canavan
Date 11 September 2017

