
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
pa/04377/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 March 2019                         |On 16 April 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    KCDK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel instructed by Pasha Law
                    Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because she is an asylum seeker and, as such, is entitled to
    privacy and because publicity could itself create a risk.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of the Philippines against the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse her  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 3. It was  made  perfectly  clear  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    although nothing was abandoned the real thrust of  the  appeal  lay  in
    Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   It  was  the
    appellant's  case  that  removing  her  would  be  a   disproportionate
    interference with her private and family life.  An  essential  part  of
    that reasoning  but  by  no  means  the  whole  of  the  case  was  her
    relationship with a British citizen who is some 30 years or thereabouts
    her senior.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any findings on that relationship.
     It might be thought that the judge was getting ready to say  that  the
    relationship  was  not  genuine  because  the   judge   described   the
    appellant's reliance on that relationship as opportunistic and  clearly
    regarded the age difference as  a  telling  feature.   Nevertheless  no
    conclusions were reached.  That is, I find, a serious omission.

 5. Further the two points relied on that tended to suggest that the  judge
    was going  to  say  the  relationship  was  not  genuine  were  not  in
    themselves particularly weighty. A relationship  can  be  opportunistic
    and entirely genuine.  It is also the case that  relationships  between
    people many years apart in age are unusual and for that reason it might
    prompt enquiry.  It is also true and equally well-known that there  are
    many examples of people  having  wholly  genuine  and  valid  and  rich
    marriages when there is a big age gap.  The reasons  relied  upon  were
    not sufficient on their own to support  the  conclusion  that  was  not
    actually reached.  This is clearly unsatisfactory and Mr Walker did not
    seek to suggest otherwise.

 6. It follows therefore that I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   I  decided  to  preserve  none  of  the  findings.   I   am
    uncomfortable about how the  inadequately  reasoned  and  non-concluded
    comments on the relationship may have impacted on  the  other  findings
    and I fear that trying to preserve  findings  could  in  the  end  just
    create complications where there should not be complications and  so  I
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision in its entirety.

 7. I note that the appellant's solicitors have prepared  further  evidence
    and  are  engaged  in  getting  more  evidence  available   about   the
    appellant's psychiatric condition.  I give no directions about how  the
    First-tier Tribunal lists the matter.  I simply draw to  the  attention
    of the First-tier Tribunal that there are further investigations  being
    made. It is for the appellant to make representations to the First-tier
    Tribunal if necessary about how further evidence should be adduced.   I
    make no directions simply draw that to the attention of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. I am satisfied that the decision is unsound for the reasons  given.   I
    set it aside and direct the case  be  heard  again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal erred. I allow the  appeal.  I  set  aside  the
    decision and I direct that the case be heard again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 April 2019                  |



