
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/04514/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 May 2019                      |        On 22 May 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                                   m j b M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Sisnerios of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Malawi born  on  6  February  1978.   She
    appeals against the respondent's decision to refuse to grant her asylum
    and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan dismissed the appellant's appeal  in
    a decision dated 11 March 2019.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien who said that it is arguable that the
    judge failed to consider the claim and did apply anxious  scrutiny  and
    failed to make sustainable findings on sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation.  Furthermore, while the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    accepted that Professor Aguilar's report  was  "good  for  information"
    does not appear to have considered the eventual risk to the appellant's
    infant daughter on return.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  the  following  findings  in  her
    decision which I summarise.  The  judge  did  not  find  the  appellant
    credible.  He did not find the  appellant's  claim  credible  that  she
    fears that her  daughter  will  be  subjected  to  FGM  and  or  sexual
    cleansing on her return to Malawi by her ex-husband, Mr  T  or  by  the
    biological father of her child. The  judge  also  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that her husband would have any  interest  in  the
    daughter which the  appellant  had  with  another  man  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He also  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's  biological
    father, who has not had any interest in her daughter,  would  seek  her
    out in Malawi for any reason.

 4. The judge did not accept that the appellant was married to a  Mr  T  in
    Malawi  as  claimed.  The  judge  found  there   were   a   number   of
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence in  her  asylum  interview,
    her statement and her oral evidence at the hearing. In her  substantive
    asylum interview she stated that she was not threatened or abused by Mr
    T, but this subsequently claimed  he  had  subjected  her  to  domestic
    violence and that this was an afterthought.


 5. The appellant stated in her interview stated that her relationship with
    H, her daughter's father, was  not  good  and  she  did  not  know  his
    immigration status and she did not know if he was interested  in  their
    daughter.  The appellant now claims that he is asking friends  for  her
    contact number and his family want to instil their cultural  values  in
    her daughter.  The judge found there was no evidence of this as he  had
    shown no interest in his daughter.

 6. The judge considered  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was  further
    damaged by Section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 because  she  only  claimed  asylum  fourteen
    years after she had lived in this country.


 7.  The  judge  considered  the  expert  report  which   she   found   was
    overexaggerated and assumed too much that  H's  family  would  want  to
    bring up his daughter. The judge found it not credible that a  man  who
    has not shown any interest in his daughter  since  her  birth  in  2016
    would now by himself or through  his  family  would  want  to  take  on
    responsibility to bring up the child and then  subject  her  to  sexual
    violence.   The  judge  then  said  that  the  report  "is   good   for
    information" but it is overstretched  towards  the  appellant's  claim.
    The judge dismissed the appellant's protection appeal.

 8. The judge also dismissed the appellant's appeal  under  Article  8  and
    took into account after taking into account the public interest.

 9. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  argue  the  following.   The  first
    ground  is  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  risk  two  the
    appellant's child being subjected to  ritualised  rape  through  sexual
    cleansing and other risks on  return.   This  is  the  kind  of  sexual
    cleansing which is practiced within the appellant's  ethnic  group  and
    which arises separately  from  any  risks  from  the  child's  father's
    family.  The judge made no finding on the appellant's evidence that she
    had been subjected to sexual cleansing which was corroborated by expert
    evidence  identifying  this  as  a  very  common  practice  in  Malawi,
    particularly one of those of appellant's ethnicity.  The  judge  failed
    to make findings on the risk to the appellant  returning  as  a  single
    woman with a child to Malawi.  The expert evidence was that  return  to
    Malawi as a lone mother would cause the  appellant  to  be  accused  of
    being a prostitute and shaming her husband and the risk of her daughter
    being killed in Malawi.

10. The second  ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  judge  failed  to  reach
    sustainable  conclusions   regarding   the   appellant's   history   of
    trafficking.  The respondent accepted some aspects of  the  appellant's
    claim in respect of being trafficked but did not ultimately accept that
    the appellant had been trafficked into  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    argued that it was not reasonably open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    to reject these aspects of the appellant's account, nor did  the  judge
    provide any or any adequate reasons for rejecting this evidence some of
    which was accepted by the Secretary of State.

11. The third ground is that the judge failed to give proper  consideration
    to the expert evidence or provide adequate reasons  for  rejecting  it.
    The judge gave no reasons for  why  he  thought  that  Professor  Mario
    Aguilar's report was overstretched towards the  appellant's  claim  and
    for rejecting the expert's conclusions generally.  The  judge  provided
    no reasons for rejecting the expert's conclusion and  for  his  finding
    that the conclusion  of  the  expert  was  not  reliable  after  having
    accepted that the information provided by the  country  expert  was  of
    good quality.

12. The fourth ground of appeal is that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the totality of the evidence before the Tribunal and failed  to
    consider the appellant's claim with anxious scrutiny.  The judge failed
    to consider or make findings on the appellant's account of having  been
    subjected to ritualised rape in Malawi in the form of sexual  cleansing
    which was material to the credibility of her claim and the risk to  her
    daughter.  The expert report's evidence  was  not  taken  into  account
    which referred to the prevalence  of  domestic  violence,  particularly
    towards younger women.  The judge did not take a structured approach to
    the assessment of credibility which is set out in the case of KB  &  AH
    (credibility-structured approach)  Pakistan  [2017]  UKUT  00491  (IAC)
    which includes an assessment of external consistency and  plausibility.



13. The fifth ground of appeal is the  judge  failed  to  make  sustainable
    findings on sufficiency of protection and internal relocation  for  the
    appellant  and  her  daughter.   The  judge's  findings   on   internal
    relocation are cursory  when  rejecting  the  risk  of  return  to  the
    appellant and her daughter.  The judge failed to take into account  the
    reasons for rejecting the  evidence  that  traditional  practices  were
    deeply entrenched and tolerated in Malawi and  that  there  was  a  gap
    between Statutes  and  the  reality  on  the  ground  and  the  harmful
    practices endured despite being formally outlawed.

14. In conclusion I was asked to find that there has been a material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

15. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  both  parties  which  I  have
    considered with great care.  The judge in a detailed decision  set  out
    the appellant's claim and then went on to assess the credibility of the
    appellant.  He did not find the  appellant  credible  and  gave  cogent
    reasons for not finding her credible.  The judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that she had been married and had  been  subjected
    to domestic violence by her husband in Malawi. The  judge  referred  to
    the  inconsistent  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  in  her  asylum
    interview, her statement and her oral evidence.

16. The judge was entitled to reach the  conclusion  that  he  did  on  the
    evidence before him and stated that the appellant  has  fabricated  the
    whole of evidence in order to make an asylum claim 14 years after entry
    to the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  has
    fabricated her evidence to  support  her  application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.  He took into account  her  credibility  under
    Section 8 of the Treatment of Claimants Act 2004 and  stated  that  the
    appellant has been in this country for fourteen years and only  make  a
    claim for asylum based on being  trafficked  because  of  the  risk  of
    sexual cleansing and FGM for her daughter.


17. Much  has  been  made  by  the  appellant's  counsel,  of  the  judge's
    consideration of the expert report from Professor Mario  Aguilar  dated
    15 January 2019.  The judge considered the report and found that it has
    been overstretched in the appellant's favour.  The  judge  entitled  to
    give the appropriate weight to the report  after  considering  all  the
    evidence. The judge noted that the  expert  report  stated  that  after
    marriage the man would move to the woman's village  and  if  the  woman
    died, he would have to choose another woman from the same  family.  The
    appellant states that Mr T's second wife was her cousin  and  therefore
    in these circumstances he would already be living in the  same  village
    as the appellant herself.  The judge also stated that  the  expert  has
    over exaggerated an assumed  that  the  appellant's  biological  family
    would want to bring up his daughter given that this family has shown no
    interest in the child since her birth in 2016. I  have  looked  at  the
    report and the expert gives his view on how things happen in Malawi  as
    opposed to giving evidence and reasons for his conclusion. I find there
    is no material error of law in the judge's  evaluation  of  the  expert
    report.


18. The judge gave cogent reasons why the appellant's husband would have no
    interest in the daughter of another man and the daughter's  father  has
    never expressed any interest in the daughter and found that there is no
    credible reason for why  he  would  now  develop  an  interest  in  the
    daughter an exposure to a risk of FGM or sexual cleansing.

19. The judge found that the appellant could relocate within Malawi because
    she is of no interest to anyone in that country. The Judge did not  set
    out exactly which part of the country she can relocate but that is  not
    a material error of law.

20. The appellant ultimately claims to fear her husband and the  father  of
    her child on her return to Malawi who are nonstate agents. There was no
    evidence before the judge that there is no  sufficiency  of  protection
    from nonstate agents in Malawi for the appellant.

21. The judge considered the appellant's and  her  daughters  rights  under
    Article 8 and found that it was proportionate to remove  the  appellant
    with her daughter to Malawi. The judge noted that the appellant entered
    the United Kingdom as a student in 2003 and gave little weight  to  her
    private life as an immigration status has always  been  precarious.  He
    noted that the appellant's daughter is not a qualifying child  and  the
    whole of the appellant's time spent in the United  Kingdom  is  in  the
    knowledge that she has no right to settle here.

22. The judge took into account the best interests of  the  child  I  noted
    that the appellant's daughter was not a British citizen. He  said  that
    the appellant's daughter has lived in the care  of  a  mother  who  has
    spent the majority of her life in Malawi and they will be removed as  a
    family unit. The judge found the appellant's daughters  best  interests
    asked to stay with her mother who is  ultimately  responsible  for  her
    well-being and quoted the case of Azimi  Moyed  and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onwards appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC). There  is
    no material error in the judge's  reasoning  in  this  regard  and  the
    appellant and her daughter's removal to  Malawi  ould  not  breach  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and this is a sustainable finding.


Notice of Decision

23. The grounds of appeal are more of a disagreement with  the  findings  of
   the judge and I find that no differently constituted Tribunal would  come
   to a different conclusion on  the  evidence.   I  therefore  dismiss  the
   appellant's appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 21st day of May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.






Signed                                  Date 21st day of May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana















