
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04247/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th November 2018                      |On 31st January 2019              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    M F p
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Watson, promulgated on 7th September 2017, following a hearing at
    Birmingham on 17th  August  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Albania, and was  born  on  [~]
    1992.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  23rd
    July 2015 refusing her application  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she  is  the  daughter  of
    [AP], a police officer in Albania, who had left to  go  to  the  UK  in
    2002, when the Appellant was just 10 years old.  However,  due  to  his
    activities the family felt unsafe for many years, and  there  had  been
    threats.  On one occasion, while she was a student, she was  threatened
    when walking back from school in 2009.  Men followed her in a car.  She
    was not assaulted.  She received text messages  threatening  her.   She
    was threatened again in  October  2014.   She  received  a  text.   She
    thought this was from a nurse at  hospital  which  told  her  that  her
    grandfather was seriously ill.  On her journey  to  see  him,  she  was
    kidnapped and held hostage, stripped, and abused.  She  heard  the  men
    talking about the fact that she was the daughter of [AP], and this  was
    why she was being treated in  this  way.   She  eventually  managed  to
    escape.  They had produced a video message of her naked and tied up  on
    a chair, but she had destroyed the video.  She is now a  single  woman.
    She has no support from anyone in Albania.   She  would  fall  prey  to
    people traffickers.  She would be  subjected  to  abuse  as  a  single,
    vulnerable woman on her own in Albania, were she to be  returned.   She
    has  had  counselling  in  the  UK  to  help  her  with  her  traumatic
    experiences and she needs this to be continued.

 4. A feature of this appeal is that there had been a previous decision  by
    Judge Anthony, promulgated on 6th June 2017, in relation to  the  claim
    of  her  mother  and  her  younger  siblings.   That  claim  had   been
    comprehensively rejected by Judge Anthony.  There was also  a  decision
    by Judge Hubball promulgated on 20th August 2013, in  relation  to  the
    case of [DP], which relates  to  the  eldest  dependent  child  of  the
    Appellant's  father.   That  claim  also  was  rejected.   The  judge's
    decision promulgated in relation to [AP] took  place  on  28th  October
    2002.  That also rejected the claim.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge had regard to the  medical  evidence,  including  psychiatric
    reports, on behalf of the Appellant (see paragraphs 23 to 27).  He gave
    particular attention to the latest people  trafficking  Upper  Tribunal
    case of TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092.  He observed
    that this played no part in the Appellant's case as she  had  not  been
    trafficked.  Her case however,  is  that  she  is  at  risk  of  future
    trafficking if she were to be returned (paragraph 22).  The  judge  did
    not accept the Appellant to be a credible  witness  (paragraph  34)  in
    relation to much of her evidence but accepted that  there  was  a  risk
    that she would be sexually assaulted or threatened if she  were  to  be
    returned to Albania (paragraph 34).  He stated that "I find there is  a
    real risk that she has been the subject  of  an  assault  of  a  sexual
    nature  in  Albania.   The  psychiatrist  indicates  that  her  claimed
    symptoms are consistent with her diagnosis  of  claimed  sexual  abuse"
    (paragraph 34).  There had  been  two  suicide  attempts  made  by  the
    Appellant which the judge took into account.  However, the judge's view
    was that there was an absence of evidence of "a  severe  mental  health
    condition", and insofar as there had been an attempt to commit suicide,
    "the self-harm  attempts  have  not  resulted  in  hospital  treatment"
    (paragraph 38).  He also stated that "the psychiatrist assessed her  as
    having mild to moderate depression" (paragraph 38).

 6. Finally, in looking at the possibility of return,  the  judge  excluded
    the consideration that she may well be returned with the  rest  of  her
    family members, given that their appeals were still pending.  What  the
    judge stated was, "of course her family may be returning  with  her  in
    which case her position is that much easier, but I have considered  her
    as a sole woman" (paragraph 40).  In short, therefore, the judge's firm
    conclusions were that,

         "My findings are that the Appellant is a victim  of  some  form  of
         sexual assault and will be returning as a lone female.   No-one  is
         aware that she is a victim of assault and there is  no  reason  for
         her to be at real risk of trafficking or further assault.   She  is
         not a target of a blood  feud  and  has  not  shown  to  the  lower
         standard that she was such a target" (paragraph 43).

    The judge did not find there to be any evidence  of  "a  severe  mental
    illness" (para 45).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge  had  marginalised  the
    evidence in relation to the Appellant's mental state.  What he had said
    was that the Appellant was the victim of "some form of sexual  assault"
    and that she would be returning as a  lone  female,  but  he  had  then
    concluded (at  paragraph  45)  that  nothing  in  the  "medical  notes"
    indicated that she  suffers  from  severe  mental  illness.   This  was
    arguably incorrect because the psychiatric report of Dr Singh concludes
    that the Appellant suffered from PTSD.  Moreover,  (at  paragraph  24),
    when summarising Dr Singh's report, the  judge  only  referred  to  the
    diagnosis of depression.  The judge also  states  that  the  report  is
    acknowledged to be based entirely on the Appellant's history, but  this
    is not correct because Dr Singh expressly states  (at  paragraph  15.1)
    that the opinions are also based on the mental state  examination.   In
    addition, the judge failed to consider the findings of Sonya Landesman,
    where it is clear that those opinions were significant and important.

 9. On 9th January 2017, permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me, on 9th November 2018, Mr  Jesurum,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that he would have  to  ask  that
    the grounds of application be amended so as to enable  there  to  be  a
    consideration of the Appellant's claim under paragraph 276ADE,  insofar
    as it would be difficult for her to integrate  into  life  in  Albania,
    given that she  was  returning  as  a  lone  woman,  together  with  an
    amendment that Article 8 should also be specifically  considered.   The
    decision in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 which suggested a broad approach
    to the question of an ability to integrate into one's own  country  was
    something that was important.

11. Mr Mills objected to this, stating that Counsel who had appeared  below
    on behalf of the Appellant had not raised  any  issue  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE, and nor was there any question raised in relation  to
    Article 8.  The judge,  however,  nevertheless,  went  on  to  consider
    Article 8, although  he  did  not  consider  paragraph  276ADE.   That,
    however, was a matter of fault that could not be laid at  the  door  of
    the judge, but at those representing the Appellant.  It was open to the
    Appellant to make a further application should she wish to do so.

12. Having considered the matter, I concluded that permission to amend  the
    grounds in this respect would not be granted.  The  judge  below  could
    not be  criticised  with  respect  to  something  upon  which  she  had
    expressly made an enquiry, and had been  informed  that  there  was  no
    paragraph 276ADE claim or an Article 8 claim.  That was the  matter  as
    it stood before Judge Watson on the day of  the  hearing.   Subject  to
    this, Mr Jesurum proceeded with his submissions.

13. Mr Jesurum submitted that the judge had  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    would be returning as a lone woman.  She had accepted  that  there  had
    been a sexual assault.  Indeed, if one looked  at  the  report  of  the
    medical practitioner it is plain that this was a particularly  gruesome
    rape of the Appellant.  It was also accepted that there  had  been  two
    suicide attempts, one where the  Appellant  had  taken  40  Paracetamol
    tablets, and the other where she had taken 30 other tablets,  and  then
    she had vomited and hence any need for  hospitalisation  was  obviated.
    Nevertheless, the evidence showed a clear attempt to end her life.

14. However, against this background, the judge had  failed  to  take  into
    account the report of Dr Singh (at page 283) where he had made it quite
    clear that the Appellant had PTSD (at paragraph 15.7) and that the risk
    of depression went beyond  moderation  (paragraph  15.8).   There  were
    three particular errors.  First, there was the error (at paragraph  24)
    where the judge had only in generic terms referred to the  "psychiatric
    report by Dr Singh" but had drawn no attention to the fact that she had
    been diagnosed with PTSD.  On the contrary, the judge had simply stated
    that "she suffers from mild to  moderate  depression".   This  led  the
    judge to the  conclusion  that,  "I  find  the  opinion  is  ambiguous"
    (paragraph 24).  This could not be  the  case.   The  opinion  was  not
    ambiguous.  The judge had failed to set out the opinion  in  its  full.
    This was an error.  Second, the  judge  had  erred  (at  paragraph  38)
    because the medical expert had been quite clear that the Appellant  had
    a serious  mental  condition,  but  the  judge  wrongly  comes  to  the
    conclusion that, "there is no information that supports a finding of  a
    severe mental health condition" (paragraph 38).  The contrary  was  the
    case.  Third, Mr Jesurum submitted  that  the  judge,  in  taking  into
    account the latest human trafficking case  of  TD  and  AD  (Trafficked
    women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092,  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant was "not with any increased risk factors" (para 40).

15. This could not be correct because TD makes  it  quite  clear  that  the
    Appellant will have difficulty in getting employment, being paid proper
    wages, finding accommodation,  getting  support,  and  would  be  under
    constant suspicion, and fear of attack, because she was in Albania as a
    lone woman.  TD and AD refers to the medical expert (at  paragraph  53)
    to confirm that although there had been a migration of people from  the
    rural areas to the urban areas, this had not led to  any  lessening  of
    prejudices against single women.  Integration was a particularly severe
    problem.  This case made it clear that women on the whole are paid  150
    euros  whereas  accommodation  is  over   200   euros,   putting   such
    accommodation well beyond them.  In  particular,  matters  set  out  at
    paragraphs 66 to 111 were quite important in terms of demonstrating the
    social exclusion of single women in  Albanian  life.   One  thing  that
    could not be  said  against  the  representative  below,  submitted  Mr
    Jesurum, was that he did state in his skeleton argument that TD and  AD
    was particularly relevant to the appeal.   That  being  so,  the  judge
    ought to have had proper regard to this.

16. For his part, Mr Mills submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  expressly
    recognise the diagnosis of PTSD.  He stated  that  "this  may  lead  to
    problems in the Appellant's ability to be able  to  return".   However,
    the judge did accept the other health issues.  She did accept that  the
    Appellant had been raped, had attempted suicide and that she  had  been
    given counselling.  Nevertheless, the judge's view was that,

         "She does not have any particular  vulnerability  due  to  societal
         perception of her as a trafficked woman.  She left the country with
         her mother and siblings.  Her locality would be aware of  this.   I
         cannot see any risk that she would be  perceived  as  a  trafficked
         woman" (paragraph 39).

17. In reply, Mr Jesurum submitted that  there  was  a  very  clear  expert
    report from Dr Singh which the judge unnecessarily rejects.  The  judge
    states that the Appellant would not be vulnerable.  This flies  in  the
    face of what the expert stated (at paragraph 15.1.8) at page 370 of the
    bundle.  There was no reference to  paragraph  15.1.7.   There  was  no
    reference to the Appellant suffering from PTSD.  To  suggest  that  the
    Appellant had skills that she had taken advantage of  in  this  country
    was the wrong way of expressing the situation where the  Appellant  was
    being removed from this country.  Finally, the guidance in  TD  and  AD
    was not properly deployed by the judge to the facts of this case.

18. He asked me to allow the appeal.

Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

20. First, it is the case that the judge, in expressly  referring  to  "the
    psychiatric report of Dr Singh" (at paragraph 24) does not refer to the
    fact that the Appellant had been diagnosed with  PTSD.   Her  statement
    that "the conclusions of the psychiatrist are  that  she  suffers  from
    mild to moderate depression, with symptoms present for the last several
    months" (paragraph 24) was an incomplete reading of the  report  by  Dr
    Singh.  It is certainly the case that what  Dr  Singh  had  to  say  at
    paragraphs 15.1.7 to 15.1.8 had not been addressed.  On that basis  the
    conclusion at paragraph 24 was incomplete.

21. Second, whilst  it  is  the  case  that  the  Appellant  has  not  been
    trafficked, it is not enough to say that the Appellant "does  not  have
    any particular vulnerability due to societal perception  of  her  as  a
    trafficked woman" (paragraph 38).   The  societal  perception  in  this
    case, as claimed by the Appellant and emphasised by her lawyers on  her
    behalf, is of her being a single, lone woman in Albania.   It  is  this
    which she maintains attracts a "particular vulnerability" to her.   The
    judge had to address the Appellant's situation on this basis.   It  was
    not to address it on the basis that she was a  trafficked  woman,  when
    she was not.  Finally, the strictures of TD and AD  (Trafficked  women)
    CG [2016] UKUT 00092, had to be properly applied  in  relation  to  the
    vulnerability of lone women, who were in Albania, without  any  visible
    form of support.  The failure to consider this  country  guidance  case
    from this viewpoint, in relation to the Appellant, is an error of  law.



Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law, such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the
    decision of the original judge.  I re-make  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge  Watson,  pursuant  to  Practice
    Statement 7.2(a) of the Practice Directions.  I make a  direction  that
    the Appellant updates the medical evidence in relation to her condition
    and presents it in a manner that it can properly be taken into  account
    by the Respondent ten days before the next  hearing.   I  also  make  a
    direction that paragraph  276ADE  be  expressly  addressed,  as  should
    Article 8, together with the issue of the Appellant's integration  into
    Albanian society, were she to return there as a lone woman.  The return
    on the basis that she is a lone woman was a matter that  was  expressly
    agreed upon by Mr Mills in this appeal.  That being so, this is how the
    matter will stand to be addressed before the First-tier  Tribunal  when
    it is reconsidered.

23. An anonymity direction is made.

24. The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Juss                                    Date
17th December 2018
