
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04965/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2018                              |On 30 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    O O A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant has a chequered immigration history. She last entered the
    UK at some point after 12 November  2011.  Her  leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor expired in May 2012 and she overstayed. She  then  submitted  a
    series of applications for an EEA residence card on the basis  she  was
    in a durable relationship with [PS], Hungarian national. At her appeal,
    heard on 24 February 2015, she told the judge that she was a widow when
    she came to the UK and she claimed to have married [PS] by means  of  a
    proxy marriage. The judge found  the  marriage  had  not  been  validly
    entered into and the relationship was not genuine. It was a marriage of
    convenience.

 2. The appellant became appeal rights  exhausted  on  8  June  2015.  Soon
    afterwards she was detained and her removal was arranged.  On  22  June
    2016 she applied for asylum. The basis of her account was that her late
    husband's family believed she had  murdered  him.  When  he  died,  his
    family wanted her to  perform  rituals  on  his  dead  body,  including
    sleeping with him for  seven  nights,  which  she  refused  to  do.  In
    September 2011, four weeks after her  claimed  marriage  to  [PS],  the
    appellant said she was kidnapped by her former brother-in-law and  held
    for three days. She was  kidnapped,  ill-treated  and  raped.  She  was
    rescued by her parents. In 2012 her mother telephoned her to  tell  her
    that her shop had been  burnt  down  by  her  late  brother's  husband.
    Additionally, the appellant said she was a  lesbian  or  bisexual.  She
    claimed to have been in a relationship in the UK with  a  woman  called
    Mimi. Her claim was  rejected  by  the  respondent  and  the  appellant
    appealed.

 3. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M B Hussain on
    4 October 2017 at the Hatton Cross hearing centre. In setting  out  his
    reasons for dismissing the appeal, the judge directed himself as to the
    burden and standard  of  proof  and  then  turned  to  the  credibility
    challenges made in the reasons for refusal letter. He reasoned that the
    Secretary of State was right to have relied on section 8 of the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, et cetera) Act 2004.  He  said
    at paragraph 33, "It seems to me to be inescapable that  the  appellant
    only claimed asylum as a means  of  preventing  her  removal  from  the
    United  Kingdom.  That  finding  undermines  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant generally. However, like the Secretary of State, I  am  aware
    that an adverse credibility finding relying on Section 8  of  the  2004
    Act is not determinative of the appellant's  overall  credibility.  Her
    claim must be assessed in the light of the  totality  of  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal."

 4. Next, the judge noted that the respondent  had  found  the  appellant's
    account of her realisation that she was bisexual to be inconsistent and
    the judge found there was "much  force  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    observations ". He also agreed with the respondent that the appellant's
    account was inconsistent regarding the  duration  of  her  relationship
    with Mimi.

 5. The judge did not hold it against the  appellant  that  she  failed  to
    mention her sexuality in her previous appeal, which was against an  EEA
    decision. However, he reasoned that the appellant's delay  in  claiming
    asylum undermined her credibility nonetheless. He said  as  follows  in
    paragraph 41, "It seems to me reasonable to expect a person to make the
    choice of making an asylum claim based on genuine grounds  and  an  EEA
    application based on a marriage of convenience, that they would opt for
    the former. In making her EEA applications, the  appellant  would  have
    had the benefit of legal assistance. She would have been  advised  that
    if she were either a lesbian or bisexual person, then those  were  good
    grounds for making an asylum claim. She did not do so, which in my view
    seriously undermines her credibility."

 6. In the same paragraph, the judge explained he did not  agree  with  the
    respondent's consideration of the appellant's  responses  at  interview
    regarding her reaction to the discovery she was bisexual.

 7. The appellant called witnesses. The judge found that the first of  them
    could only state what the appellant had told him.  The  second  witness
    was Rev Lucy Winkett, who confirmed that the appellant  was  a  regular
    attender at LGBT events at her church. The  judge  said  there  was  no
    reason to doubt that the appellant attends the church  LGBT  group  and
    was a well-liked  member.  He  did  not  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the
    witness's evidence that she believed  the  appellant  to  be  bisexual.
    However, he did not consider that he  was  obliged  to  find  that  the
    appellant's account was truthful. He noted, in paragraph 46,  that  the
    appellant had only associated herself with the  LGBT  group  after  she
    claimed asylum in June 2016.

 8. Turning to the appellant's account of  her  fear  of  her  in-laws,  he
    considered the account given by the  appellant  of  being  required  to
    sleep with her husband's corpse "wholly bizarre ... not  least  because
    by then the corpse would decompose" (paragraph 50).

 9. The judge noted that a medico-legal report had been provided,  prepared
    by Professor Cornelius Katona MD FRCPsych, a  consultant  psychiatrist,
    concluding that the appellant suffers from PTSD. The judge accepted  he
    had no reason to  doubt  that  the  appellant  does  suffer  from  that
    condition. However, the judge declined to give this matter  significant
    weight as corroboration of the claim because he considered it  had  not
    been explained  why,  if  this  condition  had  developed  due  to  the
    appellant's experiences in Nigeria, she only  sought  assistance  after
    she claimed asylum. He noted, "If the severity of her condition  is  as
    it is described,  then  she  would  have  needed  medical  intervention
    earlier. Yet, she appears to  have  chosen  only  to  turn  to  medical
    attention after she claimed asylum".

10. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds. In relation to human rights he
    found, in a short paragraph,  that  the  severity  of  the  appellant's
    condition did not reach the high threshold for a finding in her  favour
    under article 3. In terms  of  her  private  life,  her  exclusion  was
    proportionate, having regard to the considerations set out  in  section
    117B of the 2002 Act.

11. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  on  three  main  grounds.
    Firstly, she  argued  the  judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  relevant
    guidelines, namely the UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection No.
    9: Claims to Refugee Status based on Sexual Orientation  and/or  Gender
    Identity and the guidance of the CJEU in A, B &  C  v  Staatssecretaris
    van Veiligheid en Justitie Cases C-148/13 to C-150/13.  In  particular,
    the credibility of an asylum seeker's statements regarding their sexual
    orientation  should  not  be  based   on   stereotypical   assumptions.
    Consideration  should  be  given  to  any  possible  reasons  for   not
    disclosing this issue at the first available opportunity. The judge had
    fallen into error by not  following  these  guidelines.  Secondly,  the
    judge failed to  consider  the  witness  evidence  in  the  appropriate
    manner. This ground suggests the judge rejected  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's  witnesses  on  the  basis  that  he  had  already  made  a
    credibility  assessment   with   which   their   evidence   conflicted.
    Furthermore, the decision was irrational given the witnesses' knowledge
    of the appellant. Thirdly, the judge  failed  to  consider  the  expert
    evidence appropriately. Professor  Katona  had  specifically  addressed
    potential alternative causes  of  the  appellant's  PTSD  and  set  out
    reasons  why  these  were  unlikely.  He  specifically  attributed  the
    appellant's mental health issues to her past experiences and her coming
    to terms with her sexuality. As an  adjunct  to  this  ground,  it  was
    pointed out that Professor Katona had found there was a  real  risk  of
    deterioration in the appellant's mental health if she were returned  to
    Nigeria which would in turn increase the risk of suicide. This had  not
    been considered by the judge.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by the First  Tier  Tribunal.  It  was
    noted that the grounds had merit because  it  appeared  the  judge  had
    determined the appellant's  sexuality  prior  to  considering  all  the
    evidence, he did not  consider  the  guidelines  for  determining  such
    appeals and he  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting  an  expert's
    opinion.

13. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response.

14. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the judge's decision contained a material error of law.

15. Ms Akinbolu's submissions expanded on her written grounds. In  essence,
    she argued that the judge had made a decision  on  credibility  without
    taking into account parts of the evidence. He had  placed  emphasis  on
    the late disclosure of the appellant's sexuality  even  though  he  had
    accepted that it was understandable the appellant  had  not  raised  it
    within her EEA appeals. Had the judge paid attention  to  the  guidance
    and looked at the  appellant's  personal  circumstances,  such  as  her
    nationality, the fact she was married and she had not  associated  with
    anyone prior to 2016 who was familiar with the process and terminology,
    he might have come to a different conclusion. The  fact  the  appellant
    had no knowledge in the  environment  she  found  herself  in  did  not
    feature in the judge's decision.

16. Ms Akinbolu argued the judge's approach to  the  witness  evidence  was
    erroneous. He did not give weight to the length of time  the  appellant
    had known the people and the nature of their association. To find  that
    the appellant had successfully deceived all of them over such a lengthy
    period with such frequent contact  would  have  required  a  formidable
    exercise in deception. The judge had not paid sufficient  attention  to
    the detail of the evidence. He had not looked at the  evidence  in  the
    round. In particular, he made no mention of the medical evidence in the
    context of his assessment of the appellant's claimed sexuality.

17. Turning to the medical evidence, Ms Akinbolu reminded me that the judge
    accepted the appellant had PTSD but had rejected the expert's  view  as
    to its causation. She described this as a  fundamental  error.  It  was
    insufficient to reject the report, which was supported by evidence from
    other medical sources, simply because  the  appellant  had  not  sought
    treatment until after making her asylum claim. Again, Ms Akinbolu posed
    the question whether it was really possible for the appellant  to  have
    deceived everybody. She argued that the judge had failed to  deal  with
    the stand-alone medical claim. The article 3 claim had  been  dismissed
    in a single sentence notwithstanding  the  expert's  opinion  that  the
    appellant was at high risk of self-harm.

18. In reply, Ms Everett said that the medical  ground  seemed  to  be  the
    strongest point. She agreed the judge had  not  dealt  with  it  fully.
    However, she argued  that  the  medical  evidence  provided  could  not
    possibly lead to a finding that there had been a breach of  article  3.
    As for the other arguments, the judge had been entitled to look at  the
    delay in claiming asylum and the inconsistencies and  discrepancies  in
    the evidence. There was no error in his reasoning. The judge had looked
    at everything in  the  round  as  he  should  have.  His  reasons  were
    adequate. On the issue of whether the judge should have considered  the
    medical report in the context of his credibility findings, she  pointed
    out that the medical report relied in large part on the narrative given
    to the expert by the appellant.

19. Ms Akinbolu added that a great deal  of  evidence  had  been  submitted
    showing the inadequacy of medical facilities in Nigeria and  the  judge
    had not referred to this at all.

20. I reserved my decision as to whether  the  decision  of  Judge  Hussain
    contains a material error of law.

21. Ms Akinbolu argued all the grounds with great diligence but it is clear
    to me that there is nothing at  all  in  the  first  two  grounds.  The
    judge's reasoning followed a logical structure. In the first place,  he
    assessed the credibility challenge mounted by the respondent. He looked
    at the question of the delay in claiming asylum and he  made  allowance
    for the fact the appellant might not have raised this  within  her  EEA
    applications. He emphatically rejected the approach of  the  respondent
    to the evidence regarding the manner in which the appellant had come to
    terms with her sexuality, rightly noting that  "there  is  no  standard
    response to any of the questions posed, nor is there any  standard  way
    of expressing one's emotion to his/her sexuality." He clearly  did  not
    fall into the error of stereotyping. Moreover, in giving weight to  the
    delay in claiming asylum, the judge was entitled to consider  that  the
    fact she opted to pursue bogus EEA applications rather than put forward
    her  claim  for  international  protection  had  not  been   adequately
    explained in the light of the fact she was legally represented.

22. Regarding the evidence of the witnesses, Ms Akinbolu's submissions came
    close to arguing that the evidence was so substantial and detailed that
    no rational judge could have rejected  it.  Indeed,  that  argument  is
    raised in the written grounds although not  expressly  pursued  at  the
    hearing. In any event, it was for  the  judge  to  assess  the  witness
    evidence and to give it appropriate weight. That is what Judge  Hussain
    did. Behind consideration of this evidence is  the  obvious  fact  that
    only the appellant can know for sure what her sexuality is and, as  the
    judge recognised, all the witnesses could do was set out their  beliefs
    about it based on their observations. As far as I can see, no  evidence
    was called from any of the appellant's partners. It  was  open  to  the
    judge to find the appellant had not  established  this  aspect  of  her
    claim notwithstanding the witness evidence.

23. The argument that the judge rejected  their  evidence  because  he  had
    already made up his mind about the appellant's sexuality could  perhaps
    be seen to gain some  support  from  the  sentence  in  the  middle  of
    paragraph 44 of the decision in which the  judge  noted  that,  "whilst
    they may honestly believe that the appellant is a bisexual/gay  person,
    I am not prepared to find that this is so for all the other reasons set
    out above", although this extract was not specifically  brought  to  my
    attention. In my judgement, any doubts about the matter  are  dispelled
    by the fact the judge expressly rounded up  his  consideration  of  the
    appellant's  credibility  in  relation  to  her  claimed  sexuality  in
    paragraph 47 of his decision. His decision cannot be read in any  other
    way than that he looked at all the evidence he had  assessed  prior  to
    paragraph 47 in reaching his overall conclusion as expressed there.

24. The position is that, whilst many other judges  might  have  reached  a
    different view on the evidence presented, the Upper Tribunal  will  not
    interfere with a decision unless a  material  error  of  law  has  been
    demonstrated. It was open to this experienced  judge  to  make  adverse
    credibility findings and his reasoning does not show any material error
    of law.

25. That leaves the question of the medical evidence. The judge  looked  at
    this within his consideration of the  other  limb  of  the  appellant's
    claim, regarding her fear of her ex-husband's family. That is no  doubt
    because the report of Professor Katona was important evidence  when  it
    came to assessing the credibility of the appellant's account of  having
    been ill-treated and raped. Professor Katona is a well-respected expert
    who frequently provides medico-legal reports to  the  tribunal.  He  is
    eminently well qualified and his reports contain  clear  reasoning  and
    follow a well-established methodology.

26. Judge Hussain accepted Professor Katona's finding  that  the  appellant
    suffers from PTSD. He noted as well that this diagnosis  was  supported
    by other  medical  evidence.  The  judge  was  also  conscious  of  the
    conclusion of the expert that this condition had  been  caused  by  the
    appellant's experiences in Nigeria.

27. It  is  relevant  to  note  that  Professor  Katona  did  consider  the
    possibility that other factors, such as the appellant's separation from
    her country and her mother, the breakdown of her relationship with  her
    second  husband,  her  multiple   bereavements   and   her   continuing
    immigration uncertainty, may have caused her PTSD. At paragraph 4.2  of
    his report, he states as follows,  "In  my  clinical  opinion  this  is
    unlikely. These other  factors  may  well  be  aggravating  her  mental
    symptoms (particularly her depressive symptoms) but do  not  provide  a
    clinically plausible explanation for her core PTSD symptoms such as her
    intrusive thoughts and her avoidant behaviours."

28. So far so good. However, I note at this  point  that  Professor  Katona
    does not appear to have been told that the appellant's marriage to [PS]
    was a sham, as determined by the  tribunal  in  March  2015.  In  fact,
    Professor Katona sets out a great deal about the  appellant's  marriage
    in his recitation of her account and goes on to  use  her  decision  to
    stay with her second husband despite his abusive behaviour as  evidence
    of her vulnerability (see paragraph 8.4).  Therefore,  where  Professor
    Katona sets out his reasons for his opinion that the appellant was  not
    feigning or exaggerating her symptoms (see paragraph 6.1), he  did  not
    take  account  of  the  fact  the  appellant  had   pursued   dishonest
    applications to the Home Office, which  she  maintained  at  an  appeal
    hearing.

29. At the hearing I indicated  that  I  was  attracted  by  Ms  Akinbolu's
    submissions about the judge's approach to the medical evidence  (ground
    3). However, the fact Professor Katona was not aware that the appellant
    has a history of deceptive  conduct  must  be  a  matter  significantly
    reducing the weight which can be  given  to  his  report  as  potential
    corroboration. His clinical finding that  the  appellant  suffers  from
    PTSD is probably sound but his observations  about  causation  must  be
    open to question.

30. Although this was not a point taken by Judge Hussain in  his  decision,
    it must blunt the force of Ms Akinbolu's challenge to his  use  of  the
    report. To the extent Ms Akinbolu argued the judge was obliged to  give
    the report greater weight towards establishing the appellant's account,
    the strength of her arguments is diminished.

31. It is true that the judge's consideration of the freestanding article 3
    ground was extremely cursory and made no  reference  to  the  materials
    showing the paucity  of  treatment  for  mental  health  conditions  in
    Nigeria. However, Professor Katona's report is  based  in  part  on  an
    acceptance of the appellant's  sexuality  which,  as  seen,  the  judge
    rejected. Likewise, he  based  his  concerns  on  the  appellant  being
    returned to the setting in which she had described being raped and ill-
    treated. That account was also rejected by the judge. The  freestanding
    article 3 case must be based on the appellant returning to Nigeria with
    PTSD, the root cause of which remains unknown.

32. Ms Akinbolu accepted the threshold for success on article 3 grounds  in
    health cases is high. The Court of  Appeal  recently  explained  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64  that,  until  the  Supreme  Court
    rules on the effect of Paposhvili v Belgium (Application no. 41738/10),
    the law is as set out in N v SHHD [2005] UKHL 31, which remains binding
    precedent. Sales LJ, giving  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    decided that removal would only violate article 3 if intense  suffering
    or death would be imminent in the receiving state as a  result  of  the
    non-availability of treatment which would have been available in the UK
    ([38]).

33. The appellant has her mother in Nigeria. She would certainly  lose  the
    comfort of her friends at church. Beyond that, given  the  difficulties
    with the medical evidence which I have noted, it  is  not  possible  to
    form an accurate view of the appellant's likely degree of vulnerability
    on return and therefore her medical needs. Notwithstanding the  absence
    of any reference to the background evidence on  medical  facilities  in
    Nigeria, I am driven  to  conclude,  in  agreement  with  Ms  Everett's
    submission, that it has not been shown the judge erred  by  failing  to
    give more detailed consideration to the  article  3  claim.  Any  error
    would be immaterial given the  intrinsic  weakness  of  the  claim  set
    against the high threshold set by the law.  The appellant  cannot  show
    the deterioration in her health  caused  by  her  removal  would  cause
    intense suffering.

34. I also indicated at the hearing I was troubled by the  judge's  failure
    to address the issue of the risk of suicide.  Having  read  the  papers
    again post-hearing, I note that Ms Akinbolu did not  refer  to  suicide
    risk in her skeleton  argument  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    judge's record of her submissions to him does not include any reference
    to it either. It was not raised in the grounds of appeal. In my  survey
    of the voluminous papers in this  case  I  have  not  come  across  any
    reference to suicide risk in the  medical  letters  or  statements  and
    letters prepared by the appellant's church friends. It does not  appear
    to have been a point which was at  the  forefront  of  the  appellant's
    case.

35. However, it was certainly raised in Professor Katona's report. He  said
    in paragraph 9.2 of his report that  the  appellant  "is  not  actively
    suicidal  at  present  but  it  is  of  some  concern  that  she  still
    experiences derogatory hallucinations that sometimes urge her  to  kill
    herself and that on one occasion she has acted on these. Her  sense  of
    hopelessness is a further indicator of increased risk of suicide. There
    is in my clinical opinion a significant risk that  if  [the  appellant]
    lost all hope of being  allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  her  suicidal
    thoughts and urges would increase to the  extent  of  tipping  over  to
    actual (and potentially lethal) self-harm".

36. The correct approach in such cases is set out in J v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 629 and Y (Sri Lanka) & Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA  Civ  362.  There
    needs to be an analysis of the mechanism of  return  as  well  as  what
    awaits the appellant in the receiving state. None  of  this  was  done.
    However, in the light of my concerns about Professor Katona's state  of
    knowledge of the appellant and the fact the  objective  basis  for  the
    appellant's claimed fears can be removed from the assessment, I am  not
    satisfied it has been shown  the  judge  materially  erred  by  leaving
    suicide risk out of his assessment. There is no realistic prospect that
    the appellant could have succeeded  on  this  ground  once  an  adverse
    credibility assessment had been made.

37. There is no error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal and the decision shall stand.

38. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and his decision dismissing the appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 25 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
