
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04734/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th June 2019                     |On 24th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     BH
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes,  promulgated  on  22nd  June  2018,  following  a  hearing   at
    Birmingham on 16th May 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on  1st
    January 1984.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    refusing his application for asylum  and  for  humanitarian  protection
    pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

 3. At the hearing before me on 7th June 2019,  it  was  alleged  that  the
    judge below had failed to have  regard  to  material  evidence  and  to
    engage with the expert evidence, and that the finding as  to  causation
    of the PTSD was fatally undermined.  The judge failed to refer  to  all
    the expert evidence.  In particular, it was said that  because  of  the
    Appellant's contact with the  Afghan  community,  he  would  have  been
    quickly appraised of how the asylum system worked, such that the  judge
    considered that the period that the Appellant was out of  contact  with
    the Home Office, was  inconsistent  with  the  need  for  international
    protection.  This struck at the heart of  the  credibility  assessment.
    It was also asserted that the judge failed to make a finding as to  the
    Appellant's father's involvement in political activities.

 4.  Permission  to  appeal  had  been   granted   on   26th   July   2018.
    Significantly, there was thereafter  a  Rule  24  response  dated  25th
    September 2018 to the effect that the Respondent,  Secretary  of  State
    did not oppose the Appellant's application for permission to appeal.

 5. At the hearing before me on 7th June 2019, Mr Mills accepted  that  the
    judge had failed to have proper regard to the expert evidence from  the
    consultant, Dr Winton, in his  two  psychiatric  reports.   What  Judge
    Parkes had said was, "The doctor did  not  address  the  Home  Office's
    point about the Appellant's other  medical  issues  and  the  treatment
    issues identified".  However, this was incorrect because  at  paragraph
    4.1, Dr Winton's addendum  report  does  specifically  deal  with  this
    question.  Similarly, the judge  states  (at  paragraph  22),  that  Dr
    Sinha, in the scarring report, had addressed the Appellant's  concerns.
    However, the judge's reference to Dr Sinha's report is confined only to
    the main report and not to the  addendum  report  (at  page  75)  which
    addresses directly the point raised by the Respondent and the judge  as
    to the causation of the scars.  In fact, the judge does  not  refer  to
    the addendum report at any point.  Finally, it was said that the  judge
    had failed to give proper consideration as to the Appellant's delay  in
    re-establishing contact with the British authorities.  What  the  judge
    had said was that the Appellant "would have been quickly  appraised  of
    how the system actually works".  However, there was no evidential basis
    for the finding that the Appellant would have been quickly appraised of
    how the system works.  This was speculation on the  judge's  part.  The
    Appellant had not been asked about the level of  his  association  with
    the Afghan community.  Nor had he  been  asked  about  how  the  system
    operated in the  UK.   The  findings  by  the  judge  were  accordingly
    speculative.

 6. Since there is agreement between the parties that the judge had  indeed
    erred in law, I conclude that the oral failure to have  regard  to  the
    experts' reports in their entirety is such that  there  is  a  material
    error of law in the determination by the judge below.   Accordingly,  I
    make a finding of an error of law pursuant to  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), and remit this appeal back to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Parkes.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it should be set aside.  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This  appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Parkes.

 8. An anonymity direction is made.

 9. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019

