
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04845/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th April 2021                    |On 21st April 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    M S M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, instructed by Braitch R B Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim for international protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless and until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


Remote Hearing


   1. The hearing before me on 6th April 2021 was a Skype video conference
      hearing held during the Covid-19 pandemic. Neither party objected to a
      remote hearing. The appellant was able to join the hearing remotely
      but was unable to switch his 'video' function on.  I sat at the
      Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was addressed by the
      representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been if the
      parties had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that no
      party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any
      restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and
      proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of
      justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed
      with a remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions
      against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied
      that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and
      justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case,
      the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  No other technical problems were reported
      to me by the parties representatives during the course of the hearing.
       At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties had been
      able to participate fully in the proceedings.


Introduction


   2. The appellant is a national of Iran.  He arrived in the UK on 28th
      February 2017 and claimed asylum.  He claimed to have fled Iran about
      six days prior to his arrival in the UK, but it transpired that the
      appellant had been fingerprinted previously in Hungary on 2nd October
      2015 and in Italy on 4th November 2016.  The appellant's claim was
      refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 10th
      May 2019.


   3. The respondent accepts the appellant is a national of Iran of Kurdish
      ethnicity. The respondent accepted the appellant was a supporter of
      the KDP but rejected the appellant's claim that he had carried out any
      activities on behalf of the KDP and his claim that he had come to the
      adverse attention of the authorities in Iran.


   4. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision was dismissed
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes for reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 24th August 2020.  At paragraphs [29] to [37] of his
      decision, Judge Parkes considered appellant's claim that he is also
      now at risk on return because of his sur place activities, including
      posts on his Facebook account, and attendance at demonstrations
      outside the Iranian Embassy.  He noted, at [29], that there is
      evidence of the appellant posting matters on Facebook relating to
      Kurdish politics and affairs.  He also noted ".. The appellant was
      inconsistent about whether the account he now uses is a new account or
      a reactivated account from when he first arrived in the UK...".  At
      paragraph [32], Judge Parkes found the appellant's sur place
      activities are not motivated by any genuine commitment to the Kurdish
      cause but have been created to assist in his efforts to remain in the
      UK.  He noted, at [33], that nevertheless, the question remains
      whether those actions will place the appellant at risk from the
      Iranian authorities on return.  He noted the appellant's family
      members in Iran appear to remain of no interest to the authorities
      despite the 'hair-trigger approach' adopted by the authorities, and
      that reinforces the view that whatever the appellant has done, is not
      known to the government or relevant agencies in Iran.


   5. Having concluded that the appellant did nothing in Iran that could
      have been conceived as support for the KDP or Kurdish affairs in Iran,
      and he has not come to the adverse attention of the authorities
      previously, Judge Parkes went on to find that there is nothing that
      the appellant has done outside Iran that has made him of any interest
      on return, and the deletion of posts on Facebook account is entirely
      reasonable given that they have only been created to bolster his
      claim.  At paragraph [38], he concluded:


         "In summary the appellant has not given a credible account of his
         actions in Iran, his journey to the UK, he has not explained why he
         sought to conceal the true details of his journey and his actions
         in the UK have no bona fides. The appellant is not in need of
         international protection on any basis and can be safely returned to
         Iran and return to his home area."


The appeal before me


   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds.  First, the
      appellant claims Judge Parkes erred in his analysis of the risk upon
      return and failed to have proper regard to the country guidance set
      out in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC).  In particular, it
      is said Judge Parkes failed to have regard to the fact that the
      appellant and his family fled Iran when the appellant was 2/3 years
      old and had previously lived as refugees in Iraq before returning to
      Iran. The appellant claims the previous residence in the IKR is a risk
      factor that is likely to result in the appellant being questioned upon
      arrival in Iran.  Furthermore, the appellant claims Judge Parkes
      failed to consider the appellant attendance at demonstrations in the
      UK protesting against the ill-treatment of Kurds, which again, is
      relevant to the real likelihood of the appellant being questioned by
      the authorities on return. Second, the appellant claims Judge Parkes
      erred in his assessment of the appellant's credibility and his
      consideration of the appellant's account of events in Iran.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell on
      6th November 2020 on the first ground only, relating to the
      application of the relevant country guidance and the judge's analysis
      of the risk upon return.


   8. Before me, Mr Azmi adopted the appellant's grounds of appeal.  He
      submits the appellant had lived in the IKR from the age of 2/3 until
      he was about 10 years old (in approximately 1996) and taken together,
      there are a number of factors that place the appellant at risk upon
      return. The appellant is accepted to be of Kurdish ethnicity, and a
      supporter of the KDPI.  He has previously lived in the IKR and has
      attended demonstrations in the UK.  He has engaged in social media
      activity, with posts on his Facebook account that include photographs
      of his attendance at demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy.  Mr
      Azmi submits these are all relevant to the profile of the appellant,
      and the risk to which he will be exposed on return to Iran where it is
      likely he will be interviewed.


   9. In reply, Mr Whitwell submits Judge Parkes was plainly aware of the
      relevant country guidance and referred in his decision, numerous
      times, to the 'hair trigger' approach of the Iranian authorities that
      is referred to in HB (Iran).    Mr Whitwell refers to paragraph [86]
      of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in HB (Iran) in which it was
      accepted that the appellant was likely to face additional questioning
      by reason of having lived in the IKR, however, the Tribunal went on to
      confirm that this is a factor that will be highly fact-specific and
      the degree of interest that such residence will excite will depend,
      non-exhaustively, on matters such as the length of residence in the
      KRI, what the person concerned was doing there and why they left. Mr
      Whitwell submits that although the appellant had previously lived in
      the IKR, he was there as a child between the ages of 3 and 10, with
      his family. There was no evidence of the family having encountered any
      problems in Iran following their return.  As Judge Parkes noted, the
      appellant's mother and maternal uncle remain in Iran and there is no
      evidence to show that they have been targeted by the authorities.  The
      fact of the appellant's previous residence in the IKR as a child is
      likely to excite little, if any interest at all.


  10. Mr Whitwell submits Judge Parkes found that the appellant's sur place
      activities in the UK are not motivated by any genuine commitment to
      the Kurdish cause and have been created to assist in his efforts to
      remain in the UK.  He submits Judge Parkes was careful to find, at
      [34], that the appellant ".. has created an impression of activism but
      has been careful that it is not known to the authorities and in
      circumstances that there is no danger that it will become known to
      them..".


Discussion


  11. The respondent accepts the appellant is a supporter of the KDP but
      rejected the appellant's claim that he worked for the KDP and had come
      to the adverse interest of the authorities in Iran.  At paragraph [28]
      of his decision, Judge Parkes said:


         "28. ... I do not believe that the appellant took part in
         leafleting for the KDP, I reject the claim that when doing so he
         was seen and then informed on and his friend later arrested causing
         the appellant to flee Iran. The Home Office accepted that the
         appellant was a supporter of the KDP but on the evidence available
         it appears to have been at the lowest level possible, more like
         someone who supports a football club but never goes to matches,
         home or away, and vaguely follows the results and the teams place
         in the table."


  12. All that the appellant was left with, are his activities since leaving
      Iran.  That is, his attendance at demonstrations outside the Iranian
      Embassy and what is posted on a Facebook account that does not bare
      his full name.


  13. The issue in the appeal before the FtT was what would await the
      appellant on return to Iran in light of the findings made by Judge
      Parkes regarding the appellant's sur place activities in the UK.
      Judge Parkes referred to the country guidance and the 'hair-trigger'
      approach to those suspected or perceived to be involved in Kurdish
      activities or support for Kurdish rights. Judge Parkes undoubtedly had
      the country guidance in mind when reaching his decision.


  14. It is uncontroversial that a returnee without a passport is likely to
      be questioned on return to Iran.  In HB, the Tribunal heard oral
      evidence from two expert witnesses, Anna Enayat and Professor Emile
      Joff�.  It declined to give guidance to the effect that a risk of
      persecution arises where an individual is involved in the making, re-
      posting or otherwise publicising critical, insulting satirical etc
      comments about Islam, Islamic religious figures, the Qur'an, Iran's
      policies or regime members, online on social media networks whether in
      Iran or abroad; see [81].  At paragraph [82], the Upper Tribunal said:


         "However, we consider that such proposed guidance is way outside
         the scope of the case before us and in any event is far too widely
         drawn. Although there was evidence before us regarding the
         potential risk for those whose internet activity/social media use
         may attract the adverse attention of the authorities, that was not
         a matter which the parties or experts engaged with in relation to
         the giving of country guidance in terms, for example, of the
         ability of the Iranian state to monitor such activity. Indeed, in
         oral evidence Ms Enayat said that she had not been asked to deal
         with the question of social media in her instructions (although she
         had given evidence on the issue in AB and Others). We also take the
         view that such a consideration is likely to require some technical
         evidence and such was not before us. Social media use is, however,
         relevant to this particular appellant's appeal and we consider it
         in that context."


  15. The contents of the Facebook posts in HB are referred to in paragraphs
      [111] to [112] of the decision:-  "In general, as revealed in the
      posts that have been translated, they express support for the Kurdish
      political cause and express opposition to the Iranian regime. They
      consist of shared posts from individuals and from, for example, the
      Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan(PDKI) Scotland and one from
      Denmark".


  16. At paragraphs [113] to [116], the Upper Tribunal said:


         "113.    Mr Metcalfe submitted that there is insufficient evidence
         that the Iranian authorities would necessarily be aware of that
         material and that the evidence did not establish that the Iranian
         authorities routinely inspect the internet profiles of failed
         asylum seekers.


         114. However, we noted at [97] above that it is not disputed that a
         returnee without a passport is likely to be questioned on return,
         confirmed in the expert evidence before us and recognised in
         existing current country guidance, for example, SSH and HR. Ms
         Enayat's evidence was that it is part of the routine process to
         look at an internet profile, Facebook and emails of a returnee. A
         person would be asked whether they had a Facebook page and that
         would be checked. When the person returns they will be asked to log
         onto their Facebook and email accounts. That is also the effect of
         her evidence given in AB and Others which was accepted by the
         Tribunal in that case (see [457]).


         115. Mr Metcalfe accepted that the material posted by the appellant
         on Facebook, if it became known to the authorities, would expose
         him to prosecution with a risk of imprisonment and that this would
         result in a real risk of ill-treatment. It was also accepted that
         the appellant's Facebook page is currently visible to the public at
         large.


         116. We are satisfied that the content of the appellant's Facebook
         page would become known to the authorities on return as part of the
         process of investigation of his background. That is the effect of
         the expert and background evidence before us.  It is then, no step
         at all to the conclusion that this would involve a real risk of
         persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment in his case, by reason of
         detention and ill-treatment and likely prosecution. His Facebook
         posts would reveal not only his support for Kurdish rights but also
         his having insulted the Iranian regime and leading figures in it.
         This is reasonably likely to be regarded not only as having
         'crossed the line' in terms of political views or activity, but
         also in terms of religious dissent."


  17. The ultimate question is whether the behaviour of the appellant, no
      matter how cynical or manufactured, would result in a risk of
      persecution on return; if so then he may establish his right to
      protection. Having established the particular behaviour, the next
      question to be asked is whether that behaviour does place the
      appellant at risk.


  18. The country guidance establishes that on return, it is part of the
      routine process to look at an internet profile, Facebook and emails of
      a returnee.  Judge Parkes noted at paragraphs [29] that the appellant
      was inconsistent about whether the Facebook account he now uses is a
      new account or a reactivated account from when he first arrived in the
      UK.


  19. At paragraphs [34] to [36], Judge Parkes said:


         "34. As the appellant would be aware of the attitude of the
         authorities and the danger to family members if he did something
         that was not approved it strongly suggests that the appellant has
         created an impression of activism but has been careful that it is
         not known to the authorities and in circumstances that there is no
         danger that it will become known to them.


         35.  It is well known that posts on Facebook can be altered as
         required with the settings made public or private as desired.
         Screenshots are only evidence of the state of the account and its
         postings at the moment the screenshot is taken, and the profile can
         be altered immediately afterwards.


         36.  The Home Office question whether the Facebook account relied
         on is the appellant's given the name used as different from the
         appellant's. Assuming that it is the appellant's account there is
         no evidence that it is known the (sic) or that there is a
         reasonable degree of likelihood that it will be. Given the
         appellant's lack of bona fides and with his actions lacking any
         genuine conviction it would be entirely reasonable for the
         appellant to remove the posts that might be of interest to the
         authorities if, on his return, they wish to see his Facebook page."


  20. Judge Parkes found the appellant is a supporter of the KDP at the
      lowest possible level and rejected the appellant's account of events
      in Iran.  In Iran, the appellant had not been involved in any
      political opposition to the Iranian government and although the family
      had lived in the IKR previously as refugees, they had been able to
      return to Iran without any apparent difficulty.


  21. It is in my judgment clear that when the decision is read as a whole,
      Judge Parkes considered the appellant's evidence regarding his
      attendance at demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy, as part of
      his consideration of the appellant's sur place activities.  The
      evidence of the appellant's attendance at the demonstrations was
      rooted in the photographs posted on the Facebook account relied upon
      by the appellant, which referred to his attendance at demonstrations.
      At paragraph [30] of his decision Judge Parkes referred to the
      evidence before the Tribunal regarding the appellant's attendance at
      demonstrations.  There is nothing in the decision that begins to
      suggest that Judge Parkes rejected the appellant's claim that he had
      attended demonstrations. The relevant Country guidance indicates some
      surveillance at demonstrations but there is nothing to suggest that on
      the findings made, the appellant's own profile would place him at
      risk.


  22. There was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant
      has attended demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy and had made a
      number of posts on a Facebook account, but it was not clear whether
      that is a new account or a reactivated account from when the appellant
      first entered the UK.  What is not in dispute is that the Facebook
      account now being used is not in the full name of the appellant.  If
      the Facebook account is a new account, the appellant would no doubt
      disclose his previous account upon which I can only assume there are
      no adverse posts.  If the appellant has simply reactivated his
      previous Facebook account, it is, as Judge Parkes noted, entirely
      reasonable for the appellant to remove the posts that might be of
      interest to the authorities, if, on his return, they will wish to see
      his Facebook page.  The conclusions reached by the judge must be
      considered in the context of his finding, at [34], that the appellant
      has created an impression of activism but has been careful that it is
      not known to the authorities and in circumstances that there is no
      danger that it will become known to them.


  23. At paragraph [37] of his decision, Judge Parkes referred to the
      guidance set out in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, which plainly requires
      an individual and fact-specific inquiry.  He said:


         "... As I found above the appellant did nothing in Iran that could
         have been conceived as support for the KDP or Kurdish affairs in
         Iran and would not have come to the attention of the authorities or
         be of any interest to them. There is nothing that the appellant has
         done outside Iran that have made him of any interest on return and
         the deletion of posts on a Facebook account is entirely reasonable
         given that they have only been created to bolster his claim."


  24. The appellant will not have to lie if asked if he is opposed to the
      Iranian government; he is not. If he chooses to say he is opposed to
      the government, that itself is a lie and a matter for him.  On the
      findings made by Judge Parkes, the appellant has no reason to inform
      the Iranian authorities that he has been involved in anti-government
      activities because any social media activity and attendance at
      demonstrations is not predicated upon any genuine political
      involvement.  To assert otherwise would be inaccurate. At its highest,
      the appellant is a supporter of the KDP at the lowest possible level,
      but he is not an individual that has engaged in even 'low-level'
      political activity or activity that is perceived to be political.


  25. All that remains is the appellant's claim that he has previously lived
      in the IKR with his family.  I accept Judge Parkes does not expressly
      refer to the appellant's previous residence in the IKR, but that in my
      judgement is immaterial.  As the Tribunal noted in HB (Iran), a period
      of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee is reasonably likely to
      result in additional questioning by the authorities on return.
      However, this is a factor that will be highly fact-specific and the
      degree of interest that such residence will excite will depend, non-
      exhaustively, on matters such as the length of residence in the KRI,
      what the person concerned was doing there and why they left.  Here,
      the appellant will legitimately be able to confirm that his family
      lived in the IKR previously as refugees and returned to Iran in or
      about 1996.  He will be able to confirm to the authorities that the
      family had lived in Iran since 1996 without incident and that his
      mother and uncle continue to do so, without incident.


  26. The Facebook posts as described, and the appellant's evidence
      regarding the demonstrations attended, together with the lack of other
      political activity were all considered by Judge Parkes, who, in the
      context of the appellant's overall lack of political engagement on
      anything other than in the loosest sense, reached a conclusion that
      was open to him.  Judge Parkes was not satisfied that the appellant
      has been involved in any political opposition based on a genuine
      belief such as would put him at risk upon return. On return, when
      questioned, the appellant has no reason to inform the Iranian
      authorities that he has been involved in anti-government activities
      because his attendance at the demonstrations was not predicated upon
      any genuine political involvement. For him to assert otherwise, would
      be inaccurate.


  27. On a proper application of the country guidance set out in HB (Kurds)
      it is clear that those of Kurdish ethnicity are reasonably likely to
      be subjected to heightened scrutiny on return to Iran. However, the
      mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity with or without a
      valid passport and even if combined with illegal exit, does not create
      a risk of persecution.  I accept as Mr Azmi submits, Kurdish ethnicity
      is nevertheless a risk factor which, when combined with other factors,
      may create a real risk. Even low-level activity perceived to be
      political, such as, possession of leaflets supporting Kurdish rights
      involves a risk of persecution, but each case depends on its own
      facts. Judge Parkes carefully assessed the likelihood of the
      appellant's activities bringing him to the adverse attention of the
      authorities. He rejected the appellant's underlying account of events
      in Iran and found that the appellant would not be identified as
      someone of adverse interest because of his sur place activities.  It
      was open to him to reach that decision for the reasons he has given.


  28. Judge Parkes carefully considered the evidence of the sur place
      activities relied upon by the appellant in the context of the relevant
      jurisprudence and concluded, in line with country guidance, that the
      activities of the appellant would not lead to his identification as
      someone suspected or perceived to be genuinely involved in Kurdish
      activities or support for Kurdish rights. That was a conclusion the
      judge was entitled to come to, on the evidence before him.


  29. Although the decision could have been better expressed, an appellate
      court should resist the temptation to subvert the principle that they
      should not substitute their own analysis and discretion for that of
      the Judge by a narrow textual analysis which enables it to claim that
      the Judge misdirected themselves.  It is not a counsel of perfection.
      An appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not an opportunity to undertake a
      qualitative assessment of the reasons to see if they are wanting,
      perhaps even surprising, on their merits.


  30. A fact-sensitive analysis of the risk upon return was required.  In my
      judgement, Judge Parkes clearly had in mind the "pinch point" at which
      the appellant will be brought into direct contact with the authorities
      in Iran and is likely to be questioned.    It is clear that the more
      active a person has been, the more likely the authorities interest
      could lead to persecution.  The findings made by Judge Parkes were
      findings that were properly open to him on the evidence before the
      FtT.  The findings cannot be said to be perverse, irrational or
      findings that were not supported by the evidence.  Having carefully
      considered the decision of the FtT, I am quite satisfied that the
      appeal was dismissed after the judge had carefully considered all the
      evidence before him and upon a proper application of the country
      guidance.


  31. It follows that in my judgment, there is no material error of law in
      the decision of Judge Parkes and I dismiss the appeal.


Decision


  32. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Parkes promulgated on 24th August 2020 shall stand.


  33. I make an anonymity direction.




Signed   V. Mandalia                                                 Date:
     12th April 2021
 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



