
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04982/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th September 2018                        |On 15th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 mr m s s h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman, Counsel instructed by Linga and Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. An anonymity direction has been made in this appeal which I extend.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Lloyd to dismiss the Appellant's appeal insofar as  it  was  made
    upon protection grounds, but to allow it on the ground that his removal
    would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8
    of the Human Rights Convention.  For these purposes the  facts  can  be
    shortly stated.  The Appellant's protection claim was based on what  he
    claimed to be a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of his  LTTE
    activities and sympathies when he was in Sri Lanka.  For  reasons  that
    are not challenged by way of a cross-appeal, the judge roundly rejected
    that claim by wholly disbelieving the Appellant as to the circumstances
    he claimed had given rise to that fear.  That  finding  is  potentially
    significant within the context of one of the two grounds of appeal  now
    raised by the Secretary of State.

 3. Part of the evidence that the Appellant relied on  in  support  of  his
    protection claim was a medical report by Dr Lawrence in which he opined
    that the Appellant was suffering from post-traumatic  stress  disorder.
    It was the Appellant's case that he was suffering from  that  condition
    as a direct result of his experiences in Sri Lanka as an LTTE activist.



 4. At paragraph 34 of his decision, Judge Lloyd held that in view  of  his
    factual findings concerning claimed events in Sri Lanka, the  Appellant
    did not fall within any of the risk categories listed in GJ  and  Othrs
    (Post-Civil War: Returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319.   That
    decision is  uncontroversial.  However,  it  is  what  the  judge  said
    thereafter that gives rise to the Secretary of State's appeal:-

         "35. However, the matter does not quite end there.  Although I have
             not accepted his account of persecution, I  come  back  to  Dr
             Lawrence's report which I do  find  provides  strong  evidence
             that, regardless of the cause, the Appellant is suffering  the
             pronounced effects of PTSD and  depression.   I  accept  those
             diagnoses although make no further findings  as  to  the  root
             cause of the PTSD.

         36.  I note on page 25 of his report, Dr Lawrence goes on  to  talk
             about treatment and prognosis.  He confirmed that whatever the
             cause  of  the  PTSD  and  major  depressive  episode,   those
             conditions would be treatable in  the  UK  but  would  not  be
             effective if in a situation  where  the  Appellant  was  still
             afraid of returning to the source of whatever the  threat  is.
             Dr Lawrence went on to give his  opinion  regarding  treatment
             and recommended increased and  altered  medication.   He  then
             goes on to talk about the facilities available in  Sri  Lanka.
             Dr Lawrence visited Sri Lanka personally at the  time  of  the
             tsunami  noted  that  medication  was   available   but   that
             psychotherapy was only available to the expatriate  community.
             Even that did not include proper trauma reduction therapy.  He
             was however aware of changes in available medical treatment in
             Sri Lanka since that time and adopted the findings of  a  2015
             report  indicating  that  psychiatric  counselling  and  other
             treatments were available, most of which  was  at  the  mental
             health unit at the University of Jaffna.

         37.  However, Dr Lawrence was also of the opinion, which I  accept,
             that despite  the  improvement  in  available  treatment,  the
             Appellant's symptoms would undoubtedly be made worse by return
             to Sri Lanka.  Although I have not  accepted  the  Appellant's
             account of the cause of these conditions, Dr Lawrence was very
             clear in his view that  the  Appellant  was  still  afraid  of
             return to Sri Lanka.  He also  concluded  that  the  Appellant
             would be at a greatly increased risk of suicide if any attempt
             were made to remove him.

         38.  I accept  those  elements  of  Dr  Lawrence's  report  as  his
             clinical  findings.   Accepting  those   findings   does   not
             undermine  my  conclusions  with  regard  to  the  Appellant's
             account of persecution.  Dr Lawrence's conclusions do not lead
             me to  find  that  the  very  high  threshold  for  Article  3
             protection under N (FC) v SSHD 2005  UKHL  31  would  be  met.
             That being said, I'm also reminded that in Ullah and Do (2003)
             Imm AR 317, the Court of Appeal confirmed that  mental  health
             must also be regarded  as  a  crucial  part  of  private  life
             associated with the aspect  of  moral  integrity.   Article  8
             protects a right to  identity  and  personal  development  and
             pointed out that the preservation of mental  stability  is  an
             indispensable precondition to the effective enjoyment  of  the
             right to a private life.  The  physical  and  moral  integrity
             aspect of an individual's right  to  a  private  life  can  be
             engaged by removal.

         39.  On that basis, I find article 8  engaged.   The  risk  to  the
             Appellant's mental health is well documented  by  Dr  Lawrence
             and I accept his findings on  that  relatively  narrow  point.
             The Appellant has been present  in  the  UK  since  2009.   He
             clearly does not meet the requirements under  the  Immigration
             Rules  under  paragraph  276ADE   for   20-years'   residence,
             nonetheless he has been here for an appreciable period.  I  do
             however find that his mental health difficulties would present
             a very significant obstacle to integration in Sri Lanka and so
             would meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  in  that
             regard.  I note the considerations under section 117B  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Some  of  those
             considerations weigh  against  the  Appellant.   There  is  no
             evidence that he is financially independent and  his  presence
             in the UK is (sic) at all times been precarious.   However,  I
             have found, as above, that there is a significant risk to  the
             Appellants (sic) moral and physical integrity and  that  there
             are very significant obstacles to return.  I find  that  these
             outweigh the public interest in effective immigration control.

         40.  Accordingly, I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds."

 5. The grounds extend to eight paragraphs but can  be  summarised  as  two
    specific grounds.  The first ground, as set out in paragraphs 6 and  7,
    is that having rejected the  Appellant's  claimed  reason  for  fearing
    return  to  Sri  Lanka,  it  was  not  reasonably  open  to  the  judge
    nevertheless to accept Dr Lawrence's conclusion that he  was  suffering
    from post-traumatic stress disorder due to some other reason.  I  agree
    that it is something of a stretch on the one hand to reject the  causes
    of the PTSD as the Appellant claimed them to be, whilst also  accepting
    Dr Lawrence's diagnosis.  Nevertheless, I  conclude  that  this  was  a
    finding that was open to the judge.  I am reminded by Mr  Coleman  that
    findings of fact such as these  should  not  be  lightly  disturbed.  I
    agree.  In my view, it was  open  to  the  judge  to  accept  that  the
    appellant  had  suffered  psychological  trauma  whilst  rejecting  his
    account of the circumstances in which he had suffered it.  I  therefore
    reject this ground of appeal.

 6. I now turn to the Ground of Appeal as set out in paragraphs  3  and  4.
    This has given me considerably more pause for thought.   The  Secretary
    of State relies on the well-known case  of  GS  (India)  &  Ors  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 in  which
    Lord Justice Laws held as follows:-

         "86. If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold it  does  here),
             Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate  or  additional
             factual element which brings the case  within  the  Article  8
             paradigm - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a
             state of affairs having some affinity with the paradigm.  That
             approach was, as it seems to me, applied  by  Moses  LJ  (with
             whom McFarlane LJ and the Master of the Rolls  agreed)  in  MM
             (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at paragraph 23:

                  'The only  cases  I  can  foresee  where  the  absence  of
                  adequate medical treatment  in  the  country  to  which  a
                  person is to be deported will be relevant to Article 8, is
                  where it is an additional factor  to  be  weighed  in  the
                  balance, with other factors  which  by  themselves  engage
                  Article 8.  Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  Appellant  had
                  established firm family ties in  this  country,  then  the
                  availability of continuing medical treatment here, coupled
                  with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for  support,
                  together establish 'private life' under  Article  8.  That
                  conclusion would not involve a comparison between  medical
                  facilities here and those  in  Zimbabwe.  Such  a  finding
                  would not offend the principle expressed  above  that  the
                  United  Kingdom  is  under  no  Convention  obligation  to
                  provide medical treatment here when it is not available in
                  the country to which the Appellant is to be deported.'

         87.  With great respect this seems to me to be entirely  right.  It
             means that a specific case has to be made under Article 8.  It
             is to be noted that MM (Zimbabwe) also shows that  the  rigour
             of the D exception for the purpose of Article 3 in such  cases
             as these applies with no less force  when  the  claim  is  put
             under Article 8:

                  '17. The essential principle is that  the  ECHR  does  not
                      impose any obligation on the  contracting  states  to
                      provide those  liable  to  deportation  with  medical
                      treatment lacking in  their  'home  countries'.  This
                      principle applies even where the consequence will  be
                      that  the  deportee's  life  will  be   significantly
                      shortened (see Lord Nicholls in N  v  Home  Secretary
                      [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N v UK [2008]  47  EHRR
                      885 (paragraph 44)).

                  18.  Although that principle was expressed in those  cases
                      in relation to Article 3, it  is  a  principle  which
                      must apply to Article 8. It makes no sense to  refuse
                      to recognise a 'medical care' obligation in  relation
                      to Article 3, but to acknowledge it  in  relation  to
                      Article 8.'"

 7. Mr Coleman reminded me that the decision in MM (Zimbabwe) was concerned
    with an appeal against deportation.  However, its principles are in  my
    view applicable equally to all cases of removal, as are those  set  out
    in the judgement of the conjoined appeals in  GS (India).

 8. Mr Coleman also reminded me that the judge decided this  appeal  within
    the context of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration  Rules,  and  he
    thus argued that the judge was entitled to find  that  the  Appellant's
    mental  health  difficulties    constituted   the   "very   significant
    difficulties" which is the test under that provision.  I do not however
    accept that one can consider paragraph  276ADE  as  an  entirely  self-
    contained  code  that  operates  outside  the  scope   of   Article   8
    jurisprudence.  As is clear from its  heading  ("requirements  ...  for
    leave to remain on  grounds  of  private  life")  paragraph  276ADE  is
    intended to reflect the Secretary of State's view of the  operation  of
    Article 8 in private life cases.  It is often said that Article 8 cases
    must be viewed through the  lens  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   In  my
    judgement the reverse is also true, namely, that the Immigration  Rules
    should be viewed through the lens of Article 8 jurisprudence.

 9. Whilst it is true that the judge also referred to the Appellant  having
    been in the UK for "an appreciable period", this was  said  by  way  of
    explanation for why he found  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirement under paragraph 276ADE(iii) of having been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of at least 20 years. It is thus clear,  from  the
    passage I cited at paragraph 4 (above), that the sole reason  that  the
    judge gave for  his  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would
    constitute a breach of his rights under  Article  8  was  that  he  was
    suffering from mental health difficulties.  That much is clear from the
    following  sentence:  "I  do  however  find  that  his  mental   health
    difficulties would present a very significant obstacle  to  integration
    in Sri Lanka and so would meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  in
    that regard".

10. It is in my view clear from the judgements in GS (India) &  Ors  v  The
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  that  mental   health
    difficulties  cannot  of  themselves  suffice  to  engage  Article   8,
    particularly where (as the judge  found  in  this  case)  those  mental
    health difficulties do not cross the high threshold necessary to engage
    Article 3.  Were it otherwise, anybody  who  could  not  succeed  under
    Article 3 would nevertheless succeed under Article 8 on  precisely  the
    same grounds. As was said in  GS  (India),  Article  8  cannot  prosper
    without some separate and  additional  factual  element  where  it  has
    failed under Article 3.  Given that the judge made no reference to  any
    separate and additional factual element whereby it  could  succeed,  it
    follows that he fell into error in holding that the appellant's  rights
    under Article 8 would be breached upon removal.  Moreover,  given  that
    the Appellant's mental health difficulties were  the  sole  basis  upon
    which the judge concluded that Article 8 was engaged, it  follows  that
    dismissal was the only permissible outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

11. The appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  the  appeal  is  set
    aside and substituted by a decision to dismiss the appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 10th October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly




