
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/04439/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 April 2019                       |On 30 April 2019                  |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    O M B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Miss L Irvine, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the UT against a determination  by  FtT  Judge
    Buchanan, promulgated on 24 August 2018, on grounds set out  at  length
    in her application for permission dated 23 October 2018.

 2. Ground 1 is "error  as  to  treatment  of  medical,  psychological  and
    psychiatric evidence", sub-divided into error as to evidence of (1) the
    A & E consultant, (2) the psychiatrist, and (3) the psychologist.

 3. Ground 2 is "failure  to  take  into  account  corroborative  objective
    evidence" about the extent of child abuse, including sexual  abuse,  in
    Nigeria.

 4. Ground 3 is "error of fact and in any event irrational findings  as  to
    appellant's credibility in terms of the delay in the asylum claim".

 5. On 26 December 2018  UTJ  Bruce  granted  permission  on  all  grounds,
    observing that, "In particular, it is arguable that the  FtT  erred  in
    taking a Mibanga approach to the medical evidence".

 6. The SHHD filed a response to the grant of  permission  on  14  February
    2019.  This submits that the FtT directed itself to the conclusions  of
    the medical experts at 8.8, 8.9, &  8.11;  considered  the  appellant's
    diagnosis in relation to inconsistencies at 8.21,  8.25,  &  8.41;  the
    references at 9.2-3 were summaries of matters already  considered;  and
    although the judge did not refer  explicitly  to  the  opinion  of  the
    psychiatrist at 8.8-9, regard was had to it at  various  parts  of  the
    fact-finding exercise, such as 8.19 & 8.21.

 7. The main points which I noted from the submissions of Miss Irvine  were
    these:

      i) The principal complaint is in ground 1.

     ii) On ground 1.1, the A & E consultant's report (item 3,  pp.16  -  19
         appellant's first bundle in the FtT) disclosed scarring at level  C
         on  the  Istanbul  Protocol,  highly  consistent  with  the  trauma
         described and with few other  possible  causes.   The  author  also
         described the appellant's anxiety, depression  and  possible  PTSD,
         although not within his area of expertise.

    iii) The decision at 8.8 quotes the opinion, but does not  consider  how
         the report might bear on credibility.

     iv) 8.9 refers to the psychologist's report  [on  the  bearing  of  the
         appellant's diagnosis on her recall] but  there  is  no  equivalent
         paragraph about the psychiatrist's report.

      v) The decision reaches its essential  conclusion  on  credibility  at
         8.47, and only thereafter at 9.1 evaluates  the  medical  evidence,
         which is a crucial error.  There  is  no  explanation  of  why  the
         reports have no bearing on credibility.

     vi) This is the error exemplified in Mibanga [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367  at
         [25].

    vii) MT (Credibility assessment flawed, Virjon B applied) Syria [2004]
         UKIAT 00307 is a comparable instance of using  adverse  credibility
         findings  to  reject  medical  evidence,  and  of  dismissing  such
         evidence on a peremptory and unreasoned basis.

   viii) The argument would stand even if the  paragraphs  of  the  decision
         were in a different order, because there was no explanation of  how
         the findings on the Istanbul Protocol were factored in.

     ix) On ground 1.2, the psychiatrist's report (item G, respondent's  FtT
         bundle) also observed the appellant's tearful and  agitated  state,
         and supported her history of complex trauma. The decision  at  8.21
         and 8.41 takes an adverse point from the appellant elsewhere saying
         that she did  not  know  the  cause  of  her  mother's  death,  yet
         elaborating an account to the psychiatrist.  It was not open to the
         judge to reject the findings of the psychiatrist without  giving  a
         reason.

      x) The absence of even a narration of the psychiatrist's opinion at G5
         was a significant omission.

     xi) All 3 reports bore upon how the appellant presented herself, and at
         a minimum there had to be an explanation for rejecting that.

    xii)  On  ground  1.3,  the  psychologist's  report  (item  4,  pp.29-53
         appellant's  first  bundle  in   the   FtT)   reached   significant
         conclusions: at 4.30, 5.1, and 6, symptoms of  depression,  anxiety
         and PTSD.

   xiii) The  decision  erred  by  summarising  that  opinion  at  8.9,  but
         evaluating it only at 9.3, after the adverse conclusion at 8.47.

    xiv) There was nothing to add to ground 2, and only a little to  add  to
         ground 3.

     xv) The appellant explained her delay in claiming  asylum.   The  judge
         misapprehended her explanation at 8.35, as the woman with  whom  he
         thought she might have discussed matters was not a  friend,  but  a
         woman whom her boyfriend had made pregnant, and whose  company  was
         forced upon her.

    xvi) It was irrational at 8.37 to find that  the  appellant  might  have
         claimed  while  in  Edinburgh   and   in   contact   with   medical
         professionals, when her situation was  a  life-threatening  medical
         emergency.

   xvii) All the errors went to the  credibility  assessment,  so  the  case
         should be remitted to the FtT.

 8. I observed that the respondent's decision dated 19 March 2018  rejected
    the claim on the alternative grounds that, even if  the  appellant  had
    been abused by her father in Nigeria, (a) there is legal sufficiency of
    protection in that country, and (b) internal relocation  is  available.
    If the case fell to be resolved by either or both of those criteria, it
    did not obviously need to go back to the FtT, even if  the  credibility
    findings were set aside.  Miss Irvine said that those two  issues  were
    dealt with in the appellant's evidence and written submissions  to  the
    FtT, but are not mentioned in its decision.  She  submitted  that  they
    could only be dealt with as part of a remitted hearing.

 9. Mr Govan advanced the following points:

      i) The judge reached a clear and sustainable finding  on  credibility.
         It might have been an error not to state conclusions on sufficiency
         of protection and on internal relocation, but that was immaterial.

     ii) If it did become necessary to resolve these issues, the  UT  should
         do so, based on the cases put by the parties to the FtT.

    iii) The judge was clearly aware of all the  medical  evidence,  setting
         out its salient features at 4, 8.9, 8.11. 8.19. 8.21 and 8.25,  all
         in advance of his credibility conclusion.

     iv) The appellant's complaint was one of  form  over  substance,  going
         only to the order of treatment.  It was recognised  in  Mibanga  at
         [24] that all ingredients of a case had to be considered.  This was
         not a case such as described there, of reaching a conclusion  "only
         by reference to the appellant's evidence and then asking whether it
         was shifted by expert evidence".

      v) There was no separate  sub-paragraph  under  the  heading  "opinion
         evidence"  on  the  psychiatric  report,  but  it  was   referenced
         elsewhere.  The judge plainly read it and took it into account.

     vi) The psychiatric report was dealt with in less detail because it was
         of lesser medical significance.  The psychiatrist recorded "complex
         trauma" but that was the acceptance of a history, not a  diagnosis.
         The psychologist's report was  a  much  longer  and  more  detailed
         document.  It was obtained later by the appellant with  a  view  to
         further advancing the mental health aspect  of  the  case,  and  in
         effect superseded the psychiatric report.  There was nothing in  it
         which might have changed the decision.

    vii) The decision was  consistent  with  the  approach  set  out  in  JL
         (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC).

   viii) Ground 2 only set out uncontentious background evidence.  There was
         no reason to think the judge was not aware of  that  evidence,  and
         nothing in it which was specific to this case.

     ix) The 3 points in ground 3 were narrow and selective.   The  decision
         explained clearly why it was not found credible that from  2012  to
         2016 the appellant had no knowledge of the availability of  asylum,
         and why it was held that she  had  given  a  vague  and  unreliable
         history of herself over that time.

      x) The appeal should be dismissed.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. Mibanga, [24 - 25]:

         "24.     It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must not
         reach his or her  conclusion  before  surveying  all  the  evidence
         relevant thereto. Just as, if I may take a  banal  if  alliterative
         example, one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient,  so  also
         frequently one cannot make a case, in the sense of establishing its
         truth, otherwise than by combination  of  a  number  of  pieces  of
         evidence. Mr Tam, on behalf of the Secretary of State, argues  that
         decisions as to the credibility of an account are to  be  taken  by
         the judicial fact-finder  and  that,  in  their  reports,  experts,
         whether in relation to medical matters or in relation to in-country
         circumstances, cannot usurp the fact-finder's function in assessing
         credibility. I agree. What, however, they can offer, is  a  factual
         context in which it may be necessary for the fact-finder to  survey
         the allegations placed before him; and such  context  may  prove  a
         crucial aid to the decision whether or not to accept the  truth  of
         them. What the  fact-finder  does  at  his  peril  is  to  reach  a
         conclusion by reference only to the appellant's evidence and  then,
         if it be negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted
         by the expert evidence. Mr Tam has drawn the court's attention to a
         decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely HE  (DRC  -
         Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321 in which,
         in paragraph 22, it said:


             "Where the report  is  specifically  relied  on  as  a  factor
             relevant to credibility, the Adjudicator should deal  with  it
             as an integral part of the findings on credibility rather than
             just as an add-on, which does not undermine the conclusions to
             which he would otherwise come."


         25.      In my view such was the first error of law into which  the
         adjudicator fell. She addressed the  medical  evidence  only  after
         articulating conclusions that the central allegations made  by  the
         appellant  were,  in  her  extremely  forceful  if  rather  unusual
         phraseology, 'wholly not credible'. Furthermore she said  that  she
         considered that the evidence did not  assist  her  because  of  her
         belief that the scars could well be reflective only of  illness  or
         disease. Although I accept that the fact  that  the  appellant  had
         identified only two of the scars as being thus reflective  did  not
         establish that the others were inflicted in the course of  torture,
         it does -- and here I choose my words with care  in  the  light  of
         what I will be proposing to my Lords as the proper disposal of  the
         appeal -- seem at  first  a  little  unlikely  that,  to  take  one
         example, the scars underneath the penis were the result of  illness
         or disease rather than of the torture of the genitals, with  which,
         by reference to a book on the medical documentation of torture, the
         doctor had regarded them as consistent. Unusually the adjudicator's
         determination had  not  included  the  usual  express  reminder  to
         herself of the  requisite  standard  of  proof.  Had  she  had  the
         standard even more in  the  forefront  of  her  mind;  had  she  in
         particular considered the scars on the penis and also, perhaps, the
         multiple linear scars on the back; and above all, had she conducted
         her reference to the doctor's evidence at the right forensic  time;
         then it is at  least  possible  that  she  would  have  come  to  a
         different conclusion."


12. JL, headnote:

         "(1)     Those writing medical reports for use in  immigration  and
         asylum appeals should ensure where possible  that,  before  forming
         their opinions, they study any assessments that have  already  been
         made of the appellant's credibility by the immigration  authorities
         and/or a tribunal judge (SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ  155  [30];
         BN (psychiatric evidence discrepancies)  Albania  [2010]  UKUT  279
         (IAC) at [49], [53])). When the materials to which they should have
         regard include previous determinations by a judge, they should  not
         conduct a running commentary on the reasoning of the judge who  has
         made such  findings,  but  should  concentrate  on  describing  and
         evaluating the medical evidence (IY (Turkey) [2012] EWCA  Civ  1560
         [37].


         (2)      They should also bear in mind that when an advocate wishes
         to rely on their medical report to support the  credibility  of  an
         appellant's account, they will be expected to identify  what  about
         it affords support to what the appellant has said and which is  not
         dependent on what the appellant has said to the  doctor  (HE  (DRC,
         credibility and psychiatric reports) Democratic Republic  of  Congo
         [2004] UKAIT 000321). The more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming
         that the account given by the appellant was  to  be  believed,  the
         less likely it is that significant weight will be  attached  to  it
         (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23]).


         (3)       The  authors  of  such  medical  reports  also  need   to
         understand that  what  is  expected  of  them  is  a  critical  and
         objective analysis of the injuries and/or symptoms displayed.  They
         need to be vigilant that ultimately whether an appellant's  account
         of the underlying events is or is not credible and plausible  is  a
         question of legal appraisal and a matter for  the  tribunal  judge,
         not the expert doctors (IY [47]; see also HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA
         Civ 306 [17]-[18]).


         (4)      For their part, judges should be aware  that,  whilst  the
         overall assessment of credibility is for them, medical reports  may
         well involve assessments of the compatibility  of  the  appellant's
         account with physical marks or symptoms, or mental  condition:  (SA
         (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302). If the  position  were  otherwise,
         the central tenets of the Istanbul Protocol would be  misconceived,
         whenever there was a dispute about claimed causation of scars,  and
         judges could not apply its guidance,  contrary  to  what  they  are
         enjoined to do by SA (Somalia). Even  where  medical  experts  rely
         heavily on the account given by the person concerned, that does not
         mean their  reports  lack  or  lose  their  status  as  independent
         evidence, although it may reduce very considerably the weight  that
         can be attached to them."


13. Ground 1 does not fairly represent the FtT's decision.

14. Although it was suggested that the judge gave no reasons for  rejecting
    the medical findings of consistency on the Istanbul  Protocol,  he  did
    not purport to reject those findings.  The essence of the A & E  report
    is set out at 8.8 to show exactly how  far  it  takes  the  appellant's
    case.  That was her  point  on  the  physical  aspect  of  the  medical
    evidence.  The decision expresses no  disagreement.   Nowhere  does  it
    "dismiss the report as a whole", as the ground puts it.  The report  is
    not rejected, but is taken as advancing the appellant's case, as far as
    it was capable of doing so.

15. The decision at 8.9 then sets out the  essence  of  how  the  appellant
    sought to advance her case by the psychologist's report, which  was  to
    explain discrepancies in her reporting over time.

16.  The  need  to  take  account  of  the  appellant's  circumstances  and
    vulnerability is mentioned more than once, e.g. at 4 and at 8.11.

17. The judge goes on to analyse the appellant's credibility under  various
    headings (taking account of whether her vulnerability might account for
    apparent  problems  in  her  evidence  not  only  generally  but   also
    specifically, e.g. at 8.25) from 8.12 up to  the  conclusion  at  8.47.
    Those are 11 pages of detailed and careful explanation, very little  of
    which is challenged by any of the 3 grounds.

18. The judge's point in reverting to the medical reports at  9.3  is  that
    the concerns of the psychologist do not  reflect  on  his  reasons  for
    reaching an adverse credibility finding.

19. Mr Govan advanced a good explanation  of  why  the  psychiatric  report
    features only to a limited extent.

20. On a fair reading of the whole decision, the judge has  kept  carefully
    in mind throughout whether anything in the reports  explains  away  the
    difficulties  which  might  otherwise  be  found   in   accepting   the
    appellant's evidence, or her latest version of it.

21. The judge's conclusions are based on surveying all the evidence, not on
    finding the appellant incredible and then looking to  see  if  anything
    might displace that.

22. Ground 2  is  also  unfair.  The  background  is  summarised  at  8.10,
    beginning with the  facts  that  domestic  violence  against  women  is
    widespread, underreported and often considered socially acceptable.  It
    is not shown that the judge "failed to  take  objective  evidence  into
    account".

23. Ground 3 is highly selective.  It does not undermine the full  analysis
    at 8.34 - 8.38 under the heading "ignorance of procedure  for  claiming
    asylum in the UK".  The appellant's opportunities  to  find  out  about
    asylum over a 4-year period did not occur only while  she  was  with  a
    woman with whom she had no reason to be  friendly,  or  while  she  was
    receiving emergency medical treatment.  The ground says  nothing  about
    the well justified finding that  the  appellant  was  remarkably  vague
    about how she spent her time over years, not just over moments.

24. The judge should have reached conclusions on sufficiency of  protection
    and on internal relocation, but those matters are not now material, and
    need not be resolved any further.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

26. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is maintained herein.

      [pic]

      24 April 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




