




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/04213/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |               Decision and Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 20 November 2017              |               On: 5 December 2017       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                                    G S F
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, counsel (instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a national of Angola, born on  24  October  1969.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge promulgated on  2  June  2016,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision to refuse his  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights claims.

   3. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  was  heard  on  8  February
      2017. The Judge recorded that the decision was signed on  5  May  2017
      but as noted, it was promulgated on 2 June 2016.

   4. In granting the appellant permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Shimmin  decided that it was arguable that the delay in deciding
      the appeal for almost four months rendered  the  decision  unsafe  and
      unlawful. It was also arguable that the Judge erred in the  assessment
      of the medical report and also '.....failed to have proper  regard  to
      the appellant's  evidence  at  the  hearing  and  in  respect  of  the
      documentation'.

   5. Ms Pinder, who did not represent the appellant before the  First  tier
      Tribunal, relied on the grounds of appeal drawn by  counsel,  who  had
      also not represented the appellant at the hearing on 8 February 2017.

   6. Ms Pinder noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that  the
      appellant's account was incredible.

   7.  She  submitted  that  the  delay  in  deciding  the  appeal  remained
      unexplained which would have a bearing on the outcome. She referred to
      various decisions in this context from the Court of Appeal,  including
      SSHD v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868. At paragraph [28] of  RK  the
      Court of Appeal referred to the decision in Sambasivan v  SSHD  [2000]
      Imm AR 85 where the Court held that in cases of delay of this kind the
      matter is best approached from the starting point that where important
      issues of credibility arise, a delay of over three months between  the
      hearing and determination will merit remittance for rehearing  unless,
      by reason of particular circumstances, it is clear that  the  eventual
      outcome of the application, whether by the same or a different  route,
      must be the same.

   8. Ms Pinder  did  not  contend  that  the  fact  of  the  delay  in  the
      promulgation of the appellant's  case  amounted  to  "a  stand  alone"
      reason for setting the decision aside.  She did contend  however  that
      the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  assessment  of   the   appellant's
      credibility might have been affected as  a  result  of  the  delay  in
      determining the appeal.

   9. She referred to the specific  grounds  set  out  in  support  of  that
      contention: At paragraph [22] of the decision, the  Judge  noted  from
      the medical report that  the  appellant  had  given  inconsistent  and
      misleading information to  Dr  Sinha,  including  the  fact  that  the
      appellant stated that he had voluntarily left the UK in  1998  because
      his father was dying, when in fact he was deported from the UK and his
      father had died in 1992.

  10. That, Ms Pinder contended, was wrong: She referred to paragraph 15  of
      the report itself. The doctor noted that the appellant was removed  to
      Angola in 1998. He  stated  that  the  appellant  confirmed  that  his
      witness statement was incorrect in stating that he chose to return  to
      Angola. He said that he was deported because it was  not  his  choice.
      Moreover, that was consistent with his account at the hearing and when
      he was interviewed. The same point is made with reference to the death
      of his father.

  11. Ms Pinder referred to a "second aspect" set  out  at  [16-18]  of  the
      decision. There the Judge referred to a letter from West London Mental
      Health NHS Trust dated 22 August 2016. The appellant is stated to have
      reported feeling depressed as his family back home kept asking him  to
      send them money and he said that he had none to send them and they  do
      not believe him.

  12. The Judge found that the appellant mentioned the reason  for  his  low
      mood, namely that his family back home asking for money and  the  fact
      that he did not have a job. There was no mention of the fact  that  he
      has a low mood as a result  of  the  torture  he  received  whilst  in
      detention in Angola. This inconsistency was found by the Judge  to  go
      to the core of his claim.

  13. The Judge also noted that the appellant stated that  he  lost  contact
      with his family a month after he arrived in December 2015. However  in
      the letter it stated that his family keeps asking for money  after  he
      moved in to shared accommodation in February 2016.

  14. Ms Pinder referred to Dr Sinha's report at  paragraph  93.  There  the
      appellant gave Dr Sinha a history which was set out  in  detail.  That
      included being seriously beaten and  suffering  life  threatening  and
      disabling injuries after being arrested, detained and  tortured.  This
      met a criterion of a diagnosis for PTSD. His presentation was markedly
      in keeping with that of a victim of  torture  and  of  inter  personal
      violence. It was not likely that the violent death of his  father  and
      siblings wholly accounted for his symptoms and diagnosis. He refers to
      the possibility that his pre-existing PTSD was  exacerbated  by  being
      seriously beaten and suffering injuries after  arrest,  detention  and
      torture. His PTSD may not have had one simple causal  event  but  from
      multifactorial circumstances.

  15. Ms Pinder submitted that there has been no  engagement  by  the  Judge
      with the findings in that paragraph.

  16. Nor did the Judge have regard to the doctor's conclusions relating  to
      whether  the  appellant  might  be  feigning   or   exaggerating   his
      psychological symptoms. He disclosed his methodology  in  arriving  at
      the conclusion from paragraph 121 and following of his  report.  There
      was nothing to suggest that he was trying to exaggerate or  feign  any
      psychological distress - paragraph 122.

  17. Ms Pinder also referred to the screening  interview  dated  19  August
      2016 undertaken by a psychological well being practitioner from Ealing
      IAPT, at pages 44-45 of the appellant's bundle. The Judge referred  to
      that report at [23]. There Mr Pallis, the psychological and  wellbeing
      practitioner noted that the appellant reported  feeling  depressed  as
      his family back home kept asking him to send money and when he says he
      has none to send, they do not believe him. However, although  properly
      quoted by the Judge, this was a preliminary form of assessment only.

  18. Nor did the Judge properly engage with Dr Sinha's  findings  regarding
      the scars. He found that these did not show that he  was  tortured  as
      claimed [24]. The scars to his head were found to be highly consistent
      with the attributed cause. There are few  other  possible  causes.  Dr
      Sinha was unable to give the age  of  the  scars  so  as  to  identify
      whether this occurred while the appellant was in detention. In  taking
      the medical report in the round he found that he could  attach  little
      weight to the medical evidence. It was a "factor"  to  be  taken  into
      account with all the other evidence in the appeal.

  19. Ms Pinder referred to the decision at [14]. The Judge noted  that  the
      appellant had stated in his  screening  interview  that  he  had  been
      detained for two months; however in his substantive interview he  said
      it had been for three months. Given that he had been  tortured  daily,
      the appellant would be able to recall whether it was for 60 days or 90
      days. That inconsistency went to the core of his claim,  damaging  his
      credibility.

  20. However, she contended that the Judge failed to  have  regard  to  the
      appellant's evidence at the hearing or  the  correspondence  from  his
      solicitors following the screening interview.  That is set out in  the
      appellant's bundle at page 36. There is a letter from the  appellant's
      solicitors dated 22 January 2016. His solicitors stated that they were
      in receipt of the full screening interview.

  21. They noted with regard to question 5.4 of the screening interview that
      the detention was for about two or  three  months.  In  the  screening
      interview it is  recorded  that  the  appellant  stated  that  he  was
      detained in Angola for protesting  for  two  months.  Accordingly  the
      appellant's  representatives  identified  various  mistakes   in   the
      screening interview record. In any event, the screening  interview  is
      not a  verbatim record.

  22. At the hearing itself, the appellant made it clear  during  his  cross
      examination that he was detained for between two and three months.

  23. I referred the representatives to the record of proceedings which were
      helpfully typed by the Judge. At page  2  the  Judge  noted  that  the
      appellant stated in evidence that he was detained for  "about  two  or
      three months." He was referred to the screening interview at paragraph
      5.4 where he stated that he had been  detained  for  two  months.  The
      appellant stated in evidence that he meant to  say  something  between
      two and three months. He said it could have been up to  three  months.
      He was referring  to  the  approximate  period  of  time.  During  his
      substantive interview he stated at Q21 that there was a confusion.  He
      was in detention for three months. There he referred to  being  abused
      and molested.

  24. In his evidence the appellant explained that he had  not  had  contact
      with his wife and the reference to not having  had  contact  with  his
      family was in fact a reference to  friends  to  whom  he  owed  money.
      Although the Judge was not required to accept that explanation, he had
      a duty to at least consider and address it.

  25. She further submitted that the Judge did  not  pay  proper  regard  to
      paragraph 120 of Dr Sinha's  report.  The  Judge  noted  that  in  the
      reasons for refusal that it was contended that it was  not  reasonable
      for the appellant to  have  been  confused  by  a  simple  and  direct
      question, especially when it had  been  previously  clarified  by  the
      interviewing officer. However, Dr Sinha  stated  that  notwithstanding
      the clarity of the question there is evidence that  discrepancies  can
      occur where honest witnesses are required to repeat their accounts  of
      events.

  26. It is acknowledged that in his screening interview the  appellant  did
      claim  that  he  had  been  arrested  and  detained.  Further,  it  is
      recognised that sufferers from PTSD may show amnesia  for  significant
      parts of the traumatic events that  triggered  their  disorder.  These
      discrepancies   between   differing   accounts   may   therefore    be
      understandable in the context of the extreme stress to  which  he  was
      subject and the fact that he has symptoms of both depression and PTSD.

  27. Ms  Pinder  thus  submitted  that  the  Judge  should  have  at  least
      considered this in the assessment of the appellant's credibility as  a
      whole.

  28. Finally, she submitted that the Judge failed to have regard to or make
      any finding relating to the appellant's membership card of Hands Free,
      the political organisation of which he claimed to be a member.

  29. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Ahmad submitted that no nexus has been
      shown between the  delay  in  completing  the  determination  and  the
      assessment of the credibility issues.

  30. Moreover the reference by the Judge to  paragraph  93  of  Dr  Sinha's
      report is that different accounts were given at different stages. That
      was noted by Dr Sinha at paragraph 15. The appellant had been  removed
      to Angola and did not go there voluntarily.

  31. She submitted that there is no duty on the Judge to make  findings  as
      to  whether  an  appellant  has  been  feigning.  Not  every  material
      consideration has  to  be  spelled  out.  The  Judge  appreciated  the
      diagnosis at [23] and has  given  little  weight  to  the  conclusions
      having regard to the evidence in the round [25].

  32. With regard to the discrepancy relating to two/three months, the Judge
      referred to the background to the appellant's  claim  at  [5],  noting
      that the appellant claimed to have been  detained  for  two  to  three
      months. She submitted that paragraph 12  of  the  appellant's  grounds
      simply amounts to a disagreement with the Judge's findings which  were
      available to him.

  33. She submitted that it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  reference  to
      "family" constituted a reference to friends to whom he owed money.

  34. Moreover, the reference at [16]  to  the  West  London  Mental  Health
      letter has been accurately set out.

  35. With regard to membership card of Free Hands,  the  Judge  noted  that
      both Unita and Free  Hands  Association  are  legal  organisations  in
      Angola.

  36. In reply Ms Pinder submitted that Dr Sinha was not concerned  that  he
      had been misled. It was the appellant who drew these  matters  to  his
      attention. Nor did the Judge engage as to how any discrepancies  could
      have arisen.


      Assessment


  37. It has not been explained why the decision took almost four months  to
      promulgate. Although it was stated to be signed on 5 May 2017  it  was
      not promulgated for almost a month after that.

  38. It is not contended that the mere fact that  there  has  been  such  a
      delay constitutes a stand alone reason for setting aside the  decision
      as unsafe. The Court of Appeal held in Sambasivan v SSHD, supra,  that
      a delay of over three months between hearing  and  determination  will
      merit  remittance  for  rehearing  unless,  by  reason  of  particular
      circumstances,  it  is  clear  that  the  eventual  outcome   of   the
      application whether by the same or a different route must be the same.
      That approach has been endorsed by the Court of Appeal in  SSHD  v  RK
      (Algeria) at [20].

  39. The appellant told Dr Sinha that he was removed from the  UK  and  did
      not voluntarily return to Angola. That he stated at  the  hearing  and
      indeed when he was interviewed.

  40. I find that the Judge incorrectly concluded that  the  appellant  "had
      given inconsistent and misleading information  to  Dr  Sinha  such  as
      voluntarily leaving the UK in 1998 when he was deported as well as his
      father having died in 1992." As noted, the appellant told  the  doctor
      that he was in fact removed from the  UK.  He  repeated  that  at  the
      hearing as well as in his interview. He informed  Dr  Sinha  that  his
      witness statement was incorrect, including the reference to the  death
      of his father.

  41. The Judge found that it was a matter of  some  significance  that  the
      appellant stated at his screening interview that he had been  detained
      for two months whereas during his substantive interview he said it had
      been for three months.

  42. However, the Judge failed to take into account the fact  that  various
      mistakes were identified by the appellant in his screening  interview.
      A letter was in fact sent to the Home Office setting  them  out.  They
      expressly clarified that the appellant had been detained  for  between
      two and three months and  not  two  months.  Moreover,  the  appellant
      stated in cross examination that he had been detained for between  two
      and three months.

  43. The Judge however did not deal with  this  evidence  as  part  of  the
      assessment of the evidence as a whole.

  44. The findings by the Judge clearly affected the weight to be  given  to
      the assessment of the appellant's credibility.

  45. In the circumstances, I find that the Judge has made  material  errors
      in considering the credibility of the appellant. I am  unable  to  say
      that the eventual outcome of his appeal  would  have  been  the  same,
      notwithstanding these errors.

  46. I accordingly set aside the decision.

  47. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
      regarding the remittal of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
      fresh decision.

  48. I am satisfied that the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision to be remade is  extensive.  There
      will be a complete re-hearing with no findings preserved. I have  also
      had regard to the overriding objective and conclude that it  would  be
      just and fair to remit the case.



      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  errors
      on a point of law.


      I set the decision aside  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, Hatton Cross for a fresh decision  to  be  made  by  another
      Judge.


      Anonymity direction continued.










      Signed                             Date 1 December 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer








