
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/04182/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2017                       |  On 17th October 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Khan of Counsel, instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Myers made following a hearing at Bradford on 31st May 2017.

    Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  14th  March  1977.   She
    entered the UK as a student on 22nd January 2012 with her  husband  and
    three sons as her dependants.  She claimed asylum in February 2013, and
    was refused, and her appeal was dismissed.  She  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 22nd July 2013.  She then lodged further submissions which
    were rejected, followed by judicial review proceedings which  concluded
    when it was agreed that her further submissions would be  reconsidered.
    After a further rejection she was issued with an  appealable  decision,
    the one before the Immigration Judge.

 3. The judge took  as  her  starting  point  the  determination  of  Judge
    Batiste, who had dismissed her original  appeal  in  May  2013.   Judge
    Batiste recorded that the respondent accepted  that  the  claimant  had
    suffered domestic abuse whilst in the UK.  He did not accept  that  she
    had suffered abuse whilst in Pakistan.

 4. However,  before  Judge  Myers,  it  was  explicitly  conceded  by  the
    Secretary of State that it was likely that the claimant  had  been  the
    victim of domestic violence in Pakistan.  Accordingly Judge Myers  said
    that she did not need to make detailed findings about the evidence  the
    appellant had submitted, which included her husband scalding  her  with
    boiling water and attacking her whilst six months pregnant, causing her
    to lose the child.

 5. Judge Myers recorded that an expert report had  been  submitted  by  Ms
    Moeen which sets out the likely risks of her suffering serious harm  if
    returned to Pakistan, such as being the victim of an honour killing  or
    losing custody of her sons.  The judge  concluded  that  there  was  no
    evidence that her husband had been actively monitoring her to check  if
    she had returned to Pakistan but did  accept  that  both  she  and  the
    children were subjectively in fear of him and believed that  they  were
    at risk of him finding them there.

 6. The evidence did not point to the husband having any desire to have the
    children live with him but she did accept that if he  learned  she  was
    back in Pakistan it was possible he could  apply  for  custody  of  the
    children solely to cause suffering to her.

 7. The judge reviewed the medical evidence, referred to the relevant  case
    law and concluded as follows:

         "I have found above that although it is likely that  the  appellant
         will have some support from her family she  would  be  at  risk  on
         return to her home area.  There is no evidence that she would  have
         a male protector and although she is well-educated  I  accept  that
         she and  her  children  are  vulnerable  because  of  their  health
         difficulties.  She has not worked for many years, and I accept that
         it would be extremely difficult for her to  find  work  to  support
         herself and her children.  She would not be able to  avail  herself
         of any State support for victims of domestic violence for  anything
         other than the short term.  Although all the children are now  much
         more settled than before and are doing well at school I accept that
         this is in the context of living safely in the  UK.   The  youngest
         child has ongoing health problems and whilst treatment is available
         in Pakistan it would be prohibitively expensive.  Taking account of
         all factors in the round and applying the lower standard of proof I
         find that internal relocation would be unduly harsh in  this  case,
         and consequently I allow the appeal on asylum grounds."

 8. The judge went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR and wrote:

         "Even if I am wrong in my conclusion that it would be unduly  harsh
         for the  appellant  to  internally  relocate  within  Pakistan,  in
         relation to the children's Section 55 interests, taking account  of
         the evidence detailed above, I  find  that  it  is  in  their  best
         interests to remain in the UK.  They are all doing well at  school,
         and the reports show that Z has realistic prospects of attending  a
         Russell Group University to study medicine.  They have lived in the
         UK since 2012 and the older two children are at an age  where  they
         will have established their own private lives.  Although I have not
         accepted the appellant's claim in its entirety and have found  that
         she has exaggerated or fabricated aspects of it, the  children  are
         not to be blamed for this.  In  relation  to  the  public  interest
         criteria,  although  the  appellant  gave  her  evidence   via   an
         interpreter, I accept that she can speak adequate English  and  all
         the evidence shows that the children are fluent  English  speakers.
         Up to present this family  has  not  contributed  to  the  economic
         wellbeing of the country in that  they  have  been  in  receipt  of
         medical and educational services, however, I am confident  that  in
         the future they should be financially independent and all have  the
         potential of being useful  members  of  society  and  of  making  a
         positive contribution."

 9. On that basis she allowed the appeal.

    The Grounds of Application

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to properly  apply  the  principles  set  down  by
    Devaseelan and that matters should be treated as settled by  the  first
    determination if the  facts  presented  are  not  materially  different
    before the second judge.

11. It was also argued that the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons
    why the claimant would be at risk of an honour crime, and even if there
    was a risk in her home area, she had erred in her conclusion  that  she
    would be able to internally relocate outside  of  Sialkot.   The  judge
    found, like IJ Batiste, that she had continuing support of her  family,
    that it was mere speculation that her husband would be  able  to  track
    her down by her ID card and that he had no desire to have the  children
    live with him.  It was recognised that the claimant  was  educated  and
    had worked and lived elsewhere prior  to  entering  the  UK  and  that,
    despite evidence relating to her mental health, there was  nothing  new
    or updated since the appeal  before  IJ  Batiste.  The  health  of  the
    children had improved to the  extent  that  they  were  flourishing  at
    school.

12. It was also argued that the Article 8 conclusions were infected by  the
    errors outlined above and that she had erred in  her  approach  to  the
    children's  best  interests,  which  were   not   the   sole   relevant
    consideration under Section 117B.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Shaerf for the reasons stated
    in the application.

    Submissions

14. Mr Diwncyz relied on his grounds  and  the  grant  of  permission.   He
    commented upon the use of  the  word  "possible"  in  relation  to  the
    husband's wish to have custody of the children and submitted  that  her
    findings on internal relocation were inadequate.

15. Ms Khan submitted that the judge was perfectly entitled to depart  from
    the conclusions of Judge Batiste given the  clear  concessions  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  following   that   determination.    There   was,
    furthermore, substantial new evidence before the judge in the  form  of
    FIRs and an independent assessment by an expert of the  effect  on  the
    appellant and her children of relocation to another area  of  Pakistan.
    There was substantial evidence before her, both from  the  schools  and
    from the various agencies involved with the family upon which the judge
    was entitled to rely in reaching her conclusions.

    Findings and Conclusions

16. When this  matter  came  before  Judge  Batiste,  after  reviewing  the
    evidence, he stated that he rejected  each  and  every  aspect  of  the
    claimant's account, including her  assertion  that  she  had  been  the
    victim of domestic violence in Pakistan.

17. There was a clear difference in the position of the Secretary of  State
    before Judge Myers in that there was a concession before her, following
    the submission of fresh evidence, that it was likely that the  claimant
    had indeed been the victim of domestic violence in Pakistan.

18. Accordingly, the submission that she should have treated  the  evidence
    in relation to that matter as settled by the  first  determination,  is
    unsustainable.

19. No argument was made in the grounds that the judge had  misapplied  the
    burden of proof in relation to the possible application for custody  of
    the children, and no application was made to amend them.

20. There was in fact  substantial  evidence  before  the  judge  from  the
    various workers  employed  by  Sheffield  City  Council  who  had  been
    involved with  this  family.   The  eldest  child  presented  as  being
    withdrawn and very quiet and hard to engage with as  a  consequence  of
    having witnessed domestic abuse.  The second child  has  suffered  from
    incontinence due to the emotional trauma which he  has  suffered.   The
    health visitor refers to him as being extremely anxious and the  family
    have been referred  to  CAMHS  for  family  therapy.   Their  emotional
    wellbeing was described as fragile.

21. The GP refers to the claimant as suffering from  a  mixed  anxiety  and
    depressive disorder, complex in nature and  relating  to  the  problems
    with her husband and looking after the children as a single parent.

22. Sheffield Children's NHS provided evidence  about  the  second  child's
    enuresis and digestive difficulties.  The CAMHS report recommended that
    it was in the best interests of all three children that they be allowed
    to remain in the UK and  all  three  had  expressed  genuine  fear  and
    anxiety about the prospect of return.

23. It appears that, over time, the children have become more  settled  and
    the eldest child in particular  is  doing  extremely  well  at  school,
    gaining an extremely impressive set of GCSE result.

24. If the judge had referred to the evidence in more detail it would  have
    rendered her decision less open to challenge.   However,  it  is  quite
    clear that the evidence was there before her. This is  a  family  which
    has suffered from extensive  mental  health  difficulties.   The  clear
    vulnerability of the children underpinned her findings that  relocation
    within Pakistan would not be reasonable.

25. So far as the Article 8 considerations are concerned,  I  would  accept
    that the judge's brief consideration of Article 8 might not  have  been
    adequately reasoned were it not for the fact that she had already found
    that the claimant had succeeded on asylum grounds.  That  is,  however,
    immaterial because I am satisfied that her decision is  sustainable  in
    relation to that aspect of the appeal.

    Decision

    The judge did not err in law.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Taylor
          Date 16 October 2017




