

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04502/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 October 2018                                |On 31 October 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    NMMH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. Following a hearing at Birmingham on 26 June 2018 the Upper  Tribunal
       found an error of law in the decision of  First-Tier  Tribunal  which
       was set aside. The rejection of the appellants claims to be  entitled
       to a grant of international protection is a  preserved  finding.  The
       scope of this hearing is set out at [15] of the earlier  decision  of
       the Upper Tribunal in the following terms:


           15.    Despite Mr Azmi's best efforts it is the finding of  this
                Tribunal that the Judge has materially  erred  in  law  such
                that the appeal on article 3 medical  grounds  must  be  set
                aside and remade. Whilst there is sympathy for the Judge  in
                light of  more  recent  authorities  these  relates  to  the
                position appertaining before the Judge warranting the matter
                being looked at afresh. The adverse credibility findings and
                dismissal of the above respondent's protection  claim  shall
                be preserved findings.



Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  on  4  May  1991  who
       arrived in the United Kingdom  on  3  February  2011  lawfully  as  a
       student with leave valid to 25 March 2012. An in-time application for
       further leave was rejected on 19  April  2012  as  was  a  subsequent
       application. On 25 March 2013 the appellant applied for asylum  which
       was refused. The appellant's appeal against the refusal was dismissed
       before both the First-tier and Upper Tribunal. The  appellant  became
       appeal rights exhausted on 15 October 2013.
    3. On 6 November  2015  at  Leicester  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
       convicted of two counts of possessing/controlling identity  documents
       with intent and was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment on each  count
       to run consecutively giving a total of 12  months  imprisonment.  The
       appellant is the subject of a  deportation  order.  On  24  May  2016
       further submissions were made which were rejected on  12  July  2016,
       and on 25 April 2017, when a decision was made refusing to revoke the
       deportation order including a  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant's
       protection and human rights  claims.  It  is  the  appellants  appeal
       against this decision that came before the First-tier Tribunal.
    4. The Judge did not find the appellant to be credible  in  relation  to
       his protection claim and found he had not established a  well-founded
       fear of persecution or an entitlement  to  a  grant  of  Humanitarian
       Protection or for leave on article 2 and 3 ECHR grounds,  so  far  as
       the protection  elements  are  concerned.  These  are  the  preserved
       findings.
    5. The Judge  considered  the  appellant's  medical  claim  pursuant  to
       article 3 ECHR which was supported by a report written by Dr N Cowan,
       a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  dated  1  November  2017.  The   Judge's
       treatment of  this  aspect  of  the  case,  limited  as  it  was  the
       consideration of the decision of the Grand Chamber in Paposhvili,  is
       discussed in detail in the Error of Law finding of 26 June 2018 which
       does not need to be repeated in the body of this decision.
    6. Directions were given for the provision of any additional evidence  a
       party seeks to rely upon no later than 4 PM 24 July 2018 with witness
       statements to stand as the evidence in chief of the maker. No further
       written evidence was received but Mr Azmi confirmed the oral evidence
       would  be  limited  to  confirmation  of  the   appellant's   current
       medication which is a prescription of sertraline 50 mg prescribed  by
       his GP, to be  taken  twice  a  day,  with  which  the  appellant  is
       compliant and, on the evidence, stable.







Discussion



    7.  Sertraline  is  a  prescriptive  medication  often  used  to   treat
       depression, and also sometimes panic  attacks,  obsessive  compulsive
       disorder (OCD) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  Sertraline
       helps  many  people  recover  from  depression.  The   appellant   is
       compliant. There is no evidence of any other form of intervention  or
       ongoing treatment in the UK.
    8. Mr Azmi referred at the start of the hearing to [6] of  his  skeleton
       argument which Mr Mills accepted was  an  issue  that  needed  to  be
       resolved as a preliminary point. Mr Azmi wrote:


           6.     IJ Andrews (at paragraphs 29, 31) places  weight  on  the
                above medical reports, but does not find the Appellant to be
                credible, as such she found no risk the Appellant  from  the
                Sri Lankan authorities. However,  she  does  find  that  the
                above reports support the Appellant's claim of detention and
                torture, but this may be due to other reasons  by  different
                people. IJ Andrews does accept the  Appellant's  account  is
                consistent with the widespread practice of torture [See  Key
                Passages pages 212 - 214, Appellants bundles]. The UT should
                proceed on the basis that the Appellant is  likely  to  have
                been detained and tortured.


    9. At [29] Judge Andrew wrote:


           29.    At paragraph 12 of his witness statement at page 3 of the
                Appellant's Bundle the Appellant referred to letters  coming
                to his  house.  When  asked  about  these  in  evidence  the
                Appellant said he was not given any details of what  was  in
                them. He had asked his mother for copies of the letters  and
                'they have sent whatever they  have'.  However,  I  have  no
                further letters before me. When I consider this in the round
                taking into account the letter which is said  to  come  from
                ALM Anver upon which, for the reasons  I  give  above  I  am
                unable to place any weight this all leads  me  to  find  the
                Appellant is not  credible  in  his  claims  that  there  is
                anything outstanding with the authorities which  would  lead
                to the Appellant being on the stop list  and  thus  being  a
                real risk on his return to Sri Lanka.


   10. At [31] Judge Andrew wrote:


           31.    I accept the Appellant's account is consistent  with  the
                widespread use of torture in Sri Lanka.  In  this  regard  I
                have noted the key passages to which I have been referred in
                the Skeleton Argument. I place weight on the reports  of  Dr
                Hartree and the report of Dr Cohen. They provide support  to
                the Appellant's claim of detention and torture. Whether this
                was  for  the  reasons  given  by  the  Appellant   is   one
                possibility but there are others.  The  Appellant  may  have
                been the victim of an attack by people with a grudge  or  he
                may have been detained and tortured by the authorities under
                other circumstances. What they do  not  do  is  support  the
                Appellant's claims that he is on a stop list and would  thus
                be at risk in Sri Lanka in accordance with the  guidance  in
                GJ and Others  (Post-Civil  War:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
                [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).


   11. The invitation by Mr Azmi to proceed on the basis this is  a  finding
       the appellant is likely to have been detained and tortured is  noted,
       as is the  preserved  findings  of  Judge  Andrew  that  the  alleged
       detention and torture did not occur for  the  reasons  the  appellant
       claims. Judge Andrew' findings may be open to an interpretation  that
       at some point the appellant may have been detained and  tortured  but
       there is no finding by Judge Andrew that  this  was  for  the  reason
       given by  the  appellant.  There  is  no  definitive  finding  as  to
       causation other than that the appellant's claim that this was at  the
       hands of the Sri Lankan authorities as a result  of  activities  that
       placed him at risk on return to Sri Lanka has not been  found  to  be
       credible. I do not find it is open to make a finding  that  any  ill-
       treatment the appellant experienced in Sri Lanka was at the hands  of
       the Sri Lankan authorities for the reasons claimed by the  appellant.
       The source of the 'trauma' leading  to  the  appellant's  psychiatric
       presentation has not been made out as being as he claimed.
   12. The report from Dr Cowan,  a  consultant  psychiatrist,  is  dated  1
       November 2017 and records the appellant's reasons for coming  to  the
       United Kingdom and symptoms as reported by the appellant. In relation
       to past psychiatric history Dr Cowan notes the appellant was seen  by
       Dr Hartree for a medico-legal report whilst in detention, who advised
       referral to the  Community  Mental  Health  Team.  Dr  Cowan  records
       information from other sources, including the preliminary  report  of
       Dr Hartree before setting out his opinion at Section J of the  report
       in the following terms:


       J: Opinion


             1. I am aware that  the  Home  Office  have  doubts  about  the
                credibility of [N's] asylum claim.
             2. In terms of the presence of any mental  disorder,  diagnosis
                often relies upon a combination of the history  the  patient
                gives,  objective  evidence  of  symptoms  in  an  interview
                situation with the psychiatrist and  corroborative  evidence
                of  symptoms  by  independent  witnesses.  Very  few  mental
                disorders are diagnosed on the basis of objectively observed
                symptoms only. Post Traumatic Stress Disorder is the  mental
                disorder most commonly diagnosed amongst refugees and asylum
                seekers. For PTSD to be diagnosed,  however,  there  has  to
                have been a trauma. In the  case  of  many  asylum  seekers,
                there is  not  always  concrete  proof  that  a  trauma  has
                occurred (e.g. police or A and E reports) and frequently, as
                in [N] case, the existence of  the  trauma  is  called  into
                question.
             3. [N] himself reports symptoms of insomnia, nightmares,  vivid
                mental imagery when waking  at  night  -  which  sound  like
                flashbacks. [N] also  reports  panic  attacks  in  which  he
                experiences chest pain and his legs turning to  jelly.  Such
                panic attacks were also witnessed - and recorded  -  in  his
                records from Morton Hall detention centre. The symptoms  are
                consistent with  the  diagnosis  of  Post  Traumatic  Stress
                Disorder (PTSD) (ICD 10 Code: F 43.1).
             4.  [N]  also  describe  chronic  low  mood  with  feelings  of
                hopelessness. He feels that he is a waste of space; that  he
                has brought trouble on everyone. At times, he  says  he  has
                felt acutely suicidal. From his  account  he  has  taken  an
                overdose, attempted to  jump  out  of  the  window  and  has
                attempted to hang himself. These were not documented at  the
                time because, according to [N] account,  either  he  or  his
                friends were too frightened to call  an  ambulance.  He  did
                report that he attempted to hang  himself  when  in  Lincoln
                prison. I did not have access to his records from the prison
                to determine whether this episode  was  reported  by  prison
                staff, however, his  presentation  at  the  Morton  Hall  RC
                caused sufficient concern to place him on an ACDT (a version
                of an ACCT, used in prisons to look after  prisoners  deemed
                to be at risk of self-harm or suicide). These  symptoms  are
                consistent with the  diagnosis  of  depression  which  would
                appear to be secondary to his PTSD and  a  response  to  the
                situation in which he finds himself (F 32.9).
             5. All the above described symptoms  appear  to  wax  and  wane
                according to his circumstances. They appear to be  at  their
                worst when he was in detention in  the  immigration  removal
                centre.
             6. [N]  describe  the  same  symptoms  consistently  over  many
                interview situations - with GPs, the CRAT, Dr  Fletcher,  Dr
                Hartree  and  an  interview  with  me.  Likewise  there  are
                multiple reports of objective symptoms of PTSD  (e.g.  panic
                attacks, extreme agitation) and low mood (tearfulness,  lack
                of facial expression and slouched posture).
             7. [N] is adamant that  he  will  be  arrested  and  placed  in
                detention again were he to return to  Sri  Lanka;  he  fears
                being subjected to  similar  beatings  and  sexual  assaults
                which he claims to have previously  experienced.  He  became
                extremely tearful when describing his fate  were  he  to  be
                returned. I am not aware that the Home Office do not believe
                he was ever arrested or detained, however I do not think  he
                would have such an intense emotional response were he to not
                be at risk were he to be returned to his country of origin.
             8. The Home Office have  commented  that  [N]  symptoms  are  a
                response to issues unrelated  to  his  asylum;  "it  is  not
                accepted  that  there  is  a  direct  causal  link   between
                deportation and the risk of self-harm in your  case.  It  is
                acknowledged that you stated in the report that ending  your
                life would be preferable to return, however the author (this
                is referring to Dr Hartree's report), also stated  that  you
                had felt stressed in 2013 by news from your  family  in  Sri
                Lanka of your father's arrest,  your  mother's  illness  and
                your family situation... This indicates that your  self-harm
                attempts were as a result of your  family  situation  rather
                than as a result of the fear of  return  to  Sri  Lanka".  I
                would dispute this interpretation on the following grounds:
                 a) [N] was very clear that he feels  that  his  foolishness
                    (in accepting the tea chest from his former schoolmates)
                    was  the  cause  of  all  his  family's  problems.  This
                    includes  his  father's  arrest  and  his  mother's  ill
                    health: i.e. it directly relates to  the  issue  of  his
                    detention in Sri Lanka.
                 b) [N] has been in a psychological state  of  "limbo"  ever
                    since he has been in the UK. He feels he  is  unable  to
                    return to Sri Lanka because he believes his only  future
                    there would involve being detained and  tortured  again.
                    At the same time he is unable to make a life for himself
                    in the UK. Therefore his suicide attempts are  a  direct
                    result of his situation  as  an  asylum  seeker  who  is
                    currently stateless.
                 c) [N] came to the UK on a student visa but  whilst  living
                    in Slough from his arrival in the UK  in  February  2011
                    until he left in 2013, he neither attended the course on
                    which he had enrolled, nor is there any evidence that he
                    attempted to work during that period (he only  attempted
                    to work when he moved to Leicester). I find it difficult
                    to understand why he would want to be in the  UK  if  he
                    did not plan to do either  of  these  things.  The  only
                    reason I can think of his reason for being in the UK  is
                    to escape the detention and torture which he described.
             9. I think there is a high risk  of  suicide  were  [N]  to  be
                compelled to return to Sri Lanka.
            10. I do not think there is any way  of  reducing  the  risk  of
                suicide.
            11. I think that [N] mental disorder, specifically  his  anxiety
                symptoms (which are part of his PTSD) affect his ability  to
                give a coherent and consistent  account.  However,  I  think
                that he is fit to give evidence in court if  allowances  are
                made for his anxiety, that is, if the questions are asked in
                a calm and measured manner and if he is given adequate  time
                to answer questions.


   13. Mr Azmi also put reliance upon the reports of Dr Hartree, the  second
       of which is dated 6 November 2017. The addendum report  was  prepared
       following  additional  documents  being  provided  which   were   not
       available when  the  original  report  was  prepared,  including  the
       psychiatric report of Dr Cowan.
   14. Dr Hartree notes, having read Dr Cowan's report, that there are  some
       differences between [N] account as stated to Dr Cowan and that  given
       to Dr Hartree  in  July  2016.  This  includes  [N]  in  the  earlier
       assessment claiming two previous suicide attempts by way of  overdose
       in approximately 2013 and 2015 which were described to Dr Cowan as an
       attempt by [N] to overdose when living in Slough, an attempt to  hang
       himself in  Leicester,  an  attempt  to  jump  out  of  a  window  in
       Birmingham and to  hang  himself  in  HMP  Lincoln.  Dr  Hartree  has
       discussed in the reports various clinical reasons  for  discrepancies
       given in accounts. Dr Hartree comments upon the respondent's  Reasons
       for Refusal  Letter  of  25  April  2017  together  with  the  asylum
       interview.
   15. Dr Hartree considers [N] level of suicide risk to be high, based  not
       only on  his  reported  symptoms  but  on  her  observations  of  his
       demeanour and reactions and  expresses  concern  that  an  actual  or
       anticipated  removal  to  Sri  Lanka  could   lead   to   a   further
       deterioration in [N] mental state which would tend  to  increase  his
       risk further [49]. At [51] - [52] Dr Hartree writes:


           51.    As discussed in paragraph 10.12 of my  report,  I  cannot
                comment upon whether [N] reported fear  of  mistreatment  in
                Sri Lanka are realistic. Subjectively, however, he described
                fearing he would be arrested and  tortured  and  his  family
                further  persecuted  if  he  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.   The
                suggested fears appear to be prominent in his  thinking  and
                will also manifest in signs of agitation.
           52.     In  my  opinion  the  subjective  fears  would  tend  to
                undermine [N] ability to access medical help, since  out  of
                fear he might try to be inconspicuous, might want  to  avoid
                people  in  positions  of  authority  including  doctors  or
                clinics, and might well want to avoid discussing the  causes
                of his ill-health, making it difficult for him to access  or
                engage with treatment. Further, any treatment for his mental
                health problems is unlikely to be effective in  a  situation
                where he continues to feel unsafe and insecure (Herman 1992,
                NICE 2005). I am therefore concerned that [N] may in  effect
                be unable to access or make use of healthcare in Sri  Lanka.
                In my opinion he therefore requires treatment in  a  setting
                where he can feel subjectively safe.


   16. As stated above, there is now available,  since  the  publication  of
       these reports, sustainable findings of Judge Andrew  in  relation  to
       the appellant's credibility. Although the appellant's  fear  of  ill-
       treatment on return to Sri Lanka is commented upon  as  a  subjective
       aspect of his presentation it has not been found  to  be  objectively
       well-founded in light of the preserved findings.
   17. Account has been taken of the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  Y
       and Z (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]
       EWCA Civ 362 in which the Court said that even  where  there  was  no
       objective risk on return, there came a point at which the undisturbed
       finding that an appellant had been tortured and  raped  in  captivity
       had to be conscientiously  related  to  credible  and  uncontradicted
       expert evidence that the likely effect of the  psychological  trauma,
       if return was enforced, was suicide. But it is not accepted  in  this
       case that there is an undisturbed  finding  the  appellant  has  been
       tortured and sexually assaulted in detention as  he  claimed  in  his
       evidence. Causation is the matter upon which the First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge expressed concern but clearly rejected the credibility  of  the
       appellant's claim.  I do not find this is a case in which it  can  be
       found the appellant's fear on return to Sri  Lanka  of  a  repeat  of
       experiences at the hands  of  the  authorities  provides  a  credible
       explanation  for  any  unwillingness  not  to  approach  the  medical
       services in Sri Lanka.
   18. Although there is comment upon the appellant's presentation and  need
       for treatment the only treatment the appellant appears to  have  been
       given is a prescription for sertraline,  indicating  engagement  with
       the medical services in the UK  and  an  assessment  of  his  current
       needs.
   19. Whilst the risk of suicide is capable engage in article  3  ECHR  the
       threshold is a very high one. In J v Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 the Court of Appeal  said  that  in  a
       foreign case the Article 3 threshold would be particularly  high  and
       even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment was not the direct or
       indirect responsibility of the public authorities  in  the  receiving
       state and resulted from  some  naturally  occurring  illness  whether
       physical or mental.
   20. Also, on appeal to the EctHR in N v UK Application 26565/05,  a  case
       involving HIV, the Grand Chamber upheld the decision of the House  of
       Lords and said that in medical cases Article 3 only applied  in  very
       exceptional circumstances particularly as the suffering was  not  the
       result of an intentional act or omission  of  a  State  or  non-State
       body.  The EctHR said that Article  3  could  not  be  relied  on  to
       address the disparity in medical care between Contracting States  and
       the  applicant's  state  of  origin.   The  fact  that  the  person's
       circumstances,  including  his  or  her  life  expectancy,  would  be
       significantly reduced was not sufficient in itself to give rise to  a
       breach of Article 3. Those same principles had to apply  in  relation
       to the expulsion of any person afflicted with any serious,  naturally
       occurring physical or mental illness which might cause suffering pain
       or reduced life expectancy and required specialist medical  treatment
       that might not be readily available, or which might only be available
       at considerable cost.
   21. In the more recent case of AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the
       Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64 the Court of Appeal concluded that
       whilst N was binding authority up to Supreme Court level,  Paposhvili
       relaxed the test only to a very  modest  extent.   The  boundary  had
       simply shifted from being  defined  by  imminence  of  death  in  the
       removing state even  with  treatment  to  the  imminence  of  intense
       suffering or death in the receiving state occurring  because  of  the
       lack of treatment previously available in the removing
   22. Other cases from Europe include MP (Sri Lanka) (Case C-353/16)  which
       considered Paposhvili and noted that the ECtHR considered there would
       be a breach of Article 3 ECHR where the person would be  at  risk  of
       imminent death or  where  substantial  grounds  had  been  shown  for
       believing that, although not at imminent risk of  dying,  the  person
       would face a real risk, on account  of  the  absence  of  appropriate
       treatment in the receiving country or the  lack  of  access  to  such
       treatment, of suffering a serious, rapid and irreversible decline  in
       his  state  of  health  resulting  in  intense  suffering  or  to   a
       significant reduction in life expectancy.  They also considered  that
       Article 4 of the European charter must be interpreted as meaning that
       the removal of a third country national with a  particularly  serious
       mental  or  physical  illness  constituted  inhuman   and   degrading
       treatment, within the meaning of that  article,  where  such  removal
       would result in a real  and  demonstrable  risk  of  significant  and
       permanent  deterioration  in  the  state  of  health  of  the  person
       concerned.
   23. In Balogun v United Kingdom (Application no. 60286/09) ECtHR  (Fourth
       Section) the Nigerian applicant submitted a report from a  specialist
       psychiatric registrar which stated  that  he  had  attempted  suicide
       after being notified of  the  refusal  of  his  human  rights  claim.
       Nonetheless, it was held that the Applicant's complaint under Article
       3  against  deportation  was  manifestly  ill-founded  and  therefore
       inadmissible  pursuant  to  Articles  55(3)  and  (4)  ECHR.  The  UK
       Government had outlined appropriate steps it  would  take  throughout
       the deportation process to protect the Applicant  from  the  risk  of
       suicide. In light of those precautions to be taken by the  Government
       and the existence of adequate psychiatric care in Nigeria, the  Court
       could not be persuaded that there would be a breach of Article  3  if
       the Applicant was deported to Nigeria (paras 29 - 34).
   24. In Tatar v  Switzerland  (Application  no.  65692/12)  ECtHR  (Second
       Section) the Turkish appellant who had been in Switzerland since 1994
       was  being  deported  for  shooting  his  wife.  He  needed  to  take
       psychotropic drugs and  undergo  therapy  to  prevent  him  suffering
       relapses into hallucinations and psychotic  delusions.  He  submitted
       that if removed, his mental health would deteriorate rapidly, placing
       him at high risk of severely harming or killing himself  and  others.
       The Swiss Government submitted that although there was no psychiatric
       facility in the Applicant's home town, there was nothing to stop  him
       relocating. Having regard to the high threshold set by Article  3  of
       the ECHR, particularly where the case  did  not  concern  the  direct
       responsibility of the Contracting State for the infliction  of  harm,
       there was not a sufficient real risk  that  the  Applicant's  removal
       would be contrary to Article 3. Medical treatment for  his  condition
       would in principle be available in Turkey within 150 kilometres  from
       the Applicant's home town and in other parts of Turkey.
   25. In UK domestic jurisprudence; in GS(India) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ
       40, Lord Justice Laws said at paragraph 46 that "the case of a person
       whose life will be drastically shortened by the progress  of  natural
       disease if he is removed to his home state does not fall  within  the
       paradigm of Article 3. Cases such  as  those  before  the  court  can
       therefore only succeed under that Article to the extent that it falls
       to be enlarged beyond the paradigms" Lord Justice  Laws  went  on  to
       refer to D v UK 1997 24 EHRR 423, which he said at paragraph  66  was
       confined to deathbed cases, as one such example, and to another  line
       of cases such as MSS v Belgium and Greece 2011 54 EHRR 2 where States
       had  taken  on  certain  obligations  to  asylum  seekers  under   EU
       Directives. At paragraph 67 Lord Justice Laws endorsed the views in N
       v UK that "aliens who  are  subject  to  expulsion  order  cannot  in
       principle claim any entitlement to  remain  in  the  territory  of  a
       contracting state in order  to  continue  to  benefit  from  medical,
       social or other forms of assistance  and  services  provided  by  the
       expelling State".
   26. The test, to be read in the light of N v UK Application 26565/05  and
       Balogun v United Kingdom (Application  no.  60286/09)  ECtHR  (Fourth
       Section), is set  out  in  J  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  The Court of Appeal set out the test
       in Article 3 cases as follows:


             i) the feared ill treatment must  be  of  a  minimum  level  of
                severity;
            ii) a causal link must be shown between the act of  removal  and
                the inhuman treatment relied on;
           iii)  in  a  foreign  case  the  Article  3  threshold  will   be
                particularly high.
            iv) in principle it was  possible  for  an  Article  3  case  to
                succeed on the basis of a risk of suicide and
             v) in a foreign case of suicide risk it would  be  relevant  to
                consider whether the fear of ill treatment in the  receiving
                state was objectively well founded; if not, this would weigh
                against there being a real risk of there being a breach; and
            vi) it would also be relevant to consider whether  the  removing
                and/or the  receiving  state  had  effective  mechanisms  to
                reduce the risk;  if  there  were,  this  would  also  weigh
                against there being a real risk of a breach.


       The Court of Appeal went on to say that the Tribunal was  correct  to
       consider separately the risk of treatment contrary to  Article  3  in
       the UK, in transit and in Sri Lanka.  In relation to the risk in  the
       UK it was open to the Tribunal to conclude that the risk  of  suicide
       in the UK would be adequately managed by the UK authorities and  that
       in combination with the support of the appellant's family they  could
       bring the risk of suicide to below the Article 3 threshold  when  the
       decision to remove was taken.  In relation to the risk of suicide  on
       route the Tribunal was entitled to infer that the Secretary of  State
       would take all reasonable steps to discharge  his  obligations  under
       section 6 of the Human Rights Act and take  judicial  notice  of  the
       arrangements that the Secretary of State made  to  escort  vulnerable
       persons on return.  In relation to the risk of suicide in  Sri  Lanka
       the Tribunal was entitled to take  into  account  the  evidence  that
       there would be family support on return, that the claimant would have
       access to medical treatment, and that his fears of  persecution  were
       not objectively justified.
   27. In AA (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 23 the Court of  Appeal  acknowledged  a
       distinguished between "domestic" cases, where the risk is of  suicide
       in this country on being told  of  the  decision  or  of  suicide  in
       transit, and "foreign" cases, where the risk relates to the situation
       after  arrival  in  the  receiving  country.  The  Court  said   "Any
       Immigration Judge is entitled to take  the  view  that  the  risk  of
       suicide in the UK upon learning of a final  decision  to  remove  her
       would  be  adequately  managed  in  this  country  by  the   relevant
       authorities: see J, ante, paragraph 57. ... Moreover, the Immigration
       Judge would be entitled to assume that the Home Secretary would  take
       appropriate measures to guard against any suicide attempt during  the
       relatively brief transit  to  Belgium,  including  the  provision  of
       appropriately qualified escorts: see J, paragraphs 61 and 62."
   28. Although Dr Cowen  claims  there  is  no  available  remedy  for  the
       appellant's suicide, Judge Andrew records at [44] of her decision:


           44.    The Appellant is presently prescribed  sertraline.  There
                is nothing before me to show that this  drug  would  not  be
                available in Sri Lanka. I also  accept  that  the  Appellant
                appears to have been reluctant to accept mental health  care
                from teams in the United Kingdom.


   29. I make a finding it has  not  been  established  that  mental  health
       services are not available in Sri Lanka both  by  way  of  inpatient,
       outpatient, and prescriptive medication of the type similar  to  that
       being taken by the appellant, even in light of the material  provided
       by Mr Azmi to support the claim the conflict in Sri Lanka has had  an
       enormous impact upon mental health services. It has not been made out
       that the appellant would  not  have  access  to  such  mental  health
       services as are available. This is not a case in  which  it  will  be
       necessary for  the  appellant  to  undertake  a  full  mental  health
       assessment as the diagnosis of depression has already  been  made  in
       the UK and can no doubt be communicated to  the  authorities  in  Sri
       Lanka on return. It is not made out  that  those  services  that  are
       available are not sufficient to meet the appellants health needs.
   30. Considering the test set out by the Court of Appeal in J v  Secretary
       of  State the Home Department I find as follows:


             1. The required minimum level of severity of ill-treatment  the
                appellant would suffer if removed is not made out sufficient
                to engage article 3. No credible ill-treatment has been made
                out at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities in  light  of
                the adverse credibility findings  made.  In  particular  the
                appellant has not established that he  will  suffer  serious
                ill-treatment amounting to an  affront  to  the  fundamental
                humanitarian principles on return to Sri Lanka.
             2. As the appellant has failed to establish a credible risk  or
                threatened  acts  of  inhumane  human  treatment   violating
                article 3 rights, it is not made out that  the  respondent's
                action in removing the appellant from the United Kingdom  to
                Sri Lanka will have as a direct consequence exposure of  the
                applicant to the prescribed ill-treatment he asserts.
             3. The appellant fails to establish  the  article  3  threshold
                discussed  above.  In  light  of  the  adverse   credibility
                findings causation of the appellant's  presentation  is  not
                made out. All that can be said is that his presentation  has
                not been found to be for the reasons the appellant claims.
             4. It is not disputed an article 3  claim  can,  in  principle,
                succeed in a suicide case.
             5. It is not made out the appellant's fear of ill-treatment  in
                Sri Lanka upon which the risk of suicide  is  based  can  be
                said to be objectively  well-founded  which  weighs  against
                there being a real risk that his removal will be a breach of
                article 3.
             6. It is not made out the United Kingdom will not have in place
                an effective mechanism to reduce the risk of  suicide  which
                will be in place  both  prior  to  and  during  the  removal
                process. It is not made out  the  appellant  will  not  have
                access to appropriate treatment in Sri Lanka  to  assist  on
                return. The appellant, in addition  to  medication  has  not
                made out he has  no  family  support  available  to  him  on
                return.


   31. Whilst it is accepted that mental health could engage article 8, even
       if the article 3 threshold  is  not  reached,  in  SL  (St  Lucia)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ  1894  the
       Court of Appeal commented that the focus and structure of  Article  8
       is different from Article 3.  They were unpersuaded  that  Paposhvili
       had any impact on the approach to Article 8 claims.   An  absence  of
       medical treatment in the country of return would not of itself engage
       Article 8.  The only relevance would be where that was an  additional
       factor with other factors which themselves engaged Article 8.  Razgar
       was referred to for the proposition that  only  the  most  compelling
       humanitarian considerations were likely to  prevail  over  legitimate
       aims of immigration control. The approach set out  in  MM  (Zimbabwe)
       and GS (India) was unaltered by Paposhvili.
   32. It is not made out  the  appellant's  return  would  be  contrary  to
       article 8 which is not a matter considered in any detail,  the  scope
       of the hearing being identified as whether article 3 ECHR is engaged.
   33. In conclusion, it is not made out this is  a  case  in  which  it  is
       arguable that to return the appellant to Sri Lanka will result  in  a
       profound mental collapse, possibly amounting to a destruction of  his
       personality, sufficient to infringe his rights  under  Article  3  to
       protection against torture and  inhuman  treatment,  or  which  might
       qualify as one of those  very  exceptional  cases  in  which  medical
       services in Sri Lanka might constitute a bar to his deportation  from
       the UK.


Decision

   34. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


  Anonymity.


   35. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22 October 2018












