
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04352/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2020                              |On 24 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     OAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Boyle, instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1991 and is a Kurdish male citizen  of  Iraq.
    His home area is Kirkuk.  By  a  decision  dated  26  April  2019,  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant international protection.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 18 July 2019, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed by  legal
    error  such  that  it  falls  to  be  set   aside.   I   notified   the
    representatives of my decision at the initial hearing. Mr Diwnycz,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State, did not offer any  submissions  in
    support of the First-tier Tribunal decision.

 3. No issue was taken in the grounds of appeal with the judge's  rejection
    of the appellant's account  as  wholly  unreliable.  Consequently,  the
    judge's findings of fact on the  appellant's  account  of  past  events
    shall stand. Having rejected the  appellant's  credibility,  the  judge
    considered whether he was at real risk in his home area. At  the  time,
    background material and relevant country guidance indicated that Kirkuk
    lay in the contested area. The judge found that the appellant could not
    return to his home area, a conclusion which both parties accept.

 4. The judge then considered the option of internal flight. It was at this
    stage that the judge fell into error. At [50], the judge found that the
    appellant will be returned to Baghdad but seems to have taken the  view
    that serious risks for the appellant would only arise should he  remain
    living in that city 'long-term.' The judge  has  given  no  reason  for
    qualifying the risk to which the appellant might be exposed in Baghdad.
    She does not define what she means by 'long-term.' The country guidance
    in force at the time (AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  and  AAH  (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC))  indicated  that
    single male Iraqi Kurds faced a real risk of serious harm  should  they
    remain living in Baghdad without  identity documentation  (CSID).  That
    country guidance does not suggest that  only  those  who  remain  'long
    term' in Baghdad would be at real risk.

 5. As regards identity documentation, the judge's analysis is  not  clear.
    The judge did not 'accept that there  are  barriers  to  the  appellant
    obtaining his CSID or another passport with the help  of  his  family.'
    She observed that the appellant 'has a transferable skill having worked
    as carpenter and he has the possibility of family support  from  Kirkuk
    should he decide to live in the IKR.' The judge makes no  reference  to
    the severe difficulties in obtaining employment in the IKR to which the
    background material before her refers. Moreover, she  did  not  explain
    how 'the possibility of family support from Kirkuk' would  in  practice
    be available to the appellant. She did not explain  how  the  appellant
    would obtain a replacement CSID without himself having to travel to the
    contested area in which Kirkuk is situated. She has not made  it  clear
    how, from their home outside the  IKR,  the  appellant's  family  would
    actually assist him in the obtaining the a CSID or  how  the  appellant
    would gain access  to  the  IKR  in  the  first  instance  without  the
    document. In any event, she refers to the  assistance  being  available
    only as a 'possibility'; she has  made  no  firm  finding  that  family
    assistance is reasonably likely to be available to the appellant.

 6. In the light of what I say above, I find that the decision is flawed by
    legal error and I set it aside. Whilst there will not need to be a  re-
    examination of the appellant's account of past events in Iraq,  further
    evidence may be required in order for the decision to be remade in  the
    light of the new country  guidance,  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC).  The  Tribunal  will
    need to consider whether the appellant may now return to his home  area
    and, if not, whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to  exercise
    internal flight within Iraq. The Tribunal will need  to  make  findings
    regarding the likelihood of the appellant obtaining identity  documents
    (a CSID or the newer INID) from Iraq or Iraqi consular services in  the
    United Kingdom before he departs for Iraq. Given the fact finding which
    will be required, it is appropriate for the decision to  be  remade  in
    the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is now returned.



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  judge's
    findings rejecting the credibility of the  appellant  account  of  past
    events shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision following a hearing.


Signed                                           Date 17 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.









