
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04310/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2019                     |On 14 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 peshawa [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban, of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who claims to be  a  national  of  Iran  born  in  2000,
    although the judge thought he was in his mid to late twenties, appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent
    refusing his protection claims.  Judge Suffield-Thompson dismissed  his
    appeal.  He now appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to take into account
    relevant  evidence,  and  misunderstood  or  undervalued  some  of  the
    evidence that she did consider.  A Rule 24 response, filed on behalf of
    the respondent, takes no issue with the  grounds  of  appeal,  although
    indicating that, in the circumstances, the Secretary of State does  not
    accept that any findings of fact made in the appellant's  favour  could
    survive.

 3. In these circumstances I wrote to  the  parties  suggesting  that  that
    would be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  That
    proposal was resisted by Ms Alban  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  who
    proposed instead that the case be heard and  determined  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal in order to make findings solely on the risk on return:

         "... preserving the finding of Judge Suffield-Thompson with  regard
         to the Appellants nationality and the fact that he is a  victim  of
         torture by the Iranian authorities as these findings are not  under
         challenge."

 4. It is difficult to see how that  submission  could  properly  be  made.
    There can be no justification for supposing that the judge  erred  when
    making findings against the appellant but that her findings  in  favour
    of the appellant are sound.  Further, it is difficult to  see  how  the
    findings  in  question  could  be  "under  challenge":  they  were  not
    challenged by the appellant, it is true; but the  respondent,  who  had
    succeeded before the First-tier Tribunal, had no need to challenge them
    at this stage.

 5. Ms Alban went on to say that:

         "It is submitted that the Appellants is venerable witness and  that
         expecting the Appellant to give evidence  under  cross  examination
         for the second time is likely to be  injurious  to  the  Appellants
         wellbeing." [sic].

 6. However, whether or not the appellant is a vulnerable witness  and,  if
    so, to what extent, is a matter of dispute.  In particular, as we  have
    already mentioned, the judge found that he was not  telling  the  truth
    about his age.  That, we note, is  not  a  finding  challenged  in  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal.

 7. Be that as it may, it appears to us clear that the Secretary  of  State
    is right in not opposing the grounds based on the judge's  process  for
    reaching her determination.  In these circumstances  it  would  not  be
    sensible or rational to attempt to preserve any of her findings.

 8. The matter needs to be heard again anew, and given the  extent  of  the
    factual findings that will need to be made, we have concluded that this
    appeal is suitable for remittal.  We find that Judge  Suffield-Thompson
    erred in law.  We set aside her determination.   We  direct  that  this
    appeal be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal by a different judge.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 5 August 2019
