
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04846/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2018                             |On 15 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    A A N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Lowis instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on  14  November  1998.
    He is a Kurd and comes from Fayda in the Governorate of  Dohuk  in  the
    Independent Kurdish Region (IKR) of Iraq.

 3. In the summer of 2004, ISIS/Daesh attempted  to  take  control  of  the
    appellant's home area by force.  The appellant  fled  to  his  paternal
    aunt's house in Zakho which is some distance  to  the  west  of  Fayda.
    From there, as a result of  further  threats,  the  appellant  and  his
    family fled to Turkey.  They temporarily lived on the Turkish  side  of
    the border with Iraq.  The appellant and his family were separated when
    the camp was raided by local police.  The appellant  was  taken  by  an
    agent eventually arriving at Dunkirk in France.  It is accepted by  the
    respondent that the appellant lawfully entered the UK in February  2016
    when he was 17 years old.

 4. The appellant's father fled Iraq in 2003 and was granted ILR in the  UK
    in 2010 and subsequently British citizenship in 2012.

 5. Once in the UK, the appellant was reunited with his father.

 6. On 16 November 2016, the appellant claimed asylum.  On 5 May 2017,  the
    Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's   claim   for   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on  11  August  2017,  Judge  N  J  Osborne  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 8. Judge Osborne found, applying the  country  guidance  approved  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  ("AA(Iraq)")
    that the appellant's home area in the  IKR  was  safe.   Judge  Osborne
    applied [18] of the country guidance where it is stated:

         "The IKR is virtually violence free.  There  is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR."

 9. Recognising that return was (then) directly to Erbil in the IKR,  Judge
    Osborne concluded that the appellant had failed  to  establish  a  real
    risk of persecution or of harm  arising  from  indiscriminate  violence
    under Art 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC).   Judge
    Osborne made an additional finding that, if  necessary,  the  appellant
    could reasonably be expected to  internally  relocate  within  the  IKR
    where, although he would initially  struggle  to  find  employment,  he
    could obtain assistance from his father in the UK.

10. Finally, the judge concluded that it would be proportionate  to  return
    the appellant to Iraq and so not a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  Permission was initially refused by the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Dineen) on 2 November 2017.   However,  on  20  January
    2018, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Bruce) granted the  appellant  permission
    to appeal.

12. On 8 March 2018, the respondent filed  a  rule  24  notice  seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision.

The Appellant's Submissions

13. The appellant's renewed  grounds  of  appeal  set  out  seven  numbered
    grounds.  Ms Lowis, who  represented  the  appellant,  relied  on,  and
    expanded, upon those grounds in her oral submissions.

14. Relying upon a combination of grounds 1 3 and  5,  Ms  Lowis  submitted
    that the judge had wrongly dismissed the expert report, supporting  the
    appellant's claim to be at risk in his home area, prepared by Professor
    Bluth.  She submitted that the judge had done so because he had wrongly
    taken the Court of Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq) as  approval  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00544 (IAC) ("AA") and had wrongly been critical of Professor Bluth for
    failing to deal with the Court of Appeal's decision handed down shortly
    before his report was prepared.   She  submitted  that,  in  fact,  the
    relevant country guidance concerning any risk to the appellant  in  the
    IKR was unaffected by the Court of  Appeal's  decision  and,  in  fact,
    originated in the UT's  country  guidance  in  AA.   Professor  Bluth's
    report referred to the UT's decision and was expert opinion  supporting
    the appellant's claim which post-dated the UT's  decision.   The  judge
    was, Ms Lowis submitted, required to consider whether  to  depart  from
    the country guidance in the light of his report.   Instead,  the  judge
    failed to take it into account at all.  She submitted that  there  were
    sections in his report at para 5.2 headed  "the  general  risk  to  the
    appellant in the Kurdish Region of Iraq" and para 5.3 under the heading
    "specific risk to the appellant in the Kurdish Region  of  Iraq"  which
    supported the appellant's claim.  In particular, she submitted that  it
    supported human rights abuses (para 5.2.4) and that "it can be expected
    that the security situation in the IKR could deteriorate  very  sharply
    in the near future.  It is not safe for someone to be returned  to  the
    IKR for the foreseeable future" (at para 5.2.8).  In addition, Ms Lowis
    submitted that Professor  Bluth's  report  was  also  relevant  to  the
    circumstances to which the appellant would return in the IKR, including
    Professor Bluth's view that he would be forced to live as an internally
    displaced person (IDP) which was relevant  to  his  Art  3  and  Art  8
    claims.

15. Ms Lowis, relying upon ground 2, also  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed  to  consider  the   appellant's   personal   circumstances   in
    determining whether there was a real risk of harm contrary to Art 15(c)
    applying the 'sliding scale' adopted by the CJEU in Elgafaji (C-465/07)
    [2009] 1 WLR 2100 at [39].  She relied upon the matters set out in para
    6(a)-(g) of the renewed grounds.

16. Further, Ms Lowis submitted, relying on ground 4,  that the  judge  had
    speculated that the appellant's father would be able  to  provide  some
    financial support to him in the IKR from the UK so as to  overcome  his
    difficulty in obtaining employment.  She submitted that this was not  a
    matter which had been raised in the evidence and there was no  evidence
    that he had any disposable income even if the appellant lived with  his
    father whom, the evidence showed, provided him with food and  clothing.
    That did not mean  that  the  appellant's  father  had  any  disposable
    income.

17. Finally, Ms Lowis submitted, relying on ground 6, that  the  judge  had
    failed to take  into  account  all  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
    concluding  under  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  that  there  were   not   "very
    significant obstacles" to his integration in Iraq.

18. Ms Lowis, however, placed no reliance upon ground  7  and  the  judge's
    conclusion that the public interest was engaged because  the  appellant
    did not speak the English language.  She accepted that  the  judge  was
    required to take that into account under s.117B(2) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  As regards the judge's inference that
    the appellant could not speak English  because  he  gave  his  evidence
    through a Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter,  Ms  Lowis  accepted  that  the
    appellant was in some difficulty in challenging the  judge's  inference
    as he was not now  putting  forward  a  positive  case  that  he  spoke
    English.

19. In summary, Ms Lowis submitted that the judge had materially  erred  in
    law and his decision should be set aside and the appeal remitted for  a
    fresh hearing.

The Respondent's Submissions

20. Mr Howells, who represented the respondent, relied  upon  the  rule  24
    notice.

21. He submitted that the judge was correct to apply the  country  guidance
    in the UT's decision in AA but was incorrect to regard the guidance  as
    having been made, in effect, as a  result  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in AA (Iraq) in July 2017.  The  country  guidance  was  based
    upon material available to the Upper Tribunal in 2015.

22. Further, Mr Howells submitted that Professor  Bluth's  report  accepted
    that the appellant's home area was under the  control  of  the  Kurdish
    Peshmerga.  The judge was entitled to rely upon the country guidance in
    concluding that there was no Art 15(c) risk to  the  appellant  in  his
    home area.

23. In addition, Mr Howells relied upon the judge's finding in relation  to
    internal  relocation  at  para  34  of  his  determination  which,   he
    submitted, was based upon  the  evidence.   The  judge  had  adequately
    considered  the  appellant's  circumstances  at  paras  30-35  of   his
    determination and, although he had not made specific reference  to  it,
    the evidence did not support a finding that he would be at  risk  under
    Art 3 on return.

24. Finally, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had adequately dealt  with
    para 276ADE at para [40] of his determination and had been entitled  to
    find that the appellant's removal would not breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

Discussion

25. The first issue concerns the judge's treatment of the relevant  country
    guidance and Professor Bluth's expert evidence.

26. Country guidance for Iraq was given by the Upper Tribunal in AA  on  30
    October 2015 ([2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)).  There was an appeal against that
    decision to the Court of Appeal.  In its decision  in  AA(Iraq)  handed
    down on 11 July 2017 (shortly before the appeal  hearing  before  Judge
    Osborne) the Court  of  Appeal  amended,  in  part,  the  UT's  country
    guidance (see [2017] EWCA Civ 944, Annex).  It did so only  as  regards
    the issues of obtaining a CSID and its  relevance  to  an  individual's
    circumstances on return to Iraq (see  paras  [9]-[11]  of  the  country
    guidance Annex).  This was done with the consent  of  the  parties  who
    acknowledged that the UT's guidance on  this  issue  was  flawed.   The
    Court of Appeal was not asked to examine the validity of the  remaining
    guidance and it did not do so.

27. Consequently, the UT's guidance in paras [17]-[21] of the  Annex  under
    the heading "Iraqi Kurdish Region" remained the country guidance.   So,
    a person from the IKR would  be  returned  to  the  IKR  following  his
    identity being "pre-cleared" with  the  IKR  authorities  (para  [17]).
    Further, and importantly for this appeal,  at  para  [18]  the  country
    guidance states:

         "The IKR is virtually violence free.  There  is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR."

28. Paragraph [19] of the guidance is concerned with a Kurd  who  does  not
    originate from the IKR.  It is, as a consequence,  irrelevant  to  this
    appellant who does originate from the IKR.  Para [20] is concerned with
    an individual who is returned  to  Baghdad  and  whether  it  would  be
    "unduly harsh" for them to  travel  to  the  IKR.   That  also  has  no
    application to this appellant as, at least at  all  times  relevant  to
    him, he would be returned to the IKR directly.  The position  may  well
    be different now following the more recent country guidance decision in
    AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212  (IAC).
    But that decision, as Ms  Lowis  accepted,  has  no  relevance  to  the
    appellant's claim before Judge Osborne.

29. Para [21] of the  country  guidance  is  concerned  with  the  internal
    relocation to the IKR of a non-Kurd.  That also  has  no  relevance  to
    this appellant.

30. It is clear law that country guidance is "authoritative" on an issue of
    country guidance and a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  should  apply
    that country guidance "unless very strong grounds supported  by  cogent
    evidence, are adduced justifying they not doing so" (see  SG  (Iraq)  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [47]  per  Stanley  Burnton  LJ  with  whom
    Maurice Kay and Gross LJJ agreed).

31. Consequently, the UT's country guidance applicable to the appellant  at
    the time of the hearing before the judge was, as regards Art 15(c), set
    out in para [18] of the UT's country  guidance  which,  with  amendment
    made to the section dealing with CSIDs, was reproduced in the Annex  to
    the Court of Appeal's judgment.  It was based upon  material  available
    to the UT in 2015.

32. Before Judge Osborne, the appellant relied upon the  expert  report  of
    Professor Bluth to provide good reason  to  depart  from  that  country
    guidance.

33. Turning now to the judge's decision, at paras [21]-[24], he set out the
    relevant country guidance derived, as he saw  it,  from  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq), including para [18] which he set out in
    full at his para [24].

34. At paras [28]-[29], the judge turned to deal with the  expert  evidence
    of Professor Bluth as follows:

         "28. The expert witness is a Professor of  International  Relations
             and Security at the University of Bradford.  His  professional
             expertise is in international relations.  He has  a  PhD  from
             Kings College London.  Although  Professor  Bluth  has  relied
             upon the assistance of Mr Azad Deewanee  who  comes  from  the
             Kurdish Region of Iraq and is a doctoral candidate  under  the
             supervision of Professor Bluth, I find that Professor Bluth is
             aware of his responsibility to this Tribunal and that  he  has
             prepared and is responsible for his report.

         29.  Professor Bluth at 5.3 considered the specific  risks  to  the
             Appellant in the Kurdish  Region  of  Iraq.   Professor  Bluth
             concludes that the Appellant would have to provide for himself
             and would not have sufficient funds to  acquire  accommodation
             so would have to live in IDP camps.  Professor Bluth confirmed
             that Fayda is currently under the control of Kurdish Peshmerga
             but held that the situation in the area remains fluid as Iraqi
             forces  and  Shia  militia  also  operate  in  the   vicinity.
             However,  I  find  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  recently
             considered the position as I have referred  to  above  in  the
             case of AA (Iraq) [2017].  To that  extent,  I  prefer  to  be
             guided by the Court of Appeal which binds this Tribunal rather
             than the report of Professor Bluth.  In  any  event  Professor
             Bluth accepts that the Appellant's  home  area  is  under  the
             control of Kurdish Peshmerga.  Professor Bluth  predicts  that
             the number of displaced persons in the Dohuk province and  the
             surrounding areas generally will make untenable  the  security
             accommodation  employment  and  access  to  basic   facilities
             position.  That is his prediction for the  future.   Professor
             Bluth makes no mention of the case of AA (Iraq) [2017] in  his
             report even though his report postdates the  Decision  of  the
             Court of Appeal.  Respectfully,  Professor  Bluth  might  have
             done well to consider the decision of the Court of  Appeal  as
             it is most pertinent to this appeal.  The fact that  Professor
             Bluth has not considered the contents of AA (Iraq) reduces the
             weight that I can give to his report."

35. Then, at para [30] the judge reached his conclusion under  the  heading
    "The Changing Conditions in IKR" as follows:

         30.  It follows from what I have  said  above  and  from  what  the
             Respondent is  prepared  to  accept,  that  at  the  time  the
             Appellant and his family left Fayda, he has a genuine fear  of
             persecution by non-state actors.  That was in  the  summer  of
             2014.  Since then, the position had first deteriorated but now
             it has improved.  Indeed, I find that the position within  IKR
             has as confirmed by the  guidance  provided  recently  by  the
             Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 has  improved
             to the extent that this Appellant at the age of 18 years  (and
             now therefore a young adult) may return to his home area where
             there is no objective threat of persecution of  the  Appellant
             from any  source.   The  present  Court  of  Appeal  authority
             confirms that there is no Article 15(c) risk  to  an  ordinary
             civilian in the IKR.  I unhesitatingly assess the Appellant as
             an ordinary citizen."

36. It seems to me that the judge has fallen into the error  identified  by
    Ms Lowis in her submissions and in the appellant's grounds.

37. The judge discounted Professor Bluth's report because it failed to deal
    with the Court of Appeal's decision which the judge  considered  should
    have been referred to by Professor Bluth.  I  was  taken  to  Professor
    Bluth's report and, indeed, there is  no  reference  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision although his report (dated 24  July  2017)  postdates
    the Court of Appeal's decision by thirteen  days.   He  does,  however,
    refer to the Upper Tribunal's decision at para 5.4.13,  albeit  in  the
    context of ISIS attacks against civilians in Baghdad.

38. However, the important point is that the country guidance originated in
    the UT's decision in 2015.  Professor Bluth's evidence, to  the  extent
    that it relied on evidence postdating the UT's decision,  was  relevant
    as to whether the appellant had shown "very strong grounds"  which  was
    "supported by cogent evidence" why the  UT's  country  guidance  in  AA
    should  not  be  followed.   In  effect,  had  the  situation  in   the
    appellant's home area deteriorated such that it could not any longer be
    said that there was no Art 15(c) risk there.

39. In my judgment, the judge over-emphasised the effect of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision.  It is simply left untouched,  because  it  was  not
    challenged, the relevant part of  the  UT's  country  guidance  in  AA.
    There  is  a  strong  suggestion  in  the  judge's  reasoning  that  he
    discounted Professor Bluth's evidence because of the binding effect  of
    the Court of Appeal's decision.  In effect, it  had  even  more  weight
    than that of the UT when setting the country guidance in place in 2015.
     That was, in my judgment, a misapprehension of the effect of the Court
    of Appeal's decision.  Further,  since  the  guidance  was  based  upon
    evidence available to the UT in 2015, self-evidently Professor  Bluth's
    evidence postdated it and was relevant in assessing whether  there  was
    good reason to depart from it.  The judge was required,  therefore,  to
    grapple with Professor Bluth's evidence.  Although the judge refers  to
    Professor Bluth's evidence in  para  [29]  -  in  particular  that  the
    appellant's home area is now under the control of the Kurdish Peshmerga
    - he made no reference to Professor Bluth's opinion that the  situation
    was likely to deteriorate.  Instead, the  judge  discounted  that  view
    based upon the fact that Professor Bluth had not referred to the  Court
    of Appeal's decision.  Although the judge  states  that  that  had  the
    effect of "reduc[ing] the weight that I can  give  to  his  report",  I
    accept Ms Lowis' submission that, in fact, the judge thereafter made no
    reference to the report and so, in effect, gave it no  weight  at  all.
    In my judgment that was an error of law in his approach to  the  expert
    evidence and his assessment of whether the appellant's  case  that  the
    country guidance in AA should be departed from had been established.

40. Whilst I acknowledge that Professor Bluth's report is, to some  extent,
    anticipating what might happen, it  does  contain  evidence  which  was
    relevant to assessing the risk under Art  15(c)  to  the  appellant  on
    return and I am not persuaded that it was inevitable  that  the  judge,
    having considered that evidence, would have nevertheless  followed  the
    country guidance in AA.  The error  was,  therefore,  material  to  his
    dismissal of the appellant's appeal under Art 15(c).

41. Further,  and  in  addition,  Professor  Bluth's  report  does  contain
    evidence relevant to the appellant's circumstances in  the  IKR  beyond
    risk.  Professor Bluth, for example, states that the  appellant  would,
    in effect, become an IDP.  This was relevant to the appellant's  Art  3
    claim.  By discounting Professor Bluth's evidence, the  judge  did  not
    deal with Art 3 and that too was, in my judgment, a material  error  of
    law.  Also, the appellant's circumstances, including as  identified  by
    Professor Bluth on return, were relevant to  his  claim  under  Art  8,
    including under para 276ADE and whether there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles" to his integration on return.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,
    the judge's discounting of Professor Bluth's evidence led the judge not
    to fully consider the appellant's circumstances under  para  276ADE  at
    para [40] or in determining the proportionality of his removal  outside
    the Rules under Art 8 at para [42].

42. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law in dismissing  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under Arts 3 and 8 of the
    ECHR. It is unnecessary,  therefore,  to  consider  the  other  grounds
    relied upon by Ms Lowis.

Decision

43. The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an  error  of
    law.  The decision cannot stand and is set aside the decision.

44. The proper disposal of the appeal is to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than  Judge  N  J
    Osborne.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              9 October 2018


