

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04467/2016


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision promulgated         |
|on 13 September 2017                          |on 23 November 2017          |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SZ
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Tetty instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-Tribunal Judge E.  M.
        M. Smith, promulgated on 1 February 2017  following  a  hearing  at
        Stoke, in which the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
        protection and human rights grounds.




Background


     2. The appellant is an Iranian  national  born  on  1  November  1989.
        Having considered the evidence the Judge recognised  at  [16]  that
        much turned upon the credibility of the appellant in terms  of  his
        account for the reasons why he fled Iran.
     3. The Judge records at [18] that the respondent's assertion that  the
        appellant was not from Iran was not made out and it was found  that
        the appellant had established to the lower level of proof  that  he
        is an Iranian citizen.
     4. The Judge thereafter identified  a  number  of  credibility  issues
        stated to be relevant  when  considering  whether  the  appellant's
        account as to why he left Iran can  be  relied  upon  [19  (a)-(d)]
        leading to it being found by the Judge that  the  appellant  is  an
        untruthful witness whose account was incredible. It was  not  found
        the appellant had established any  links  with  the  KDP,  had  not
        established that he smuggled  goods  or  that  he  was  wanted  for
        smuggling, or that there had been any hearing before a Court or the
        imposition of a sentence in  Iran.  The  Judge  was  satisfied  the
        appellant is an economic migrant [20].
     5. The Judge considered the appellant's sur place activities  and  the
        question of whether an unlawful departure  from  Iran  put  him  in
        danger. In relation to the sur place issue the Judge records:


             29.  In relation to his  Sur  Plac  activities  the  appellant
                  produced two photographs (RB p18/19)  taken  at  the  same
                  event.  The  appellant  explained  where  he  was  on  the
                  photographs and is next  to  the  man  holding  the  black
                  umbrella. The appellant states that he  then  had  a  full
                  beard and a white open shirt. I asked  the  appellant  who
                  took  the  photograph  and  he   said   members   of   the
                  demonstration which was in London.  The  appellant  didn't
                  take any photographs of his own and  is  not  seen  to  be
                  holding any placards. He explained  that  the  photographs
                  have been put on the Internet and are,  therefore,  freely
                  available. I asked if he had obtained  copies  of  any  of
                  those photographs on the Internet that show  him.  He  had
                  not. When asked why he said he hadn't  been  asked  to.  I
                  asked him if he had joined the  KDP  in  the  UK,  and  he
                  confirmed he had but he  had  no  registration  documents,
                  identity cards or evidence from any  person  connected  to
                  the KDP to confirm  that  he  was  a  supporter.  In  that
                  regard, I, have taken note of TK (Burundi) v  SSHD  (2009)
                  EWCA Civ 4009 where the CA  said  that  where  there  were
                  circumstances  in   which   evidence   corroborating   the
                  appellant's evidence was easily obtainable,  the  lack  of
                  such  evidence  must  affect   the   assessment   of   the
                  appellant's credibility. It followed that where a judge in
                  assessing credibility relied on the fact that there was no
                  independent supporting evidence where there should be  and
                  there  was  no  credible  account  for  its  absence,   he
                  committed no error of law when he relied on that fact  for
                  rejecting the account of the appellant. I am satisfied the
                  appellant could have obtained evidence from  his  wife  or
                  other members of his family and friends corroborating  his
                  account. This was, in my view, easily obtainable. The lack
                  of supporting evidence damages the appellant's account.  I
                  have also taken note of the decision  in  YB  (Eritrea)  v
                  SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360 the CA sounded a note of  caution
                  in relation to the argument  that,  if  an  appellant  was
                  found  to  have  been  opportunistic  in  his  sur   place
                  activities,  his  credibility  was  in  consequence   low.
                  Credibility about what, said the Court of  Appeal.  If  he
                  had already been believed ex hypothesi about his sur place
                  activity,  his  motives  might  be  disbelieved,  but  the
                  consequent risk on return from his activity sur place  was
                  essentially an objective question.


             30.  I am satisfied bearing in mind the  appellant  showed  no
                  interest whilst in Iran for joining or promoting KDP  that
                  his conduct in the UK has been opportunistic and there  is
                  no evidence before me  that  the  appellant  was  anything
                  other than a bystander in London during the demonstrations
                  or that he is a member of KDP or has  attended  any  other
                  functions in the UK involving KDP.  I,  therefore,  reject
                  his claim that he has any reason to fear of returning upon
                  this basis.


     6. The Judge found there was nothing  in  the  appellant's  background
        that prevented his return to  Iran  and  that  he  was  capable  of
        obtaining documentation to do so. It was not  found  the  appellant
        had discharged the burden upon him in relation  to  any  protection
        claim. The Judge dismissed the appeal on human rights  grounds  but
        noted  that  was  not  pursued  in  argument  by  the   appellant's
        representative, in any event.
     7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another judge of  the
        First-tier Tribunal but granted on a  renewed  application  to  the
        Upper Tribunal on limited grounds relating to Ground  2  only.  The
        operative part of the grant being in the follows terms:


             9.   However, in Ground 2 the Appellant  argues,  in  summary,
                  that  notwithstanding  that  the  Judge  held   that   the
                  Appellants  attendance  at  an  Iranian  demonstration  in
                  London was only as a 'bystander' and 'opportunistic' (para
                  30), that the Judge failed to consider as per para  23  of
                  SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
                  [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) whether there may  nonetheless  be
                  'any   particular   concerns'   during   the    Appellants
                  questioning  on  return  to  Iran  as  a  result  of  that
                  attendance, that may result in further questioning  and  a
                  consequent risk of detention and potential treatment.  The
                  Judge held at para 31 that there will be no  risk  to  the
                  Appellant as a person who had left illegally and  will  be
                  returning as a failed asylum seeker; but  that  does  not,
                  without more, answer the question raised  in  the  present
                  Appellant's case.


             10.  I  am  persuaded,  narrowly,  that  this  point  requires
                  further  consideration,  in  particular  because   in   BA
                  (Demonstrators in Britain -  risk  on  return)  CG  [2011]
                  UKUIT 36 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held at  para  65  that
                  the  fact  that  an  individual's  participation  may   be
                  opportunistic was not likely to be a  major  influence  on
                  the perception of the regime. The Judge arguably erred  in
                  failing to  deal  with  this  issue  in  way  put  by  the
                  Appellant. Whether there was in fact any error of law, and
                  whether any such error was material to the outcome of  the
                  appeal, of course be  a  matter  for  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  hearing the appeal.


Preliminary issue - application to seek permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on Ground 1



     8. Mr Tetty referred  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  the  decision  in  SSH
        regarding the process on return which  established  that  a  failed
        asylum seeker will be questioned and that if other  concerns  arise
        this may create a situation in which the failed asylum seeker faces
        a real risk of harm.
     9. Mr Tetty stated that he intended to renew the application regarding
        the finding the appellant had  opportunistically  pursued  a  claim
        regarding his being agnostic as he was not religiously observant.
    10. It was submitted that the appellant, as a Kurd, will be  questioned
        at the airport and personal details  obtained  which  could  "raise
        eyebrows" which could place him at risk. It  was  argued  that  the
        first ground on which permission to appeal was  sought  could  give
        rise to the appellant being questioned.
    11. In relation to the first  ground,  permission  to  appeal  was  not
        granted by the Upper Tribunal for the following reasons:


             5.   I am  of  the  view  that  there  is  no  arguable  error
                  established in the first ground.  Although,  according  to
                  paragraph 4 of the original grounds, the  judge  permitted
                  the Appellant to argue that  his  removal  to  Iran  would
                  result in serious harm as a  result  of  his  agnosticism,
                  this claim can rightly be described as a bolt  on  element
                  of his claim for protection, and I note that  it  was  not
                  relied upon in the notice of appeal from the  Respondent's
                  decision  to  the  First-tier.  The  quotations   of   the
                  Appellants evidence in paragraph 3 of the original grounds
                  on this point are with respect incomplete and  misleading;
                  the Appellant did not merely say that he was agnostic, but
                  also specifically said at screening question 1.12 that  he
                  believed in God, and at question 9 of the SEF that he  was
                  sure there is a  God;  he  simply  did  not  practice  any
                  specific religion. It is in fact doubtful, in light of the
                  evidence,  that  the  Appellant  could  be  described   as
                  agnostic at all.


             6.   It is right to state that the Judge came to no particular
                  finding as to whether the  Appellant  believed  in  God/or
                  whether he was agnostic, or whether any risk of harm arose
                  as a result of either scenario.


             7.   However, the grounds of appeal  failed  to  identify  any
                  country evidence which would establish that a person being
                  agnostic, or  believing  in  God  but  not  following  the
                  Islamic faith, would give rise to a real risk  of  serious
                  harm. The Appellant cannot expect  the  Tribunal  to  take
                  judicial notice that there merely being some  question  as
                  to an  individual's  adherence  or  non-adherence  to  the
                  Islamic faith would of itself, give rise to a risk of harm
                  in Iran. There is no country guidance to that effect;  the
                  grounds  refer  to  no  country   information;   and   the
                  Appellants  bundle  consisted  principally  of   materials
                  relevant to the issue of risk arising  from  illegal  exit
                  and the return  of  failed  asylum  seekers,  rather  than
                  evidence relating to religion.


    12. It was also submitted by Mr Tetty that the  Judge  failed  to  deal
        with the perception point and that the combination of the  evidence
        and case law more than justified finding in the appellant's  favour
        on this point.
    13. The application to amend the grounds was opposed by  Mrs  Aboni  on
        the basis this element was  adequately  dealt  with  by  the  Judge
        refusing permission to appeal on Ground 1. It was argued it was not
        clear whether the  issue  of  risk  arising  from  the  appellant's
        alleged religious beliefs was ever pursued  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. It was accepted it does not appear in the decision  under
        challenge that the First-tier Tribunal  say  that  religious  views
        meant the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  on  return  and  did  not
        specifically refer to this issue, although did  find  that  nothing
        had been established that prevented the appellant being returned.
    14. Mrs Aboni also referred to the fact the evidence indicated that the
        appellant had left Iran previously and returned with no evidence of
        adverse interest being shown in him. It was also submitted  that  a
        risk arising from religious beliefs had not  been  pursued  at  the
        hearing.
    15. Mr Tetty, in response, stated the motivation claim was not accepted
        by the Judge  but  not  all  the  evidence  was  rejected  and  the
        appellant's case was not simply a case  that  not  being  a  Muslim
        would get him into trouble, as this issue was  considered  in  SHH,
        but recognition of the situation that the government  in  Iran  did
        not want people to oppose them.  It was not  accepted  this  was  a
        "bolt on" element of  the  claim  but  a  characteristic  that  was
        identified which should have been  given  more  prominence  by  the
        Judge.
    16. My finding on this issue was  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
        establish that it is appropriate  in  the  circumstances  to  grant
        permission at this stage  to  pursue  Ground  1,  relating  to  the
        appellant's alleged agnosticism, as the  appellant  has  failed  to
        establish any realistic prospects of success in  relation  to  this
        issue. The Judge refusing permission to appeal on this  ground  has
        given adequate and sustainable reasons for why  no  arguable  legal
        error is made out justifying a grant of permission.



Error of law


    17. In relation to  the  matter  on  which  permission  to  appeal  was
        granted, it was submitted by Mr Tetty that  the  Judge  erred  when
        assessing real risk due to the nature of the demonstration attended
        by the appellant. It is not disputed the appellant is not a  leader
        of any opposition group but it was submitted that if the  appellant
        attends something which leads to a perception he is  advancing  the
        cause of a separatist movement this could give rise  to  challenge.
        The appellants presence was at a  rally  relating  to  a  sensitive
        issue and the Judge  should  have  assessed  differently  the  risk
        arising as a result of the appellants presence and  the  situation.
        Photographs provided were black and white and not  very  clear  and
        did not assist, but the type of demonstration was not an issue.
    18. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mrs Boney submitted that there
        is no material error in the decision.  The evidence was  considered
        relating to the appellant's  account  but  rejected  as  not  being
        credible. The sur place activities had been  considered  and  taken
        into account, the photographs are not in  the  public  domain,  and
        adequate reasons have been given  to  support  the  conclusion  the
        appellant is a bystander. It was submitted there was nothing in the
        background to the case that would raise suspicion and  no  arguable
        error had been made out.
    19. Mr Tetty submitted that the fact  the  judge  made  a  finding  the
        appellant  as  a  bystander  is  a  finding  that  he  was  at  the
        demonstration which was a demonstration relating to Kurdish issues.
    20. In SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran  CG  [2016]
        UKUT 00308 (IAC) it was held that (i)  An Iranian male whom  it  is
        sought to return to Iran, who does not possess a passport, will  be
        returnable on a laissez  passer,  which  he  can  obtain  from  the
        Iranian Embassy on proof  of  identity  and  nationality;  (ii)  An
        Iranian male in respect of whom no adverse interest has  previously
        been manifested by the Iranian State does not face a real  risk  of
        persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights on  return  to  Iran  on
        account of having left Iran illegally and/or being a failed  asylum
        seeker.  No such risk exists at the time of questioning  on  return
        to Iran nor after the facts (i.e.  of  illegal  exit  and  being  a
        failed asylum seeker) have been established.  In particular,  there
        is not a real risk of prosecution leading to imprisonment.
    21. A case from the European courts is MA  v  Switzerland  (Application
        no. 52589/13) in which it was held that removal to Iran, where  the
        appellant claimed to face a sentence of  seven  years  imprisonment
        and flogging for his participation  in  anti-regime  demonstrations
        breached Article 3 of the ECHR.  However, at paragraph 57 the ECtHR
        also said that "Whilst being aware of the reports of serious  human
        rights violations in Iran as set out above, the Court does not find
        them to be of such a nature as to show, as they stand,  that  there
        would be as such a violation of the  Convention  if  the  applicant
        were to return to that country". The decision to allow  the  appeal
        was taken on the specific facts claimed by the Appellant and not on
        the basis that removal to Iran per se would breach Article 3.
    22. In BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)  Iran  CG  [2011]
        UKUT 00036 (IAC) the Tribunal held that Iranians returning to  Iran
        are screened on arrival.  A returnee who meets the  profile  of  an
        activist may be detained while searches of documentation are  made.
        However, there is not a real risk of persecution for those who have
        just exited Iran illegally or are merely  returning  from  Britain.
        The conclusions of the Tribunal in the country guidance case of  SB
        (risk on return -illegal exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053  are
        followed and endorsed.
    23. It was held in SB that Iranians facing enforced return  do  not  in
        general face a real risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment.  That
        remains the case even if they exited Iran illegally. Having  exited
        Iran illegally is not a significant risk factor, although if it  is
        the case that a person would face difficulties with the authorities
        for other reasons, such a history could be a factor adding  to  the
        level of difficulties he or she is likely to face.
    24. This tribunal also takes note of the decision of the  Outer  House,
        Court of Sessions, citation EZ  v  Secretary  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2017] CSOH 29. The appellant in that case,  an  Iranian
        national, based a claim for asylum uncertain  political  activities
        namely online postings to his Facebook page and his  membership  of
        and attendance at the meetings of the National Movement of  Iranian
        Resistance ("NAMIR") a body said to  be  critical  to  the  Iranian
        regime and a claim based upon article 8 ECHR.
    25. At [31] the Court right:


             31. The second difficulty for Mr Forrest is that  the  passage
             founded on from AB does not support his contention. Miss Smith
             is correct that AB is neither  a  country  guidance  case  nor
             binding on this court. More to the point, the Tribunal  in  AB
             was identifying the difficulties in making any recommendations
             as a generality as to how to approach the  assessment  of  the
             risk of political activities  carried  on  fire  the  Internet
             outside Iran. The import of  BA  was  to  counsel  caution  in
             drawing any conclusions in this area  and,  as  such,  is  the
             reverse of a country guidance case. The  sentence  quoted,  in
             context, is no more than a cautionary statement that a lot  of
             activity is not necessary to  create  the  relevant  level  of
             visibility to the authorities in Iran. However, that  sentence
             is not support for a wholly different  proposition,  but  only
             very little activity of such activity will suffice.  While  Mr
             Forrest  appeared  to  accept   that   these   were   distinct
             conclusions and that the first did not lead to the second,  he
             did not follow through the logic  of  this.  He  presented  no
             other argument.


    26. The conclusion by the Judge that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a
        profile that will place him at risk on return was only  made  after
        the Judge considered the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious  scrutiny.  The  issue  is  not  whether  the   appellant's
        attendance at the demonstration per  se  creates  a  real  risk  as
        unless  notice  of  that  comes  the  attention  of   the   Iranian
        authorities they will be unaware of such activities. The  issue  is
        whether the appellant  is  likely  to  be  perceived  as  being  an
        activist, i.e. a person who campaigns to bring about  political  or
        social change: the conduit of adverse  interest  in  Iran  being  a
        perceived threat to either Islam or the Iranians state.
    27. The conclusion by the Judge is not that the appellant is  a  person
        who campaigns in an adverse manner but a person  who  was  no  more
        than a bystander at the event in question. There  is  logic  in  Mr
        Telly's submission that that finding means that the appellant  must
        have been at or within the location of the demonstration  but  that
        is not the specific issue and the country guidance does not support
        a finding that mere presence at a demonstration will create a  real
        risk.
    28. The Judge was clearly aware of the facts of  this  matter  and  the
        relevant country guidance cases. The  Judge  clearly  assessed  the
        factual aspects of the case and it has not been made out  that  the
        conclusions in relation to the lack of  credibility  in  the  claim
        were not reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.
    29. The appellant had not demonstrated that any  interest  in  the  KDP
        represented  a  genuinely  held  political  belief  or   that   his
        activities were in any way representative of  the  same.  There  is
        therefore arguable merit in the argument that an  HJ  (Iran)  point
        does not arise in relation to the expectation  that  the  appellant
        can deny any 'political' involvement.
    30. The appellant fails to establish any arguable legal error  material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    31. On an unrelated matter,  the  appellant  was  not  present  at  the
        hearing as it was believed  he  had  not  attended.  At  12:20  the
        appellant came into court claiming that he had arrived at  9:30  AM
        but had not been called in. The Tribunal clerk had no record of the
        appellant having arrived at this time. The  appellant  was  advised
        that Mr Tetty had represented him and pleaded his case and that  he
        was advised to contact his solicitors.
    32. The Upper Tribunal does not consider it necessary to reconvene  the
        Error of Law hearing to allow the issues raised be repeated in  the
        appellants  presence  as  the  appellant  was  represented  by   an
        experienced barrister in the field of immigration  and  asylum  law
        and it is a hearing in relation  to  which  no  evidence  from  the
        appellant was required or would normally be taken.


Decision

    33. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    34. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 16 November 2017

