
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04287/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 August 2019                |On 15 August 2019               |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                   Mrs SANDRA YANETH CAMANCHO DE LOS RIOS
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel
      (instructed by Nag Law Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Stephen
         Smith  on  4  July  2019  against  the  decision  to  dismiss   the
         Appellant's protection appeal made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Shore in a decision and reasons promulgated on 1 April 2019.

      2. The Appellant is a national of Colombia, born there on 17  February
         1971.  She entered the United Kingdom twice  as  a  visitor  during
         2017.  She claimed asylum on her third visit, on 20 September 2017,
         after she had been refused leave to enter on the grounds of  verbal
         deception.   The  Appellant  asserted  a  fear   in   Colombia   of
         paramilitaries and because of her imputed political  opinion.   Her
         protection claim was refused by  the  Respondent  on  21  September
         2018.

    3.     Judge Shore found that the Appellant's fear of  return  was  not
         objectively well founded, for a number of reasons: see [61] onwards
         of his determination where those reasons are set out in detail  and
         which need not be repeated here.  The judge found that no  part  of
         her claim was credible.  She could return safely  to  Colombia  and
         reintegrate without difficulty.  Thus the appeal was dismissed.

    4.     Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen
         Smith because he considered it was arguable that the judge had  not
         analysed the individual planks of the Appellant's claim,  and  that
         he had not taken into account all of the material evidence.

    5.     There was no rule 24 notice but  Ms  Jones  indicated  that  the
         Respondent opposed the onwards appeal.

    6.     Ms Anzani for the Appellant relied on the grounds submitted  and
         the grant of permission to appeal by the Upper  Tribunal.   Counsel
         submitted in summary that the judge's reasoning was defective.   He
         had misstated the principles of Tanveer  Ahmed*  [2002]  UKAIT  439
         when considering the documents.  The judge had not  considered  all
         of the evidence and had not made findings on  all  of  the  issues,
         such as the kidnapping.  The determination was unsafe and should be
         set aside and the appeal reheard.

    7.     Ms Jones for the Respondent submitted that if the  determination
         were read as a whole as it should be, it was clear that  the  judge
         had addressed every point and had reached  findings  open  to  him.
         Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00431 (IAC) showed the correct approach  and
         the judge's determination reflected those principles.  The evidence
         before the judge was feeble and the Appellant was found to have  no
         knowledge of some of the documents she had belatedly  put  forward.
         There was no material error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         determination and  the  judge's  findings  were  sustainable.   The
         appeal should be dismissed.

    8.     In reply Ms Anzani briefly reiterated her submissions as to  the
         inadequacy of the judge's reasons.

    9.     The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's view  an
         over generous one, which did not reflect the true substance of  the
         judge's determination.  In reality the grounds  of  onwards  appeal
         are simply an extended expression of disagreement with a  full  and
         careful decision.

    10.    As the judge correctly identified, the  Appellant's  credibility
         was central to the appeal.  The  country  background  evidence  for
         Colombia  was  not  in  serious  dispute.  The  Appellant's  asylum
         application had many if not most of the hallmarks  of  a  contrived
         claim: late claim made  only  after  refusal  of  leave  to  enter,
         despite a claim of coming to the  United  Kingdom  specifically  to
         seek  asylum,  lack  of  detail  and  general  vagueness,   serious
         inconsistency,  excessive  coincidence   and   selected,   doubtful
         documents produced post initial claim with no context.

    11.    The judge set out the background to the claim,  and  provided  a
         full  and  accurate  summary  of  the  evidence  and  also  of  the
         submissions made by the parties.  The judge recorded  that  he  had
         warned the Appellant during cross-examination that her evidence was
         too vague and generic, and that she needed to give more thought and
         care to her answers.  (There was no  suggestion  at  any  stage  of
         interpretation issues.) At [40]  of  the  determination  the  judge
         records that, notwithstanding his helpful  warning,  the  Appellant
         when asked whether the threats  to  her  came  from  paramilitaries
         replied "I couldn't tell  you".   Thus  the  feeble  tenor  of  the
         Appellant's evidence was well established before the judge  reached
         the stage of discussion and findings.

    12.    As noted above, the judge provided detailed reasons for  finding
         that none of the Appellant's evidence was credible.  This was not a
         selective analysis but one  demonstrated  by  key  examples.   That
         global finding meant, perfectly  obviously,  that  the  Appellant's
         entire case was rejected, including her claims of past persecution.
          Nothing more was needed by way of findings.  The judge's reference
         to Tanveer Ahmed* might  with  advantage  have  been  more  clearly
         expressed, but nothing turns on that because that judge had already
         directed himself to an "in the round" assessment  of  the  evidence
         (see, e.g.,  [57]  of  the  determination),  which  was  faithfully
         performed.  Anxious consideration was applied  abundantly.  It  was
         not necessary for the judge to comment separately on  every  single
         item of evidence: see Budhathoki (above).

    13.    In the tribunal's judgment the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
         reached careful, properly reasoned findings, in  the  course  of  a
         thorough,  balanced  determination,  which  securely  resolved  the
         issues and  applied  the  correct  lower  standard  of  proof.  The
         tribunal finds that there was no material  error  of  law  and  the
         onwards appeal must be dismissed.




    DECISION

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 8 August 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


