
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04124/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13th June 2017                          |On  22nd June 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                 master h k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A M S Green, promulgated on 31st October 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 24th October 2016.  In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on  1st
    January 2002.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    14th April 2016, by refusing his application for  asylum  and  refusing
    his application for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of  HC
    395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he was abducted forcefully by the Taliban
    when he was tending to his goats in the mountains at some distance from
    his home.  He was then taken by the Taliban to an unknown location  and
    held captive for four days and mistreated.  A man felt pity for him and
    helped him to escape.  He flagged down a car and told the  driver  what
    had happened to him and the driver took him to his village.   When  the
    Appellant told his  parents  they  contacted  his  maternal  uncle  and
    arrangements were made for him to leave the country.  In the  meantime,
    the Appellant's father was taken away and has not been heard of since.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge rejected the Appellant's claim  for  two  essential  reasons.
    First, that he failed to claim asylum in several safe  third  countries
    through which he travelled, including  Hungary  before  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge held that, "he could and should have claimed
    asylum earlier and this has damaged his  credibility"  (paragraph  13).
    Second, the Appellant chose not to give evidence, and  the  judge  held
    that, "had he done so, I would have been able to  assess  his  evidence
    and how it stood up  to  cross-examination.   He  was  present  at  the
    hearing and there was no obvious reason why he did not give  evidence".
    The judge went on to say that, "he is  14  years  old  and  could  have
    testified.  Instead he simply chose to say nothing.  He did  not  adopt
    his witness statement.  Under the circumstances,  I  give  his  witness
    statement very little weight.  I simply do  not  believe  what  he  was
    saying about his abduction or his father's abduction"  (paragraph  14).
    The judge also held that there was  no  risk  of  the  Appellant  being
    recruited by the Taliban  (see  paragraph  15).   Moreover,  if  it  is
    asserted that a child cannot contact his family members,  then  such  a
    claim should be supported by credible evidence of  efforts  to  contact
    those family members and their inability  to  meet  and  care  for  the
    child, which had not been done here (see paragraph 16).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge was wrong  to  draw  an
    adverse inference of credibility on the basis that the  Appellant,  who
    had been fingerprinted in Hungary, did not claim asylum  there,  or  in
    any other country en route.  Old established case law states that there
    is an element of choice that asylum seekers have as to where  to  claim
    asylum.  Second,  the  judge  wrongly  drew  an  adverse  inference  of
    credibility from the Appellant's failure to  give  evidence.   However,
    since the Appellant was a minor, he had chosen not  to  give  evidence,
    but that did not mean that his written statements could  not  be  taken
    into account, and the Appellant was not  asked  to  adopt  his  witness
    statement in any event.  Thirdly the  judge  wrongly  relied  upon  the
    country guidance case of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT
    00163, because there  had  been  a  significant  deterioration  in  the
    security situation in Afghanistan since that decision was  promulgated.



 7. On 16th January 2017, the Upper Tribunal granted permission  to  appeal
    on the basis that the judge had erred in treating  adversely  the  fact
    that the Appellant did  not  give  oral  evidence  (at  paragraph  14).
    Second, the judge had also erred in treating the Appellant's failure to
    claim asylum en route to the UK as a matter weighing against him in his
    oral credibility assessment (see paragraph 13).

 8. A Rule 24 response was entered on 8th February 2017 to the effect  that
    the Tribunal below had directed itself appropriately, and  the  failure
    of the Appellant to claim asylum in another safe country was  a  matter
    that the judge could properly take into account, as was the Appellant's
    failure to give evidence.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 13th June 2017, Mr  Bedford,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the following  submissions.   First,  the
    Appellant was a 14 year old when he travelled through Hungary,  and  he
    could not be expected to claim asylum as a minor, even if he  had  been
    fingerprinted in that country.

10. Second, the failure to  claim  asylum  in  a  country,  which  was  now
    accepted as being not one which could properly be categorised as a safe
    country, could not be taken against the  Appellant.   In  the  case  of
    Ibrahimi [2016] EWHC 2049, which was promulgated two  months  prior  to
    the decision of the judge, the High Court, in giving  its  judgment  on
    5th August 2016, made it clear that refoulement to Hungary was a breach
    of the European Convention, because it was unsafe.

11. Third, the Appellant's failure to tender himself for  cross-examination
    was deliberate given that he was a minor but this did not mean that his
    witness statement could not be taken to account, and it  certainly  did
    not mean that an adverse inference could be drawn. However, he had been
    interviewed twice, and these matters should have been given priority by
    the judge rather than the Appellant's failure to be orally examined  of
    his witness statement.

12. Fourth, the judge stated that there were  material  inconsistencies  in
    the evidence but did not identify what these were.

13. Fifth, the case of JK v Sweden (Application No.  59166/12)  dated  22nd
    August 2016, makes  it  clear  (at  paragraph  91)  that  all  that  an
    applicant has to do is "to adduce  evidence  capable  of  proving  that
    there are substantial  grounds  for  believing  that,  if  the  measure
    complained of were to be implemented, he or she would be exposed  to  a
    real risk of being subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3".  Once
    this is done, then the government has to dispel any  doubts  that  this
    would not happen.  The Appellant has produced this  evidence.   He  was
    not certified as  manifestly  unfounded.   That  being  so,  the  Grand
    chamber in JK stated (at paragraph 101) that, "credibility  established
    where the applicant  has  presented  a  claim  which  is  coherent  and
    plausible, and not contradicting generally known facts".  This was  the
    case here.

14. Finally, the judge had regard to authorities that  were  irrelevant  to
    the Appellant's condition.   For  example  reference  was  made  to  AK
    (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  00163,  and  reference  was
    also made to PM (Afghanistan) [2007] UKAIT 00089, but that was  a  case
    that involved hard bitten insurgents, rather than a  minor  child,  and
    the judge's emphasis upon these cases, eschewed his assessment  of  the
    merits of the Appellant's  claim  (see  paragraphs  16  to  17  of  the
    determination).

15. For her part, Ms Aboni relied upon the Rule 24 response of 8th February
    2017.  First, she submitted that the failure to claim asylum in another
    safe country, such as Hungary, was just one factor that the judge found
    that damaged the Appellant's credibility, and it was not an error  when
    read in the context of the determination as a whole.  Second, that  the
    judge took account of the  Appellant's  age,  and  in  the  absence  of
    evidence also, or even a claim of mental health issues, which prevented
    the Appellant from giving evidence, the judge was entitled to  conclude
    that the Appellant should have testified in  court.   Third,  the  main
    basis  for  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  was  material
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence.  The judge considered  the
    evidence in the round with the resulting conclusion that the  Appellant
    had not made out his claim to be at  risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan.
    Finally,  the  judge  considered  the  relevant  country  guidance  and
    background evidence and concluded that the return of the Appellant  was
    entirely feasible in these circumstances.

16. In reply, Mr Bedford stated that one could not get away from  the  fact
    that the judge had concluded (at paragraph  13)  that  the  Appellant's
    failure to claim asylum in Hungary, which was not a safe  country,  was
    against him.  Secondly, the judge should not have  had  regard  to  the
    failure of the Appellant to give evidence as a matter that went against
    the Appellant.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, the judge stated that the failure of the Appellant  to
    claim asylum "in several safe third countries including Hungary  before
    coming  to  the  United  Kingdom"  was  something  that   damaged   his
    credibility (paragraph 13).  However, Hungary is not a safe country  as
    stated in Ibrahimi [2016] EWHC 2049,  such  that  the  Appellant  could
    realistically have claimed asylum in that  country.   He  was,  in  any
    event 13 years of age at that time.

18. Second, the judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  from  the  Appellant's
    failure to give evidence leading him to conclude that he would give his
    witness statement "very little weight"  (paragraph  14).   Whereas  the
    judge does refer to the Appellant's screening interview,  outside  what
    was said in the witness statement which the Appellant did not refuse to
    adopt, his relative substantive asylum interview,  stating  that  there
    were "material inconsistencies between them" he  does  not  explain  in
    what way.

19. Third, the judge's reference to authorities, such as  PM  (Afghanistan)
    [2007] UKAIT 00089 and AK (see paragraph 16) could not  be  criticised,
    in the way suggested by Mr Bedford, because although  these  cases  did
    not refer to children, what the judge was doing was  referring  to  the
    principles of adjourned application, when  drawing  attention  to  such
    case law, and he was entitled to so do.  Nevertheless, for the  reasons
    that I have given, there was a material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge A M S Green, pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2, for the reasons  that
I have set out above.  The appeal is allowed only to that extent.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st June 2017

