
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04805/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 January 2019                      | On 8 March 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                IMRAN SHIRZAD
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a male citizen of  Afghanistan  and  was  born  on  20
    January 1993. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in January  2012
    as a student. He returned to Afghanistan between 18 March 2014  10  May
    2014. On 27 May 2014, he returned to the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed
    asylum. A subsequent appeal was dismissed March 2015 following  refusal
    of his claim for asylum. He became appeal rights exhausted on  23  July
    2015. Further submissions were made and these were accepted as a  fresh
    claim which, in turn, was refused by a decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State dated 21 April 2017. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27  November  2017,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the hearing at Bradford on 15 January 2019, the  appellant  did  not
    attend nor was he represented. A previous hearing on 27  November  2018
    had not proceeded on  account  of  the  appellant's  absence.  On  that
    occasion, Judge Kelly had directed that the appellant be served at  his
    last known address in Leeds and at another address in Leeds  which  had
    appeared on the appellant's application for permission to appeal. Those
    directions were complied with and the  appellant  was  served  of  both
    addresses by second class post on 4 December 2018. The circumstances, I
    am satisfied that the appellant has been  served  with  the  notice  of
    hearing and that he has chosen not to attend. Accordingly, I  proceeded
    with the hearing.

 3. The grant of permission bears  little  resemblance  to  the  manuscript
    grounds of appeal. The appellant's grounds of appeal, which he  appears
    to have drafted himself and without professional assistance, amount  to
    no more than a series of disagreements with  findings  which  had  been
    available to the First-tier tribunal judge on the evidence.  The  grant
    of permission by Judge Simpson goes beyond the grounds   in  search  of
    'Robinson obvious' points arising  from  the  decision.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted, first because the judge at [31] appeared to apply a
    higher standard of proof than  that  required;  secondly,  because  the
    judge  had  not  made  detailed  findings  regarding  the   appellant's
    attendance at church baptism and evangelising but had,  instead,  moved
    directly to the question of whether the conversion to Christianity  was
    genuine; finally, judge had failed to consider  whether  the  appellant
    would be at risk on the basis of imputed religious belief  upon  return
    to Afghanistan. Notwithstanding the fact that  the  appellant  was  not
    represented, it is unclear to me why Judge Simpson saw fit to go beyond
    the pleaded grounds. However, I shall deal with the  issues  raised  by
    her grant of permission.

 4. I do not find that the judge has applied too high a standard of  proof.
    At [9], the judge sets out the correct standard of proof for an  asylum
    appeal. Upon a careful reading of the decision, I  have  no  reason  to
    believe that the judge has departed from that standard.  At  [31],  the
    judge wrote that, 'I would expect him nevertheless to have been able to
    give more detail and be more convincing about the core of his claim and
    his claimed new-found faith conversion baptism is  such  a  significant
    matter in a person's  life.'  I  do  not  find  the  use  of  the  word
    'convincing' is anything more than a form of expression;  it  certainly
    does not indicate the imposition of a higher  standard  of  proof.  The
    judge has done no more than to indicate surprise at the quality of  the
    appellant's  evidence  regarding  his  conversion,  given  the   likely
    importance of such an event in his life.

 5. Secondly, I see no reason why  the  judge  should  have  made  detailed
    findings about the appellant's  religious  activities.  The  judge  has
    adopted an entirely legitimate method of  analysing  credibility  which
    appears at [26-44] of her decision. She  has  given  clear  and  cogent
    reasons for  rejecting  the  appellant's  claimed  conversion  and  for
    attaching only limited weight to the evidence of the witness, Mr Pedro.
    The judge was entitled to rely on the findings of the previous tribunal
    in 2015 (see Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  D  (Tamil)
    [2002] UKIAT  00702  *).  The  analysis  of  credibility  is  detailed,
    thorough and legally sound.

 6. It is not clear why the appellant should have imputed to him conversion
    from Islam to Christianity given that his  claimed  conversion  in  the
    United Kingdom is not genuine and there would be no reason  for  anyone
    in Afghanistan to be aware of  his  church  attendance  in  the  United
    Kingdom unless he chose to tell them about it.

 7. I find that the judge has produced a thorough  analysis.  She  has  had
    regard to all relevant matters,  including  findings  of  the  previous
    tribunal; she has applied an appropriate standard of proof  throughout;
    she has not had regard to irrelevant matters. The resulting decision is
    not legally flawed for the reasons given in the grounds of appeal,  the
    grant of permission or at all. The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

