
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04869/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd October 2018                           |On 30th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  WALI [U]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Young-Harry, promulgated on 24th August 2017, following a hearing
    at Birmingham on 21st June  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, a male, and was born on  1st
    November 1997.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 3rd May 2017, refusing his  claim  for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339F of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that the Taliban in Afghanistan
    had instructed him to become a suicide bomber and his refusal to do  so
    would result  in  his  death  at  their  hands.   He  fears  return  to
    Afghanistan on that basis.  He claimed that shortly  after  his  father
    was kidnapped and killed by the Taliban  for  refusing  to  heed  their
    warnings and to stop working for a mine-clearing  company,  he  himself
    had come under their scrutiny.  The Taliban  had  initially  threatened
    his father and then they  had  kidnapped  him.   His  father  was  then
    killed.  The Appellant himself was required to become a suicide bomber.
     Members of the Madrasah had come to his home to look  for  him.   They
    did not find him.  The Appellant  has  subsequently  learned  that  his
    younger brother was also kidnapped and has been killed.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Young-Harry,  on  21st  June  2017  in
    Birmingham, there was copious evidence from a variety of sources,  much
    of which was treated with considerable care and attention by the  judge
    in  the  determination.   The  expert  report  by  Dr   Giustozzi   was
    particularly scrutinised.  Attention was drawn  by  the  judge  to  the
    medical evidence and the psychiatric report of Dr Kumar (paragraph 31).
     There was a social worker's report, and this was referred  to  by  the
    judge (paragraph 34).  The judge then  ended  with  a  recital  of  the
    country guidance case and its  application  to  the  facts  here.   The
    decision was then made to refuse the claim.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the decision  was  flawed  for  a
    number of reasons, principally because  Dr  Kumar's  extra  psychiatric
    report was not taken into account as  part  and  parcel  of  the  other
    evidence, to be considered as  a  whole,  but  only  analysed  after  a
    conclusion had been reached on the Appellant's  claim  prior  to  that,
    with the result that this offended the principle in Mibanga [2005] INLR
    377.  It was also said that this was a case where, not only was there a
    social worker's report, but the social worker himself, in the  name  of
    Roisin Tear, from the Leicestershire County Council, had actually  been
    called as a witness, and had given evidence-in-chief, and had then been
    subject to cross-examination, where he had spoken about the Appellant's
    level of vulnerability, and yet none of this was referred to.

 6. Finally, it was said that the Appellant was a "vulnerable witness"  and
    the vulnerable witnesses guidelines were not applied to his case, where
    it was assessed that his credibility, in terms of how he was giving his
    evidence, was damaged.

 7. On 11th January 2018, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, specifically  on  the  basis  that  the  judge's  failure  to
    properly deal with the psychiatric evidence, or at all  deal  with  the
    social worker's oral evidence who had been called, meant that there was
    an error of law.

 8. A Rule 24 response dated 1st February 2018 was then put forward on  the
    basis that the judge had considered the evidence of the  social  worker
    at paragraph 34, and had proceeded to give clear reasons  for  why  the
    evidence was not persuasive.  There was no error of law.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on  3rd  October  2018,  however,  Mrs  Aboni,
    appearing on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, conceded that
    there was indeed an error of law in this appeal, because the judge  had
    failed to treat the Appellant as a vulnerable  witness,  in  accordance
    with the guidelines given in this jurisdiction, and had also not  drawn
    attention to the oral evidence of the social worker, which specifically
    went to the question of the Appellant's vulnerability.   Moreover,  the
    expert report had been factored into the conclusions of the judge after
    those conclusions had been reached, rather than been taken into account
    as a whole.  With that, Ms Smith agreed.   She  pointed  out,  however,
    that this matter should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to
    be reheard again, but with the assistance of a Pushto interpreter.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied, for the reasons given  by  Mrs  Aboni,  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal, that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of  TCEA  2007)
    such that I should set aside the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Young-Harry, pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b) because the  nature
or extent of any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order  for  the
decision in the appeal to be remade, is such  that,  having  regard  to  the
overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.

A Pushto interpreter should be provided.

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        22nd October 2018
