
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04527/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2020                       |On 29 May 2020                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     SY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge S Smith on 30 January  2020  against
         the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper,  promulgated
         on 27 November 2019 following  a  hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  7
         October 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Turkish national born on 16 May 1978. His  claim
         is that he would be at risk from the Turkish authorities for  being
         involved in the G?llenist movement.

      3. Two grounds were put forward by the appellant to the Upper Tribunal
         in his permission application. The first argued that the judge  had
         not  treated  the  appellant's  previous  persecution   (i.e.   two
         detentions) as a serious indication of the risk of serious harm  in
         the future and failed to give reasons for this. The  second  argued
         that  the  judge  erred  in  his  consideration  of  the  evidence;
         specifically, that he focused on the lack of  independent  evidence
         of an arrest warrant instead of applying Tanveer  Ahmed  principles
         and evaluating the evidence in the round.

      4. Article 8 was not pursued.

    Covid-19 crisis

      5. As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic and need to  take  precautions
         against its spread, directions were sent  to  the  parties  on   17
         April 2020. They were asked to present any objections to the matter
         being dealt with on the papers and to make any further  submissions
         on the error of law issue within certain time limits. As of  today,
         the time limits having  passed,  the  Tribunal  has  only  received
         written submissions from Ms S Jones for the respondent.

      6. I can, therefore, only assume that the appellant does not object to
         a paper decision and has nothing further to add to the grounds  put
         forward when the application  for  permission  was  filed.   I  now
         proceed to consider the material on file and to make a decision  on
         whether or not the judge materially erred  in  law  such  that  his
         decision should be set aside.

    Discussion and Conclusions

      7. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission  and
         the respondent's submissions.

      8. The appellant entered the UK in October 2017 as a visitor with  his
         wife and child. This was after he had been arrested in August 2017.
         He was able to leave Turkey through the normal channels without any
         difficulties. Subsequently his wife  sought  to  remain  under  the
         Ankara  Agreement  and  then  unsuccessfully  claimed  asylum.  The
         appellant and his wife separated and the appellant  claimed  asylum
         following his return after a trip to Turkey when he claimed to have
         been detained on arrival at Ankara airport in  September  2018  for
         two days.

      9. The respondent accepted the appellant's identity  and  nationality,
         she accepted he was a low level  G?llen  movement  supporter,  that
         there  had  been  mass  arrests  of  such  persons  and  that   the
         appellant's brother had faced problems from the authorities for his
         own involvement in the movement. She did not  accept  that  he  had
         problems with the authorities, however, because he had been  unable
         to provide evidence of the warrant,  he  had  been  released  twice
         without charge and he had been able to  leave  Turkey  without  any
         problems.  Even taking the claim at  its  highest,  she  considered
         that he would not be at risk because he had destroyed all  evidence
         linking him to the  movement  and  the  authorities  were  now  re-
         instating people who had previously been dismissed.

     10. The judge is criticised for his approach to  the  evidence  in  the
         second ground. It is specifically argued  that  he  did  not  apply
         Tanveer Ahmed principles and did not mention  them  when  assessing
         the evidence. There  is  no  merit  in  this  argument.  The  judge
         properly directed himself (at 26 - 33) and specifically referred to
         Tanveer Ahmed and the need to consider evidence in  the  round  (at
         paragraphs  33  and  34)  immediately  prior  to   commencing   his
         assessment from paragraph 35 onwards. At paragraph 42  he  confirms
         that the evidence has been considered in the round. It is difficult
         to see, therefore, how it can be maintained that he did not  assess
         the evidence in the correct manner.

     11. With respect to the first ground, the judge plainly approached  the
         evidence with an open mind,  making  several  positive  credibility
         findings (at 37), accepting that despite minor  discrepancies,  the
         appellant had been coherent in his account. He  accepted  that  the
         appellant's account of  arrest  was  consistent  with  the  country
         evidence  which  showed  that  tens  of  thousands  were   arrested
         following the attempted coup in July 2016 (at 38) and that  he  may
         well have been arrested and been interrogated (at 42). He  accepted
         that the appellant's brother had been arrested and charged (at 39).
         He found, however, that even if the appellant  had  been  arrested,
         the movement was one without membership or  structure,  that  there
         were millions of followers and  that  the  appellant  was  released
         without charge, "indicating that he was not a person of concern and
         that no evidence had been found by  the  authorities  of  his  AYSA
         account or any other evidence linking him to the movement" (at 42).
         The judge noted that the appellant's evidence was  that  his  other
         family members were all supporters of the government. He found that
         the lack of interest in  the  appellant  was  consistent  with  the
         evidence that indicated that the interest was mainly in members  of
         the judiciary, police, journalists, lawyers and teachers (like  the
         appellant's  brother)  (at  42).  The  judge  considered  that  the
         appellant did not feel he was at risk  as  he  voluntarily  visited
         Turkey in September 2018 by which time  his  brother  had  been  in
         detention for some two years awaiting trial (at 43). He noted  that
         the appellant had been unable to  produce  copies  of  his  alleged
         arrest warrant whereas he had been able to  submit  copies  of  his
         brother's (at 46). He also claimed there had been no need to  check
         for evidence  on  his  UYAP  account  (the  e-judicial  information
         management system available to all citizens) but that in any  event
         he had forgotten the password (at  47).   The  judge  rejected  the
         appellant's excuses for not being able  to  instruct  a  lawyer  to
         obtain evidence (at 47-51)  and  given  that  the  appellant's  own
         nephew was a lawyer, it was open to the judge to conclude that this
         was evidence that the appellant could reasonably have been expected
         to produce and that the letters from his siblings which stated that
         they had been told of the warrant was not independent evidence  (at
         52).

     12. The appellant's  evidence  had  been  that  his  arrests  had  been
         "informal" (at 23), he had been able to  leave  Turkey  after  both
         occasions without any issue and despite  his  brother  having  been
         arrested and charged. The judge found that  the  evidence  did  not
         support  the  appellant's  contention  that  individuals  would  be
         detained in this way many times before a formal arrest (at 53).  He
         considered that the appellant had not fallen into the  category  of
         the vast majority of those held after the attempted coup  and  that
         whilst he may have been questioned about his brother's  involvement
         when he returned to Turkey  in  September  2018,  he  was  released
         without charge and was  permitted  to  leave  the  country  without
         hindrance after his holiday. The country information, on the  other
         hand, showed that suspected G?llenists were banned from leaving the
         country and had their passports confiscated (at 53).

     13. It is not correct, as the grounds argue, that the  risk  issue  was
         determined solely on the basis that there  was  no  evidence  of  a
         warrant. As the respondent  submits  in  her  written  submissions,
         paragraph 53 should not be read in isolation. It is plain from  the
         summary  of  the  judge's  reasoning,  set  out  in  the  preceding
         paragraphs, that there were several factors which the judge  relied
         on when reaching his conclusions.

     14. For all the above reasons, the judge was entitled to conclude  that
         despite the appellant's past, even taking it  at  its  highest,  he
         would not be of adverse interest to the authorities in the  future.
         Following the guidance in  Shizad:  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set
         aside) [2013] UKUT 00085, the determination contains  adequate  and
         sufficient reasoning and the loser can be under no doubt as to  why
         his appeal was  rejected.  There  are  no  errors  in  the  judge's
         approach.

    Decision

     15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error
         of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.




    Anonymity

     16. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.




    Signed


         R. Keki?


    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 27 May 2020
