
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04884/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 March 2018                           |On 12 April 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   S I S R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill (the judge), promulgated on 21  December  2017,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 4 May 2017, which in turn refused his protection and  human
    rights claims.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Egypt, put forward his protection claim  on
    the basis that he had converted from Sunni Islam to Shia Islam and that
    would place him at risk on return.  In addition, due to  mental  health
    problems, the argument was put before the judge that there was  a  real
    risk of the Appellant committing suicide on or after return.

The judge's decision

 3. Having set out the evidence of  the  Appellant,  and  the  Respondent's
    objections thereto, the judge goes on to make his findings of  fact  in
    respect of credibility at [31] - [38].   In  summary,  he  rejects  the
    Appellant's credibility wholesale.  At [39] the judge  finds  that  the
    Appellant was not in fact a true convert to  Shia  Islam  and  that  he
    could return to his home  area.   A  reference  is  then  made  to  the
    Appellant's  mental  health.   It  appears  to  be  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD, but the  judge  concludes  that
    that could be dealt with appropriately in Egypt, particularly with  the
    help and support of his immediate family.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds of appeal are succinct.  They assert that the judge  failed
    to consider relevant medical evidence which  went  to  the  Appellant's
    vulnerability as a witness and the assessment of his credibility  as  a
    whole.  Specific reference is made to a report by Dr John Murphy of the
    Kingston North Community Mental Health Team.  It is said that the judge
    simply failed to have any regard  to  this  evidence.   Second,  it  is
    asserted that the judge failed to engage in any way with  the  argument
    that there was a suicide risk in this case.  The third  ground  asserts
    that the judge  failed  to  consider  a  particular  credibility  issue
    relating to a previous representative.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on
    19 January 2018.

The hearing before me

 6. Neither the  Appellant  nor  his  legal  representatives  attended  the
    hearing.  I asked my clerk to contact the representatives currently  on
    record.  I was told that they were no longer acting and had not been so
    for a while.  They asserted that a letter to this effect had been  sent
    to the Upper Tribunal  (I  can  see  no  such  letter  on  file).   The
    representatives informed my clerk that the  Appellant  appeared  to  be
    aware of today's hearing and that he said he would attend in person.  I
    note  that  the  notice  of  hearing  was  only   sent   out   to   the
    representatives.  Although it appears that there is now  a  residential
    address on file for the  Appellant,  I  cannot  see  evidence  that  an
    amended notice of hearing was sent out directly to him.

 7. I considered whether it would be fair to  proceed  in  the  Appellant's
    absence  given  the  circumstances.   On  the  one  hand  his  previous
    representatives had apparently been told that he was aware  of  today's
    hearing whilst on the other it also appears  as  though  no  notice  of
    hearing had been sent directly to him.  On balance I concluded that  it
    is more likely than not that the notice of hearing was received by  the
    representatives and that they in fact notified  the  Appellant  of  the
    time and place for this hearing.  I accept what the representative told
    my clerk, namely that the Appellant himself said that he would  attend.
    There has been no further correspondence from the Appellant  about  his
    non-attendance.  I also of course bear in mind the mental health  issue
    in this case.

 8. For reasons that will become apparent I decided  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing and to make a decision on error of law.

 9. I asked Mr Clarke for his submissions.  He acknowledged that the  judge
    had failed to have specific regard to the report by Dr Murphy  and  had
    not dealt with the suicide argument.  However, he submitted  that  none
    of this was material.  Having regard to the Court of Appeal judgment in
    AM  (Afghanistan)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123  and  paragraph  10  of  the
    Tribunal's Practice Directions it was submitted that the report  by  Dr
    Murphy simply did not comply with relevant procedural  requirements  as
    to form and content for medical reports.  It  was  unclear  whether  Dr
    Murphy had ever in fact seen the Appellant.  It was equally unclear who
    Dr Rutherford was (a doctor referred to in  Dr  Murphy's  report).   In
    respect of the suicide issue Mr  Clarke  wondered  whether  this  could
    possibly succeed in light of relevant case law and  the  evidence  that
    was in fact before the judge.

Decision on error of law

10. I conclude that the judge has materially erred in law.  I am  satisfied
    that the report from Dr Murphy was before the judge (it is contained at
    page 93 of the Appellant's bundle).  I  am  also  satisfied  that  this
    evidence was referred to in argument before the judge, both oral and in
    the skeleton argument provided by the Appellant's Counsel.

11. It is clear from reading the judge's decision as a whole that there  is
    no reference to the medical evidence, and certainly no  assessment  and
    findings thereon.  In the normal  course  of  events  medical  evidence
    disclosing mental health issues would be of material relevance  to  the
    assessment of an  Appellant's  vulnerability  both  at  a  hearing  and
    previously, together with the assessment of credibility as a whole.  On
    the face of it the judge has erred by failing to have  regard  to  this
    evidence in any way.

12. Mr Clarke's argument is effectively that on any view  the  judge  would
    not have placed weight upon the report of Dr Murphy because of  a  lack
    of information contained therein and/or  non-compliance  with  relevant
    procedural requirements.  There  is  some  force  in  this  point.   In
    certain respects the report  is  lacking  in  terms  of  the  form  and
    content.  It is unclear as to what level of involvement Dr  Murphy  had
    had with the Appellant.  It is also unclear precisely who Dr Rutherford
    was.

13. Having said that, on the face of it the report emanates from what would
    appear to be a reliable source, namely an associate specialist from the
    Mental Health Department of the Kingston Recovery Support Team.  It  is
    reasonably clear that this unit had had care of the  Appellant,  to  an
    extent at least.  The report refers to two  previous  suicide  attempts
    including, potentially importantly, one that occurred in the spring  of
    2017.

14. There is reference to  PTSD  and  relevant  antidepressant  medication.
    There is a note that the Appellant had described hearing voices telling
    him to jump under a  train.   At  the  end  of  the  report  Dr  Murphy
    concluded that there would  be  a  "severe"  risk  of  suicide  if  the
    Appellant were to be returned to Egypt.

15. In light of this it is my view that the judge  was  bound  to  have  at
    least considered the  evidence  as  part  and  parcel  of  his  overall
    assessment of the evidence.  It may be that the judge would have placed
    little weight on the evidence, but it is by no means certain  that  the
    report would not have had a bearing on the  assessment  of  credibility
    and the merits of the argument that there was a risk of suicide.  As to
    the last point, I disagree with Mr Clarke  that  the  suicide  argument
    would be effectively bound to fail.  Clearly, the threshold is  a  high
    one, having regard to the relevant case law (including J, Y (Sri Lanka)
    and N).  Notwithstanding that, there was enough in the argument and the
    evidence to require an adequate consideration of the issue.  There  has
    been none.

16. For these reasons the judge has materially erred in law and I set aside
    his decision.

Disposal

17. Mr Clarke was agreed that if I were to find  there  to  be  a  material
    error of law this case should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In a case such as the present that  must  be  right.   The  Appellant's
    claim needs to be looked at in the  round,  incorporating  the  medical
    evidence such as it is.  It is by no means  certain  that  the  medical
    evidence will have a very significant bearing on the appeal as a whole,
    but it is a relevant factor and reasons will need to  be  given  as  to
    what value/significance it plays.  Findings of fact  will  need  to  be
    made.

18. For those reasons remittal is appropriate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Signed        [pic]             Date: 9 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal on remittal

    1. This appeal is remitted for a complete rehearing;

    2. The remitted hearing shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Cockrill;

    3. The next Tribunal shall need to consider the  protection  and  human
       rights claims in light of the medical evidence, such as it is.



