
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04459/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 JULY 2019                      |On 09 AUGUST 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  AKAR [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  is  male  citizen  of  Iraq.  By  decision  which  was
    promulgated on 10 April 2019, I found that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that its decision should be  set  aside.  My  reasons
    were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born on 5 September 1995. He is a citizen of
         Iraq and is of Kurdish ethnicity. He claims to have arrived in  the
         United Kingdom in July 2017. By decision dated 20 March  2018,  the
         Secretary  of  State  refused  his  application  for  international
         protection. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         which, in a decision promulgated on  31  May  2018,  dismissed  the
         appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal.

         2.   At the initial hearing at Bradford  on  28  March  2019,  both
         representatives accepted that the judge had erred in law such  that
         her decision falls to be set aside. Briefly,  the  reasons  are  as
         follows. At [28], the judge concluded that there  was  insufficient
         reason to depart from the  country  guidance  including  AA  (Iraq)
         [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and BA (Returns from Baghdad)  [2017]  UKUT  18
         (IAC).  The  judge  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  had   given
         consistent evidence that he comes  from  Kirkuk  but  she  did  not
         accept that he had proved to the lower standard of proof that he is
         from that area. The judge found it likely that  the  appellant  has
         'access to his passport  and,  if  the  Home  Office  are  able  to
         retrieve his CSID card and electoral  documents,  he  will  have  a
         complete complement of documents to  enable  him  to  return.'  The
         appellant has documents  currently  in  Finland,  which  the  judge
         accepted to be  the  case  and  she  found  further  that,  'if  he
         retrieves documents from Finland showing he is from Kirkuk then, of
         course in the alternative I finally cannot return there  but  could
         relocate to Baghdad.'

         3.   The judge's reasoning is problematic.  There  are  simply  too
         many  contingencies  for  there  to  be  coherent  outcome  to  her
         analysis. The judge should have determined the  likelihood  of  the
         appellant retrieving his documents from Finland. Had she  found  it
         likely that would be able to obtain the documents, then she  should
         have carried out a proper fact-sensitive analysis as to whether  it
         would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the  appellant  to  relocate  to
         Baghdad. She should have made a firm,  rather  than  a  contingent,
         finding as to whether the appellant is from Kirkuk. As it  is,  she
         has  left  the  appellant  in  an  uncertain  position   which   is
         unsatisfactory.

         4.   Fresh country guidance is that believed to be imminent. In the
         circumstances, I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.  The
         decision will be remade in the Upper  Tribunal.  The  date  of  the
         substantive hearing will be fixed following, in the first instance,
         a case  management  review  which  will  be  listed  on  the  first
         available date after 13  May  2019  before  me  at  Bradford  (time
         estimate: 20 minutes; no interpreter)."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 23 July  2019,  it  was  apparent
    that no progress had been made in obtaining the  appellant's  documents
    from the Finnish authorities. It  appears  that  both  the  appellant's
    representative and the Home Office have written to the relevant Finnish
    government department but have not received any response.

 3. For the purposes of the disposal of this appeal, both parties now agree
    that the appellant is from Kirkuk. Notwithstanding the  judge's  doubts
    that the appellant does not have access to his passport and  CSID,  the
    fact remains that he does not possess these documents  at  the  present
    time. There is no prospect of  obtaining  identity  documentation  from
    Finland. I told the parties that, subject to the country guidance which
    still exists (at least for the time being) in the  form  of  AA  (Iraq)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG
    UKUT 00212 (IAC),  I  intended  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds. However, the appellant should be aware
    that any leave to remain which is granted to  him  consequent  to  that
    decision may be short lived; if, in the foreseeable future, it  becomes
    possible to return the appellant safely either to Baghdad  or  the  IKR
    then it is likely that the Secretary of State will take steps to do so.





Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 20 March 2018 is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed                              Date 23 JULY 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

