
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04542/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2018                           |On 28 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    h b k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Clarke, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (H B K).   A  failure  to  comply
    with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court Proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 6 January 1990.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 March 2010.  He claimed asylum on  9
    March 2010 but that application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    on 26 March 2010 and his subsequent appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was dismissed on 20 May 2010.  Following the refusal of  permission  to
    appeal, he became appeal rights exhausted on 2 September 2010.

 4. On 16 July 2010, he was convicted at the Worcester Crown Court on three
    counts: first, assault occasioning actual bodily harm contrary to  s.47
    of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 and secondly, two  offences
    of assault.  In respect of the first offence, having pleaded guilty, he
    was sentenced to a period  of  fifteen  months'  imprisonment  and,  in
    respect of the other offences, he was sentenced to concurrent terms  of
    three months' imprisonment in respect of each one.

 5. On 25 September 2012, the appellant was notified that he was liable  to
    be deported under  the  automatic  deportation  provisions  in  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  On 19 April 2013, a  deportation  order  was  signed
    against the appellant which was served upon him on 23 April 2013.  On 7
    March 2014, he lodged an out of time appeal against deportation.  On 15
    April 2014, his appeal was determined to be out of time and  he  became
    appeal rights exhausted again.

 6. On 1 December 2016, in response to a s.120 notice, the  appellant  made
    further submissions.

 7. On 27 April 2017, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Price on 4 July 2017.  In a decision  promulgated  on  2
    August 2017, Judge Price dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Refugee  Convention  and  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.   That
    decision has not been challenged by the appellant and  I  need  say  no
    more about it.

 9. Before Judge Price, the appellant relied upon Art 8 and, in particular,
    his relationship with his daughter ("L"), a British citizen for whom he
    claimed to be the primary carer.  In particular, relying upon Exception
    2 in s.117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the
    "NIA Act 2002"), the appellant  argued  that  he  had  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" with L, a qualifying  child  and  his
    deportation would be "unduly harsh".  Consequently, the public interest
    did not require his deportation in accordance with s.117C(3) of the NIA
    Act 2002.

10. Judge Price accepted that the appellant was the  primary  carer  of  L.
    The judge accepted that whilst the appellant's partner (and  mother  of
    L) was at work - she worked for the British Navy -  the  appellant  was
    L's carer.  The judge accepted  evidence  from  an  independent  social
    worker, Mr Peter Horrocks that if the appellant were deported  L  would
    "suffer great trauma and  distress,  which  would  cause  harm  to  her
    emotional development because of the loss of her primary carer and  her
    secure attachment figure".

11. Judge Price concluded that it was not in the best interests of L to  be
    separated from the appellant.  Judge Price went  on  to  find  that  it
    would be "unduly harsh" for the family to continue their family life in
    Iran and, importantly for the purposes of this appeal, that it would be
    unduly harsh for L to remain in the UK without  the  appellant.   As  a
    consequence, Judge Price allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8  of
    the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on essentially three grounds.  First, the judge had failed  to
    have "full regard" to the appellant's criminal and immigration  history
    in concluding that it would be "unduly harsh" on  L  if  the  appellant
    were deported.  That was contrary to the approach set out by the  Court
    of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  450.   Secondly,  the
    judge had failed properly to have regard  to  the  public  interest  by
    concluding that the public interest was lessened due to the  fact  that
    the appellant had rehabilitated and no longer drank alcohol, which  was
    found by the sentencing judge to be central to his offending.  Thirdly,
    following OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694, the judge had  failed
    to take into account two of the facets of the public  interest,  namely
    'public revulsion' and 'deterrence' which are "weightier considerations
    in the public interest".

13. On 9 October 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E  B  Grant)  granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

14. On 30 November 2017, the appellant filed a rule 24 response seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision.

The Submissions

15. The central plank of Mr  Mills'  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State was that the judge had failed properly to take  into
    account the three facets  of  the  public  interest  recognised  in  OH
    (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694 in reaching her finding at paras 63
    - 71 that the effect upon L of the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
    "unduly harsh".  Mr Mills somewhat stepped back from the  assertion  in
    the grounds that the judge was not entitled to take  into  account  the
    appellant's rehabilitation in assessing his future risk to the  public.
    However, Mr Mills submitted that, in  accordance  with  MM  (Uganda)  v
    SSHD, the judge had failed to take into account the seriousness of  the
    offence and that deportation acted as a  deterrence  to  other  foreign
    nationals committing offences and in reflecting  the  public  revulsion
    engendered by such serious offences.  Anticipating the  submissions  to
    be made by Mr Clarke on behalf of the appellant  (and  foreshadowed  in
    the rule 24 response), Mr Mills did not accept that the  Supreme  Court
    in Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 had removed from the ambit of the  "public
    interest" that of 'public revulsion'.  He submitted  that  Lord  Kerr's
    rejection of that facet of the  public  interest  at  [168]  was  in  a
    dissenting judgment and the same  approach  by  Lord  Wilson  at  [70],
    modifying what he had previously said himself in OH (Serbia),  was  not
    subject to the express agreement of the other  Justices  in  particular
    Lord Reed (who had delivered the leading judgment) with whose  judgment
    the other Justices agreed.

16. Mr Clarke, on behalf of the appellant accepted that the concept of  the
    "public interest" went beyond assessing whether there was a risk to the
    public as a result of future offending.  He accepted that deterrence of
    others was an aspect of the legitimate  aim  of  preventing  crime  and
    disorder.  Nevertheless, he submitted that in  Ali  the  Supreme  Court
    had, in effect, recognised that it was  difficult  to  connect  "public
    revulsion with that legitimate aim".

17. Mr Clarke submitted that the judge had properly taken into account  the
    required facets of the "public interest".  He drew my attention to  her
    reference to the sentencing judge's remarks at paragraph 42.1  and,  he
    submitted, it was not necessary for the judge to repeat  everything  at
    paras 69 - 71 when referring to the "public interest" and carrying  out
    the balancing exercise required by MM (Uganda) in assessing whether the
    appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" upon L.   He  submitted
    that the judge had properly assessed L's best interests which were that
    she should not be separated from the appellant.  He submitted  that  to
    the extent that the grounds suggested  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    assessing L's best interests without regard  to  the  public  interest,
    that was contrary to the approach in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC
    4.  Mr Clarke submitted that by referring to  the  judge's  failure  to
    have "full regard" to the appellant's criminal and immigration history,
    it was clear that the challenge was to the weight that had  been  given
    to the public interest and that was, subject to irrationality, a matter
    for the judge.  Mr Clarke submitted that  the  grounds  were  wrong  to
    assert that the "deterrence" facet of the public interest (and if still
    relevant the "public revulsion" facet  of  the  public  interest)  were
    "weightier considerations" than  the  risk  of  reoffending,  that  was
    simply wrong.

18. Mr Clarke submitted that the Secretary of State had not established any
    error of principle in the judge's decision.

Discussion

19. The relevant provisions  in  the  NIA  Act  2002  in  this  appeal  are
    ss.117C(3) and (5).  Section 117C(3) provides that:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies."

20. Exception 2 is set out in s.117C(5) as follows:

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

21. Judge Price accepted that the appellant had a "genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with L who was, being  a  "British  citizen",  a
    "qualifying child" as defined in s.117D(1).

22. In MM (Uganda), the Court of Appeal rejected the argument that  whether
    the deportation of an individual would be "unduly harsh" on  a  partner
    or qualifying child was to be determined solely on  the  basis  of  the
    impact upon that individual without regard to the public interest.   At
    [24], Laws LJ (with whom Vos and Hamblen LJJ agreed),  having  set  out
    s.117C(2) of the NIA Act, said this:

         "This steers the Tribunals and the court  towards  a  proportionate
         assessment  of  the  criminal's  deportation  in  any  given  case.
         Accordingly, the more pressing the public interest in his  removal,
         the harder it will be to show that  the  effect  on  his  child  or
         partner will be unduly harsh.  Any other approach  in  my  judgment
         dislocates the 'unduly harsh' provisions from  their  context.   It
         would mean that the question of undue  hardship  would  be  decided
         wholly without regard to  the  force  of  the  public  interest  in
         deportation in the particular case.  But  in  that  case  the  term
         'unduly' is mistaken for  'excessive'  which  imports  a  different
         idea.  What is due or undue depends on all the  circumstances,  not
         merely the impact on the child or partner in the  given  case.   In
         the present context relevant circumstances  certainly  include  the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history."

23. Then at [26], Laws LJ concluded that s.117C(5):

         "... requires regard to be had to all the  circumstances  including
         the criminal's immigration and criminal history."

24. In MM (Uganda), Laws LJ referred to s.117C(2) which sets out that:

         "The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal."

25. This follows the legislative statement in s.117C(1) that:

         "The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest."

26. However, it is now settled law that  if  Exception  1  or  Exception  2
    applies, then the public interest does  not  require  the  individual's
    deportation (see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662).

27. In OH (Serbia) the Court of Appeal  identifying  three  facets  of  the
    public interest in deportation: (1) the risk of  reoffending;  (2)  the
    need to deter foreign criminals from committing serious crimes; and (3)
    as an expression of society's revulsion that serious crime and building
    public confidence in  the  treatment  of  foreign  criminals  who  have
    committed such crimes (see Wilson LJ (as he then was) at [15]).

28. There is no doubt that in his judgement in  Ali,  Lord  Kerr  at  [168]
    rejected the third facet of the public interest identified by Wilson LJ
    in OH (Serbia) where he said:

         "Expression of societal revulsion, the third of the factors applied
         in the OH (Serbia) case, should no longer be seen as a component of
         the public interest in deportation.  It is not rationally connected
         to, nor does it serve, the aim of preventing  crime  and  disorder.
         Societal disapproval of any form of criminal  offending  should  be
         expressed through the imposition of an appropriate penalty.   There
         is no rational basis for expressing additional revulsion on account
         of the nationality of the offender, and indeed to do  so  would  be
         contrary to the spirit of the Convention."

29. Lord Kerr dissented on the outcome of the  appeal  before  the  Supreme
    Court.  None of the other Justices expressly agreed with his  judgment.



30. However, Lord Wilson returned to his views expressed in OH (Serbia)  as
    to the content of the "public interest" in deportation  cases  at  [69]
    and [70].  At [69],  he  did  not  accept  Lord  Kerr's  analysis  that
    "customarily,  the  risk  of  re-offending  will  be   of   predominant
    importance" (expressed at [96] of Lord Kerr's judgement).  Lord  Wilson
    reiterated  that  the  "deterrent  effect  upon  all  foreign  citizens
    (irrespective of whether they have a right to  reside  in  the  UK)  of
    understanding that a serious offence will  normally  precipitate  their
    deportation" was likely to be a powerful  aid  to  the  "prevention  of
    crime", perhaps even more so than the removal of one  foreign  criminal
    "judged as likely to re-offend" (at [69]).

31. Then, at [70], Lord Wilson returned to the "public revulsion" facet and
    said this:

         "By his Counsel, the appellant mounts a sustained objection  to  my
         statement and I am constrained to agree with part of it.  I  regret
         my reference there to society's revulsion at serious crimes  and  I
         accept Lord Kerr JSC's criticism of  it  at  paragraph  168  below.
         Society's undoubted revulsion at certain crimes is, on  reflection,
         too emotive a concept to figure in this analysis.  But  I  maintain
         that I was entitled to refer to the importance of public confidence
         in our determination of these issues.  I believe that we should  be
         sensitive to the public concern in the UK about the facility for  a
         foreign  criminal's  rights  under  Article  8  to   preclude   his
         deportation.  Even though, for the purposes of the present  appeal,
         we must ignore s.19 of the  Immigration  Act  2014,  the  depth  of
         public concern has earlier been manifest not in s.32(4) of the 2007
         Act but also in the amendments to the Immigration Rules  introduced
         on 9 July 2012 to which I will return in the next paragraph.   Laws
         serve society  more  effectively  if  they  carry  public  support.
         Unless it lacks rational foundation (in which case the court should
         not pander to it), the very fact of public concern about an area of
         law, subjective though that is, can in my view  add  to  a  court's
         object analysis of where the public interest lies: in this  context
         it can strengthen the case for concluding that interference with  a
         person's rights under Article 8 by reason  of  his  deportation  is
         justified by a pressing social need."

32. It might be  said  that  Lord  Wilson's  statement  is,  with  respect,
    potentially  ambiguous.   Although   he   rejects   the   language   of
    "revulsion", he nevertheless considers that public opinion  (reflecting
    concerns about foreign criminals remaining in the UK)  might  be  taken
    into account in a "court's  objective  analysis  of  where  the  public
    interest lies".  Perhaps, Lord Wilson, having eschewed his own  use  of
    the word "revulsion" in OH  (Serbia),  was  seeking  to  point  up  the
    importance of, and significant  weight  to  be  given  to,  the  public
    interest in deportation of foreign criminals.  That has been  reflected
    in s.117C of the NIA Act 2002 as a  result  of  its  amendment  by  the
    legislative  provision  to  which  he  refers,  namely  s.19   of   the
    Immigration Act 2014.

33. In any event, as Mr Mills submitted, neither Lord Kerr's views (in  his
    dissenting  judgment)  nor  Lord  Wilson's  views  (in  his  concurring
    judgment) were adopted in the judgement of Lord  Reed  (with  whom  the
    other Justices  agreed)  or  that  of  Lord  Thomas  in  in  his  short
    concurring judgment.

34. Certainly, subsequent to the Supreme Court's decision in Ali, the Court
    of Appeal has referred to the  three  facets  of  the  public  interest
    identified in OH (Serbia) without suggesting  that  the  Supreme  Court
    has, in any way, departed from the earlier approach (see, e.g.  SSHD  v
    Quarey [2017] EWCA Civ 47, especially at [33]).

35. It is unnecessary, in my judgment to reach any  concluded  view  as  to
    whether a change in  the  content  of  the  public  interest  has  been
    effected by the decision of the Supreme Court in Ali.  The  reason  for
    that is that I am not persuaded  that  the  judge  failed  "fully"  and
    properly to consider the public interest in reaching her  finding  that
    the appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" upon L.   I  doubt,
    in any event, whether any change would shift the weight to be given  to
    the public interest or affect the outcome of  the  balancing  exercise.
    It would not, in my judgment, have had any effect  on  the  outcome  of
    this appeal.

36. The judge's decision must  be  read  as  a  whole.   That  is  a  trite
    statement but one which bears repetition as it is often  overlooked  in
    challenges brought by appellants and respondents alike.  The judge  had
    before her the remarks of HHJ Juckes QC in  sentencing  the  appellant.
    At paragraph 42.1, albeit in her recitation of  the  appellant's  case,
    she set this out:

         "42.1    On 14th August 2012, he was sentenced by HHJ Juckes QC  at
              Worcester Crown  Court  on  a  three-count  indictment.   The
              incident arose following  a  disturbance  at  a  night  club,
              resulting in the appellant being arraigned on two  counts  of
              common assault and one account of assault occasioning  actual
              bodily harm.  The appellant pleaded guilty and was  sentenced
              to 15-months imprisonment.  HHJ Jukes QC, commented 'that had
              it not been for drink, you would probably not have  committed
              those offences'."

37. In the course of the parties' submissions, the Judge Price was referred
    to the case of Ali and s.117C of the NIA Act 2002 (see para  52).   She
    was also referred to, and set out, the relevant factors in  determining
    whether the appellant  had  established  a  breach  of  Art  8  in  the
    Strasbourg decision of Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50 (at para
    58 of her decision).  Although the judge made no specific reference  to
    the decision in MM (Uganda), it is clear that she did not approach  the
    issue of whether the appellant's deportation would  be  "unduly  harsh"
    solely by looking at the impact upon L without  regard  to  the  public
    interest.

38. Before the judge, it appears to have been argued that the family  could
    move to Iran or to Fiji which was the country of origin of L's  mother.
    The judge rejected both of these possibilities and, before me, Mr Mills
    did not seek to challenge that finding.  The issue was,  he  confirmed,
    whether the family could be 'split up' between the UK and Iran to which
    the appellant would be deported.  The judge's reasons for finding  that
    it would be "unduly harsh" to 'split up' the family in this way is  set
    out at paras 64 - 65 and 68 - 71.  I omit para 66 and 67 of the judge's
    reasons which deal with the issue, no longer relied  up  by  Mr  Mills,
    that the family could relocate to Iran or Fiji.  At paras 64 - 65,  the
    judge dealt with L's best interests as follows:

         "64. The Appellant is the primary carer for his daughter.  He cares
             for her daily, from 6am to the evening whilst his partner, and
             mother of his child is at work.  His  partner  words  for  the
             British Navy.   I  attach  weight  to  the  opinion  of  Peter
             Horrocks about the potential negative impact upon  [L]  should
             she be separated from her father, her primary carer.   I  have
             regard to the best interests of the child  assessment  as  set
             out in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
             Act 2009.  It is in the child's best interest to be with  both
             of her parents.  In light of the fact that in this  particular
             case the child's father, the Appellant  is  a  primary  carer,
             this carries  substantial  weight.   I  note  that  [ND]  [L's
             mother], due to the  nature  of  her  work,  may  be  deployed
             overseas at any point.  This could be at short notice.  Whilst
             [ND] enjoys being part of the Fijian  community  in  Plymouth,
             she does not have anybody who could  take  over  the  role  of
             caring for her daughter if she was deployed and the  Appellant
             was  deported.   The  prospect  of  her  having  to  employ  a
             professional child-carer to care for her child 24 hours a  day
             for an unknown period of time, is a  matter  that  she  cannot
             bring herself to think about."

39. The reference to the opinion of Peter Horrocks, the independent  social
    worker, is to his evidence which the  judge  set  out  at  para  56  as
    follows:

         "If [the appellant] were to be removed from the UK and returned  to
         Iran, there is no question that [L] would suffer great  trauma  and
         distress, which would  cause  harm  to  her  emotional  development
         because of the loss of her primary carer and her secure  attachment
         figure.  Although [the appellant] is her father not her mother,  he
         is her primary carer for most of the week, and consideration should
         be given to research which indicates  that  'the  occurrence  of  a
         mother-child separation of a week or longer within  the  first  two
         years of life was related to higher levels of child negativity  (at
         age 3) and aggression (at ages 3-5)....."

  40. At para 68, the judge referred to the precarious nature of the  family
      life but also that this should not factor  into  the  best  interests'
      assessment in respect of L.  The judge said this:

         "68. I have had regard to the precariousness of  family  life,  and
             the fact that the Appellant  and  [ND]  have  entered  into  a
             relationship whilst the Appellant's status was  unassured.   I
             have also factored in that this finding should  not  interfere
             with the best interest of the child assessment in  respect  of
             [L]."

41. Although Mr Mills did not specifically rely upon  this  aspect  of  the
    grounds in his oral submissions, the grounds do  contend  that  it  was
    wrong in law for the judge  to  fail  to  have  regard  to  the  public
    interest in deportation and the appellant's poor immigration history in
    reaching an assessment of L's best interests.  The  contention  in  the
    grounds is simply wrong as a matter of law.  The immigration status  of
    a child or parent is not relevant to  an  assessment  of  that  child's
    "best interests" (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4  at  [26]  and
    [33]; Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 at [10(7)] and R (MA) Pakistan  and
    others v UT IAC [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at  [53]).   Likewise,  the  public
    interest is not  relevant  in  assessing  a  child's  "best  interests"
    although, as the  case  law  recognises,  providing  the  child's  best
    interests are taken as a 'primary' consideration, those best  interests
    can, in an appropriate case, be outweighed  by  countervailing  factors
    such as the public interest.

42. The judge returned to the "public interest"  in  paragraph  69  of  her
    decision as follows:

         "69. I have to consider the  public  interest,  and  as  a  foreign
             criminal,  the  public  interest  factor  increases  the  more
             serious  the  offence  is.   The  offence  committed  by   the
             Appellant was an indictable offence,  causing  a  serious  eye
             injury to the victim, this was reflected in  the  sentence  he
             received for the charge of actual bodily harm.  I do not  wish
             to undermine the seriousness of the offence; however,  I  have
             regard to  the  remarks  of  the  sentencing  judge,  and  the
             reference  to  alcohol  being  a  contributing  factor.    The
             Appellant has rehabilitated, the offence  occurred  over  five
             years  ago.   Since  that  date,  he  has  complied  with  all
             immigration requirements.  I have considered all these factors
             when deciding the weight to be attached to the public interest
             in this balancing exercise."

43. Then, at paras  70  -  71  the  judge  reached  her  finding  that  the
    appellant's deportation would have an unduly harsh impact upon L.   The
    judge said this:

         "70. I find the Appellant enjoys family life  of  a  character  and
             quality to engage Article 8.  I find that the decision of  the
             Respondent is in pursuance of a legitimate  aim.   I  have  to
             decide if the decision is proportionate.

         71.  In considering the assessment I have careful regard to Section
             117C of the NIA 2002.  I have made a finding that  [L]'s  best
             interests are served by being with both her parents.  This  is
             of particular importance in respect of the Appellant as he  is
             her primary carer.   [L]  and  her  mother  [ND]  are  British
             Citizens.  It is in [L]'s interests to ensure that she is able
             to enjoy the benefits  and  advantages  that  flow  from  this
             status.  It would be unduly harsh for [L] to remain in the  UK
             without her father, having regard to the evidence  from  Peter
             Horrocks the independent social worker.  I find that it  would
             be unduly harsh to expect family life to continue in  Iran  in
             light of the [ND's] religious beliefs."

44. It is plain to me, when reading the judge's determination as  a  whole,
    that at paragraph 69 she clearly had in mind the public interest  based
    upon the seriousness of the offence.  I am wholly unpersuaded that  the
    judge failed to give full, and appropriate weight, to the full gamut of
    the public interest  in  reaching  her  finding  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" on L.

45. The judge was entitled to take into account, based upon the  sentencing
    judge's remarks, that the appellant had rehabilitated and that that was
    relevant to the weight to be given to the public interest in the  sense
    of what, if any, risk to the public the appellant presented based  upon
    reoffending.   Mr  Mills  accepted  in  his   oral   submissions   that
    'rehabilitation' was relevant to the risk of  reoffending.   The  judge
    did no more than she was entitled to do in para 69,  namely  take  that
    into account in assessing his future risk.

46.  However,  the  judge's  reference  to  the  public  interest  was  not
    restricted to future risk to the public.  She clearly had in  mind  the
    "seriousness" of the offence.  She said so: she  explicitly  summarised
    the circumstances giving rise to its seriousness  and,  of  course,  at
    paragraph 42.1 she had already quoted the sentencing  judge's  remarks.
    These set out the circumstances of the offence which included causing a
    serious injury to the victim's eye as  a  result  of  a  "flying  kick"
    whilst he was on the floor.  The injury was, as  the  sentencing  judge
    remarked, "a very serious and unpleasant" one.   Although  Judge  Price
    made no specific reference to the third facet of  the  public  interest
    identified in OH (Serbia), even if that remains an integral part of the
    public interest, I am wholly unpersuaded that the judge's assessment of
    the "public interest", and the importance to that of the  "seriousness"
    of  the  offence  (including  reflecting  the   deterrent   effect   of
    deportation on others), fails to reflect the proper weight to be  given
    to the public interest in this case.

47. It is important to notice that neither in the grounds nor in Mr  Mills'
    submissions was it suggested  that  the  judge  reached  an  irrational
    conclusion in relation to whether the impact upon L of the  appellant's
    deportation would be "unduly harsh".  It is plain to me that the  judge
    properly  carried  out  the  balancing  exercise,  as  required  by  MM
    (Uganda), taking fully into account the public interest based upon  the
    seriousness of the offence and the appellant's offending and any future
    risk to the public of his reoffending.  In addition, the judge  clearly
    had in mind (at para 68 of her decision) the "precariousness of  family
    life" relied upon by the appellant.  I see no basis for  the  criticism
    in the grounds, that the judge failed to  take  into  account  all  the
    relevant circumstances, including the appellant's  immigration  history
    which, Mr Clarke pointed out in  paragraph  8  of  the  rule  24  reply
    without challenge from Mr Mills, was not specifically  relied  upon  in
    the oral submissions before Judge Price.

48. As I have already pointed out, the Secretary of State does not  contend
    that the judge's decision was irrational.  Her primary findings are not
    disputed, including that the appellant was the primary carer of  L  and
    that, based  upon,  in  part  Mr  Horrock's  opinion,  the  appellant's
    deportation would not be in the best interests of L.  Mr  Horrocks,  of
    course, considered that L would suffer "great trauma and distress"  and
    her  "emotional  development"  would  be  harmed  by  the   appellant's
    deportation.  In reaching her finding that the appellant's  deportation
    would be "unduly harsh" upon L, the judge fully took into  account  the
    public interest and I  see  no  basis  upon  which  it  could  be  said
    (although of course the contrary is not contended for by the  Secretary
    of State) that the judge was not entitled as a matter of  law  to  find
    that the public interest was outweighed by the  effect  of  deportation
    upon L.





Decision

49. For these reasons, the judge  did  not  err  in  law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 and that decision stands.

50. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               15 March 2018
