
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04349/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 August 2017                          |On 5 October 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     aj
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel instructed by ASR Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1984.  He arrived in the
    UK as a student on 22 August 2010.  After a series of applications  for
    further leave to remain as a  student,  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and on human rights grounds, he made an asylum claim
    on 30 November 2015.

 2. The respondent refused the application in a  decision  dated  19  April
    2016.  The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Mathews ("the FtJ") at a hearing on  9
    March 2017 following which the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The appellant's protection claim, in summary, is made on the  following
    basis.  To pursue studies in the UK he borrowed  large  sums  of  money
    from moneylenders in Pakistan, to the  tune  of  25  lakh  rupees.   He
    provided the moneylenders with post-dated cheques and initial  payments
    were to be made by cash.  Whilst in the UK the appellant found that his
    college said that they had not received any sums for his  tuition  fees
    which were to be paid in advance  by  the  agent  that  he  used.   The
    appellant therefore found himself in debt, with no place to study,  and
    unable to repay those that lent him the money.

 4. The moneylenders visited the  appellant's  family  home  seeking  their
    money.  Police also attended and the appellant  believes  that  he  has
    been reported to the authorities for issuing a cheque that has not been
    honoured.  Threats have been made that he would be killed on return  to
    Pakistan.  The appellant's family have suffered as a  result  of  these
    events, with his brother having undergone a divorce.  If returned,  the
    appellant fears that he would be harmed or killed by the  moneylenders.
    He also fears that he would be arrested and that corrupt  police  would
    support the moneylenders.

    The FtJ's decision

 5. The FtJ made a number of adverse credibility findings.  The credibility
    of the appellant's claim was found to  be  adversely  affected  by  the
    delay in making his claim, the appellant having accepted that  in  2011
    he realised he could not repay the moneylenders.  The FtJ said at  [17]
    that despite having legal advice and  representation  in  the  UK,  and
    seeking to remain here, he made  no  claim  for  protection  after  the
    initial threats.  He found that the appellant had  made  no  protection
    claim until November 2015 when other applications had  been  exhausted.
    He further found that in previous applications, when giving his reasons
    for wishing to remain in the UK, the appellant had made no  mention  of
    any need for protection, a fact which was found to be at odds with  his
    claimed fears.

 6. At [18] the FtJ said that he found it  "utterly  incredible"  that  the
    appellant would never have checked to see if the post-dated cheques had
    been presented to his bank.  He also found that  it  was  inconceivable
    that the lenders would not have presented the cheques for payment since
    that  was  the  intended  method  of  repayment.   He  concluded   that
    presentation and 'bouncing' of the cheques would have been reported  to
    the appellant since they were cheques that he had written  against  his
    own account.  He further found that it defied credibility that he would
    not be aware that his cheques had been dishonoured or that  they  would
    not have been presented for payment.

 7. At [19] he said this:

         "I note the copy of the claimed loan agreement, and observe that it
         is a document presented with translation dated 7th March 2017,  the
         eleventh hour in this case.  I note that I have no original of  the
         loan agreement.  I apply the principles set out  in  Tanveer  Ahmed
         and attach very limited weight to a translation  of  copy  document
         provided in the circumstances set out above."

 8. I have quoted [19] in full in the light of  the  argument  advanced  in
    relation to the FtJ's conclusions in that respect.

 9. The FtJ went on to find that the fact that his family have reported  no
    recent contact or threats  from  the  lenders  was  at  odds  with  the
    assertion that the lenders act with impunity, and the apparent support,
    or at least indifference, of the police.  He noted that  there  was  no
    need for corroborative evidence in a protection claim, but  found  that
    he could take into account a lack of any evidence  that  is  reasonably
    available to the appellant  and  could  support  his  claim.   In  that
    respect he noted that there was no evidence  from  any  of  his  family
    supporting the account of the visits they had received, and the alleged
    shame reflected upon them.  He noted also that although  the  appellant
    said he is no longer in contact with them, he was in the past.   Hence,
    communication about such events had taken place  and  his  family  were
    helping him by warning him, although "not so much as a letter or  email
    is available in support".

10. The FtJ said that  he  viewed  all  the  evidence  and  the  issues  of
    credibility in the round, but there were a number of concerns which  he
    had referred to.  He said that whilst individually some of the concerns
    may not entirely undermine the appellant's account, when taken together
    they drove him to conclude that his account was lacking in credibility,
    notwithstanding the low standard of proof.  He found that the appellant
    had not established that he had taken out any loan or that  he  was  at
    risk in Pakistan for the reasons that he gave.

11. At [23] he said that even if he accepted  the  appellant's  account  of
    defaulting on a loan, notwithstanding that  copies  of  some  Pakistani
    legislation had been provided, there was no sufficient evidence from  a
    qualified practitioner or expert to confirm that the failure  to  repay
    would be a criminal matter.  He  referred  in  the  next  paragraph  to
    having read the background material with care, noting the  shortcomings
    of the police and judicial system in Pakistan.  However, he found  that
    the material does not suggest that any person being  pursued  for  debt
    would face oppression and mistreatment such as to  require  protection.
    He also found that there was no sufficient evidence to suggest that  it
    would be impossible to find any assistance from  a  police  officer  in
    Pakistan when faced with an  over-zealous  debt  recovery  officer  who
    makes threats of harm.

12. He repeated in [26] his view of the appellant's failure  to  pursue  an
    asylum claim in a timely fashion in the UK.

13. He also referred to "the  claimed  medical  difficulties  in  the  UK",
    stating that no medical evidence had been put before  him  that  allows
    any relevant findings of health issues  that  would  prevent  a  proper
    return to Pakistan.

14. In relation to the respondent's case that there had been fraudulent use
    by the appellant of an ETS language certificate, the FtJ resolved  that
    issue in the appellant's  favour.   He  concluded  that  there  was  no
    adequate evidential basis upon which he could find that  the  appellant
    was a party to an ETS fraud as alleged.

15. The FtJ then went on to dismiss the Article 8 aspect of the appeal, and
    about which no complaint has been made in the  grounds  of  the  appeal
    against the FtJ's decision.

    The grounds and submissions

16. I summarise the grounds and submissions.  The grounds assert  that  the
    FtJ was wrong to conclude that the appellant had made no mention of any
    need for protection in the UK until his asylum claim in November  2015.
    In fact, he had referred to the issue of risk from the moneylenders  in
    a leave application made in September 2015.  Furthermore, the  lateness
    of the claim was not an issue that was raised with the appellant during
    the course of the  hearing  and  he  therefore  did  not  have  a  fair
    opportunity to explain the matter.

17. Issue is taken in the grounds with the FtJ's assessment of the  banking
    system in Pakistan in terms of whether the appellant  would  have  been
    provided with information as to the cheques not having been honoured.

18. It is also asserted that the FtJ was wrong in his  adverse  credibility
    finding in terms of no original loan agreement having been provided and
    in relation to a translation having  been  presented  at  the  eleventh
    hour.  It is asserted that the appellant would not have  been  able  to
    provide an original because that would have been kept by the lender not
    the creditor.  Accordingly, the FtJ's conclusions in this respect  were
    based on speculation and presumptions.

19. Furthermore, in the respondent's refusal letter, it  is  apparent  that
    there  was  a  translation  of  the  loan  agreement  put  before   the
    respondent.  Accordingly, it could not be said that no translation  was
    provided until two days before the hearing.

20. Objection is  taken  to  the  FtJ's  having  said  that  there  was  no
    requirement for corroborative evidence, but  yet  having  required  the
    appellant to provide evidence from his family  in  relation  to  police
    visits and their feelings of shame in relation to the situation.

21.  The  grounds  also  contend  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's medical conditions, including PTSD, which  it  is  asserted
    corroborated the claimed fear of persecution.

22. Lastly, it is argued that the  FtJ  had  not  properly  considered  the
    background evidence in terms of Pakistani  legislation  that  supported
    the appellant's claimed fear of persecution.

23. In  submissions,  Mr  Jafferji  relied  on  the  grounds.   He  further
    submitted that in terms of the lateness  of  the  claim,  the  FtJ  had
    applied the wrong test by stating at [12] that s.8 of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 'required'  him  to
    conclude  that  the  appellant's  late  claim  adversely  affected  his
    credibility, whereas the true position  is  that  it  only  potentially
    affects that assessment.  Furthermore, the respondent's decision letter
    did not raise s.8 in that context, but only in the context of  the  ETS
    fraud allegation.

24. In the appellant's interview (page 51) he had been asked why he  waited
    to make his asylum claim and  the  appellant  had  referred  to  having
    mentioned it  in  a  previous  application  and  had  given  a  further
    explanation.  None of that was taken into account by the FtJ.

25. It was submitted that this aspect of the FtJ's decision  is  sufficient
    to set the decision aside.

26. It was submitted that at [19] it was not clear as to whether or not the
    FtJ was saying that the copy of the loan agreement  was  only  produced
    for the first time on 7 March 2017 (two days before  the  hearing),  or
    just the translation.

27. In terms of whether the appellant ought to have known that the  cheques
    had bounced, it was true that the appellant could have  made  enquiries
    but the FtJ was not entitled to conclude that the  appellant's  account
    in this respect was "utterly incredible" in terms  of  his  not  having
    checked.  The appellant in any event knew that there were no  funds  in
    the bank so no check would have made any difference.  Furthermore,  the
    family had said that the police had been to his house.

28. As to the lack of any supporting or  corroborative  evidence  from  his
    family, the appellant's account was that he had had no current  contact
    with his family, and the last contact was some time in 2014.  There was
    no basis from which the FtJ could conclude  that  the  appellant  would
    have any e-mail or letter referring  to  the  problems  that  they  had
    experienced in Pakistan and the threats or visits.  It was further  not
    clear that that point was put to the appellant at the hearing.

29. The FtJ had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  consistency  of  the
    appellant's  claim.   It  was  not  suggested  that   there   was   any
    inconsistency in it, and none is referred to.

30. At [23]-[24] there is a very  brief  consideration  of  the  background
    material but the FtJ had failed  to  assess  it.   I  was  referred  to
    aspects of the background evidence  in  terms  of  the  punishment  for
    issuing a cheque that was dishonoured.  Although this was potentially a
    case  of  prosecution,  it  may  still  amount  to  persecution.    The
    persecution would be in terms of making a false case that the appellant
    was dishonest,  for  which  he  could  be  prosecuted.   There  was  no
    assessment of the extent to which a criminal offence might apply to the
    appellant.

31. Mr Mills accepted that the FtJ had not set out the test in terms of s.8
    entirely correctly, leaving out the fact that delay, for example,  only
    potentially adversely affects credibility.  Nevertheless, the  FtJ  was
    entitled to conclude that the appellant's claim lacked credibility  for
    it not having been made sooner.

32. With characteristic fairness however, Mr Mills referred to a copy of an
    application for leave to remain made by the appellant in September 2014
    in which he mentioned that he had a  fear  of  persecution  by  private
    actors from whom he borrowed money for his education,  further  stating
    that his family said they would not help him unless he agreed to  marry
    a girl of their choice.  It was accepted therefore, that the  appellant
    had raised the protection issue earlier than the claim  for  asylum  in
    November 2015.

33. However, it was submitted that the issue (of fear of  return)  actually
    arose in 2011 and the appellant had made  several  applications  before
    his claim for asylum in November 2015.   Even  by  September  2014  the
    appellant had been here for a long time.  It was clear from  [17]  that
    the FtJ did assess the delay in claiming asylum on the correct basis.

34. As to the copy loan agreement and the translation, the  key  point  was
    that the appellant had not produced the original document.

35. It could not be said that there was any 'cultural context' in terms  of
    the FtJ's assessment of whether or not the appellant would  have  known
    that the cheques had not been honoured.  The FtJ was  not  saying  that
    Pakistani banks work in the same way as UK banks.  He was simply saying
    that there was no attempt  by  the  appellant  to  find  out  what  had
    happened in relation to his bank account or if an attempt had been made
    to cash the cheques, or even if his account had been closed.

36. The FtJ was entitled to find that where evidence  could  reasonably  be
    expected from his family, that it could have  been  provided.   In  the
    years since these events, no evidence had been provided from his family
    in support  of  the  appellant's  claim.   Furthermore,  there  was  no
    apparent effort by the appellant to contact his family to  provide  any
    supporting evidence.

37. As to consistency, that could be a signpost to credibility but it  does
    not necessarily mean that a person is telling the truth.  In this case,
    the FtJ had given other reasons for  concluding  that  the  appellant's
    account was not credible.

38. Furthermore, even if the appellant's arguments are sustainable, the FtJ
    was entitled to conclude that the appellant would not in any  event  be
    at risk on return for the reasons given at [23]-[24].  His reasoning is
    brief but adequate.  AW (sufficiency  of  protection)  Pakistan  [2011]
    UKUT 31(IAC) indicates that there is a  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Pakistan.  The appellant would have to demonstrate that the  people  he
    fears are influential enough to be able to harm him.  There was  simply
    no evidence of that before the FtJ.

39. The question also arises as to whether the appellant's claim amounts to
    anything more than prosecution, which he  ought  to  face  for  issuing
    cheques that could not  be  honoured.   The  issues  may  turn  on  the
    influence of the people the appellant claims to fear and to sufficiency
    of protection, including by the courts.

40. In reply, the only additional point made on behalf of the appellant was
    in terms of a reference to page 39 of the appellant's asylum  interview
    where he was asked about why he had not made enquiries of his bank, and
    his explanation in that respect.  It was submitted that  this  was  not
    referred to by the FtJ.

    Conclusions

41. I do not consider that there is merit in every facet of the grounds  of
    appeal against the FtJ's decision and the submissions in support of it.
     Nevertheless, I am satisfied that in material respects the FtJ did err
    in law, such as to require the decision to be set aside.  I can set out
    my reasons briefly.

42. The FtJ categorically stated that the  appellant  had  not  raised  the
    issue of his need for protection in the  UK  until  making  his  asylum
    claim in November  2015.   It  is  apparent  that  that  conclusion  is
    demonstrably false.  Mr Mills was able to locate the application of  16
    September 2014 (which appears to have been a human rights  application,
    in which the appellant raised the issue of his claimed fear of  return,
    in the way that I have summarised above).  The lateness  of  the  claim
    was a significant matter that  weighed  in  the  FtJ's  conclusions  in
    relation to the appellant's credibility.  So much is clear from [17] of
    his decision.

43. Although the point that the appellant did not claim asylum much earlier
    remains potentially a good one in terms  of  adverse  credibility,  the
    further issue arises in terms of the fact that the appellant was  asked
    about the late claim in his asylum interview, as is clear from page 51.
     He was asked why he did not claim asylum when his  fear  first  arose.
    He said that he was worried most of the time but was not sure  what  he
    could do.  He was asked about the fact that he had solicitors who could
    advise him, and he gave an explanation (albeit brief and vague) of some
    action that had been taken by his previous solicitors.

44. The FtJ would have been entitled to make an adverse credibility finding
    on the basis of the appellant's late claim  for  asylum,  or  at  least
    delay in mentioning his claimed fear, but it is a  finding  that  would
    need to have been made on the  correct  footing.   If  the  appellant's
    explanation for the late claim is to be held against him, there does at
    least need to be some  indication  that  the  matter  was  put  to  the
    appellant, and that his reasons as given in the  asylum  interview  are
    assessed.  There is also then, the factual error about when it was that
    the appellant first raised this issue with the Home Office, albeit that
    that was still some years after the claimed events first arose.

45. Likewise, in his interview, at page 39, the appellant was asked why  he
    had not checked his bank account, and he gave  an  explanation,  albeit
    again a brief one.  There is no reference in the FtJ's decision to that
    explanation and accordingly no assessment of it.  Whilst  again,  on  a
    proper footing, the FtJ may have been entitled to make  the  criticisms
    of the appellant's account that he did,  the  conclusion  that  it  was
    "utterly incredible" that the appellant would not have checked his bank
    account and that it 'defied credibility' that he would  not  have  been
    aware that his cheques had been dishonoured or that they would not have
    been presented for payment, is a conclusion that must be  based  on  an
    assessment of the appellant's account as  given  in  interview,  or  as
    given in oral evidence.  There is no indication  that  that  assessment
    has taken place, and no indication that the appellant was  asked  about
    that matter during his oral evidence.

46. I have set out in full what the FtJ said at [19]  of  his  decision  in
    terms of  the  provision  of  a  copy  of  the  loan  agreement  and  a
    translation of it.  It is not clear from that paragraph whether the FtJ
    concluded that it was both the translation and the copy loan  agreement
    that were provided at the  "eleventh  hour".   It  is  clear  from  the
    refusal letter at [28] that the appellant had provided a  copy  of  the
    loan agreement in support of the claim for  asylum,  in  November  2015
    therefore.   He  had  also  provided  a  translation,   although   that
    translation was found to be inadequate.  If the FtJ was asserting  that
    the appellant had provided no copy of the agreement prior  to  7  March
    2017, that is plainly wrong.  If it is asserted that the appellant  had
    not provided any translation prior to that date, that  is  also  wrong.
    Whilst it does appear to be the case that the further  translation  was
    provided two days before the hearing, I cannot see in the circumstances
    why that could have led to  the  FtJ's  conclusion  that  very  limited
    weight should be attached to it.  Furthermore,  although  the  FtJ  may
    have been entitled to take into account that no original  of  the  loan
    agreement had been provided, again, it does not appear that this  is  a
    matter that was put to the appellant for his explanation.

47. I do not consider  it  necessary  to  deal  with  the  other  arguments
    advanced in the grounds  and  submissions  in  relation  to  the  FtJ's
    decision, given that I am satisfied that the  matters  I  have  already
    referred to reveal that the FtJ's credibility assessment is vitiated by
    error of law.

48. I have considered whether such errors of law are material,  given  what
    the FtJ said  at  [23]-[24]  about  his  assessment  of  the  Pakistani
    legislation and background material.  However, I am not satisfied  that
    those paragraphs indicate a satisfactory assessment  of  the  materials
    that were before the FtJ in terms of the risk  of  prosecution  of  the
    appellant, which arguably could be said to amount  to  persecution,  on
    account of his  having  issued  cheques  that  were  dishonoured.   The
    background material to which I was  referred  in  submissions  required
    assessment and analysis by the FtJ.  The FtJ's decision does not  refer
    in any detail at all to the material that he considered, or explain why
    he found that the appellant would  not,  even  on  the  basis  of  that
    material, be at risk of persecution on return.  It is  furthermore,  at
    least implicit from  [24]  that  the  FtJ  considered  that  there  was
    material which suggested that a person being pursued for debt might  be
    subject to "oppression and mistreatment".

49. In all these circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision of the FtJ
    must be set aside.  Given that the errors of law relate  to  the  FtJ's
    assessment of credibility, it is  appropriate,  having  regard  to  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2, for the  matter
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo,  given
    the nature and extent of the fact-finding exercise required.

50. With one exception, none of the findings of fact are to  be  preserved.
    That exception relates to the FtJ's conclusions at [28] in terms of the
    ETS fraud allegation.   That  finding  is  self-contained  and  is  not
    infected by the error of law.  It is a finding that is to be preserved.

    Decision

51. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision  is  set  aside,  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mathews.   Except   as
    indicated in the preceding paragraph, no findings of  fact  are  to  be
    preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Given that this is an appeal in relation to a protection claim,  unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        5/10/17


