
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/04062/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th May 2017                       |       On 31st May 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     N S
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Harding of Counsel, instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Munonyedi sitting at Taylor House on 25th  November
    2016 whereby she dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and
    human rights grounds by way of  a  determination  promulgated  on  11th
    January 2017.

2.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Sheridan where it was said in relation to the grounds as a  whole  that
    the majority appeared weak  but  that  permission  be  granted  on  all
    grounds. The focus of the grant of permission was as follows


         "It is arguable that the judge erred in law by failing to  consider
         the objective evidence about the current situation  in  Afghanistan
         that was adduced by the  Appellant.   The  judge  appears  to  have
         relied solely on the 2012 country guidance case in  evaluating  the
         risk of harm in Afghanistan.  Given  this  guidance  is  over  four
         years old it was arguably an error of law to not consider the  more
         up-to-date information that was before the Tribunal  including  the
         UNHCR guidelines referred to in the grounds".

3.   The grounds, well drafted by Mr Harding, set out several aspects  where
    it was said that there were material errors of  law.  Firstly,  it  was
    alleged in respect of the substantive asylum interview, there  was  not
    the inconsistency in the reply to question 38 which the judge had found
    there to be. It is said that  paragraphs  16  and  17  of  the  judge's
    decision amounted to a cross-cultural comparison based  on  assumptions
    on how village  elders  would  behave  but  without  any  reference  to
    background material.  It was said that  in  reality  in  relation  many
    findings of fact were not actually findings at all.

4.   There was an age dispute  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  age.  This
    raised issues in respect of the duties owed  by  the  local  authority.
    There was a medical report from Dr Diana Birch.  The grounds of  appeal
    to the Tribunal suggest that there was a material error of law  in  the
    way in which the age assessment had been looked at  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Overall,  it  was  said  that  the  reasons  given  in
    rejecting   credibility   were   not   impressive   and   suggested   a
    misapplication of the lower standard of  proof.   By  way  of  example,
    paragraph  27  of  the  judge's  decision   suggested   a   fundamental
    misunderstanding of the lower standard of proof which applies  to  this
    sort of case.

5.   Insofar as the background material is concerned Mr Harding said he  had
    handed in a bundle of background material to  Judge.  This  morning  he
    took me to certain aspects of that bundle, in particular  a  report  by
    the  UNHCR  entitled  "Eligibility   Guidelines   for   Assessing   the
    International Protection Needs of Asylum Seekers from Afghanistan".  It
    is dated April 2016. I say from the outset that UNHCR  guidelines  are
    just that and do not have to be followed. The guidelines are  therefore
    a piece of evidence just as is any  other  that  is  presented  to  the
    Tribunal which then requires assessment, evaluation and for appropriate
    weight to be applied to it.

6.   Mr Harding amplified his grounds further. Ultimately he said  that  the
    judge's decision was flawed and that there had to be a de novo  hearing
    at the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   In his reply Mr Wilding said that although he could not  say  that  the
    Judge's decision  was a perfect determination, it was one whereby  "all
    the right boxes were ticked" in respect of assessment and in  terms  of
    the findings.  Insofar  as  question  and  reply  38  to  the  AIR  was
    concerned the judge was entitled to make the decision that she had come
    to.  There was a reason for considering the matter in terms of what had
    been raised and the grounds were really just an attempt to reargue what
    was before the judge.

8.   Mr Wilding said that the judge's findings at paragraphs 16 and 17  came
    to a conclusion  within  a  range  of  findings  that  could  be  made.
    Ultimately the judge explained why whether one or both  letters  should
    or  should  not  have  the  Appellant's  names  on  them.   Given   the
    significance  of  the  threat   which   was   supposedly   within   the
    correspondence the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was
    unimpressive.  Reasons were provided by the judge  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to come to those decisions.

9.   Insofar as the factual matrix  was  concerned  it  was  submitted  that
    because adverse findings were made then actually it was  not  necessary
    to go behind those findings or then to apply  the  background  material
    because it was not relevant in view of the adverse findings.

10.  Insofar as the age  dispute  matter  was  concerned,  the  judge  dealt
    adequately with the report by Dr Birch. The  judge  considered  it  and
    compared it with the social worker's report.  It was to be  noted  that
    Dr Birch's report was of some vintage and there were strong factors  in
    the judge's assessment in relation to the Appellant being known  as  an
    adult in Italy with a date of birth of 1992.

11.  It was submitted by Mr Wilding that there was no sufficient basis  upon
    which it could lawfully be said that there was any doubt in respect  of
    age.  He said there was a catch-all finding at paragraph 25  which  set
    out the cumulative way in which the Appellant's account  could  not  be
    believed.  The judge was entitled to make the findings that she made.

12.  Insofar as the background material which was highlighted to  me  today,
    i.e. the assessment of risk to the Appellant for  being  "westernised",
    Mr Wilding said that the UNHCR document does not establish  a  specific
    risk. The Appellant needed to  do  more  than  to  flag  an  individual
    paragraph.  For example, where is it said  that  this  risk  will  take
    place, is it countrywide or just in certain areas?  The judge's failure
    to consider the specific point was not a material error  of  law  after
    having roundly  rejected  the  Appellant's  account  in  terms  of  his
    credibility.  The judge's decision lawfully disposed of the matter  and
    Mr Wilding submitted that there was no error of law.

13.  Mr Harding did not seek to say anything by way of reply.

14.  There are two aspects which concern  me  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    decision.  First is paragraph 27 at the second sentence when  she  said
    "the test of persecution must be kept at a high  and  demanding  level.
    There should be strong and credible elements but this is lacking in the
    Appellant's account."    This is not the correct test for a  protection
    claim.

15.  The second aspect which concerns me is in relation  to  the  background
    material which was specifically brought to the judge's  attention.   Mr
    Harding who appears before me and appeared at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has provided his contemporaneous notes of the hearing and indeed I have
    the bundle of background material and it is quite clear that the  judge
    had before her the background material.  Mr  Harding's  contemporaneous
    notes are helpful. They show that there can be no doubt whatsoever that
    the judge was referred to the background  material  and  that  she  was
    thereby invited to look beyond the 2012 Country Guidance which was some
    four years or so in antiquity at that time.

16.  There are aspects of this case which are troublesome because there  was
    a detailed age assessment which suggests that it was a Merton compliant
    assessment and I am well aware that there is a lot  of  case  law  from
    both the High Court and the Upper Tribunal in respect  of  age  dispute
    cases. It appears to me that there was something about the  Appellant's
    case that the judge was troubled by in terms  of  his  age  which  then
    seems to have seeped into the general findings  which  she  then  made.
    However what has considerably troubled me though are those two  matters
    that I refer to, i.e. paragraph 27 of the judge's decision  where  she
    wrongly set out the test for persecution and the consideration  of  the
    background material.

17.  In my judgment, it  is  essential  I  give  this  protection  case  the
    anxious scrutiny that it requires.  With some reluctance and despite Mr
    Wilding's persuasive submissions, ultimately I conclude that there is a
    material error of law in the judge's decision.  Therefore it would  not
    be safe to leave the judge's decision to stand.  In  my  judgment,  the
    failure to properly set out the standard of proof or to apply it, along
    with the  failure  to  consider  the  submissions  and  the  background
    material as to why the four year old country guidance should  not  have
    been followed, shows that there has not been the most anxious  scrutiny
    applied by the judge in this case.

18.  I have considered whether there is a way  in  which  I  could  continue
    considering  this  matter  and  particularly  because  of  the  general
    findings which  have  been  made,  but  I  have  concluded  on  balance
    ultimately it is difficult to salvage some findings and not others  and
    that in the circumstances there will have to be a  complete  rehearing.
    In my judgement the appropriate place for that rehearing will be at the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The previous hearing took place at  Taylor  House
    and unless there is a reason why it should not  take  place  at  Taylor
    House then that is where the further hearing will be.   The appeal will
    be a de novo hearing, on all matters.  None  of  the  current  findings
    shall stand.  There will be  further  directions  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in due course.


Decision

Appeal allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing on  all
matters.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 8 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                  Date: 8 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

