
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04019/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th September 2016               |On 8th November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [K s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Charlton (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wilsher, promulgated on 26th July 2016, following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 21st  June  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon   the   Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of India, who was born on 5th July
    1990.  She arrived in the UK on 12th July 2012, on a student visa valid
    until 4th November 2014.  She had been studying at a  college  but  her
    leave was curtailed when the college lost its Sponsor licence  on  20th
    May 2013.  She subsequently applied for asylum on 8th  July  2015,  but
    the claim was refused in a decision dated 4th December 2015,  whereupon
    she was served with  removal  directions.   She  appealed  against  the
    refusal of her protection claim.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed how in 2012 the Appellant met a man called [TS]  and
    began a relationship with him, whereupon she  fell  pregnant  with  his
    child.  He initially suggested that they get married.    Their  parents
    were unhappy with this.  In April 2014, after some two years, she  even
    moved into [TS]'s property at [~] Road  in  Luton  and  they  cohabited
    there until  he  apparently  left  her  and  returned  to  India.   The
    Appellant had two cousins in the UK by the names of [SS] and [KK], upon
    whom she was heavily reliant, and they filed witness statements  before
    Judge Wilsher, confirming that she resided with them while she  studied
    in London until her course was suspended because the college  lost  its
    Sponsor licence.  She now has a son born to her by the  name  of  [SMS]
    who was born on 19th July 2014.  She is afraid that  her  parents  will
    not be supportive of her now that [TS] has left  her  were  she  to  be
    returned to India.  She has supporting medical evidence in the form  of
    a report by Dr Anopana Kapoor prepared on 20th May 2015 which refers to
    her symptoms as presenting  "severe  depression  and  severe  anxiety".
    What this report states is that, "It is likely that the severity of her
    symptoms would increase and she may experience suicidal thoughts due to
    no support mechanisms or financial aid, and the possible treatment  she
    and her child may receive from others".

 4. The judge, after setting out the applicable law with considerable  care
    in  the  determination,  proceeded  to  make  findings  of   fact   and
    credibility, and applied the correct standard of  proof  on  the  lower
    standard, before concluding that, "I am just  persuaded  to  the  lower
    standard of proof that the Appellant is telling the  truth  as  regards
    the history in this case" and that she was an Indian woman from a rural
    background whose parents own a shop, and she was sponsored to  come  to
    the UK to study and fell pregnant by a man called [TS] who subsequently
    abandoned her.  The judge observed how, "She  has  tried  to  reconcile
    with her family but they have thus far rejected her  and  made  threats
    against  her  life"  and  she  now  suffers  from  severe  anxiety  and
    depression (paragraph 6).

 5. Having accepted the Appellant's basic account, the judge then proceeded
    to look at the  "risk  on  return"  and  observed  how  "this  case  is
    difficult to evaluate in terms of risk on return" and not least because
    the statements by the two cousins upon which reliance was placed was in
    circumstances where, "These witnesses were  not  in  court  to  explain
    further" (paragraph 7).   The  judge  observed  that  the  South  Asian
    Women's Network lists a number of organisations that provide short stay
    homes in India and that although children are not allowed to stay  with
    the women, the report on shelter services for  women  prepared  by  the
    United Nations in December 2012, stated that in reality many women  are
    accompanied by their children (paragraph 9).   Furthermore,  the  judge
    observed how, "the Appellant has  been  extensively  supported  by  her
    cousins in the UK since she arrived here in 2012",  and  although  they
    were not in court to be questioned they could provide  further  support
    in India which would  go  much  further  in  that  country  "given  the
    relevant costs of living" (paragraph 10).

 6.  It  was  in  relation,  however,  to  the  application  of  Article  8
    jurisprudence, that the judge then found in favour  of  the  Appellant,
    noting that the Appellant's son had to have his "best interests"  taken
    into account and that, "It is clearly in his best interests  to  remain
    in the UK with his mother.  She would have  a  much  better  chance  of
    securing him education and have  a  much  better  standard  of  living"
    (paragraph 11).  Furthermore, although the judge had earlier found that
    the support given by the cousins would go much  further  in  a  country
    like India and could continue to be provided, in relation to Article 8,
    the judge felt that,

         "It is not obvious to me that at the moment she would  be  able  to
         manage the practicalities of that alone in the fragile mental state
         that she is.  For this reason I have very real concerns  about  the
         welfare of her son as well as the Appellant.  It  is  possible  she
         may resort to self harm again if she were  left  in  a  shelter  in
         India that was unable to properly support  her  or  was  a  hostile
         environment" (paragraph 12).

    Finally, the judge held that the Appellant's  removal  would  interfere
    with the enjoyment of family life by the child "in a very  serious  way
    in that he would leave facing a real prospect of ending up  going  into
    care or being abandoned by his mother" (paragraph 13).

 7. The appeal was allowed.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me on 29th September 2016, Mr Bramble,  appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of  State  submitted  that  there
    were a number of factual inaccuracies by the judge.   He  claimed  that
    originally the reason being dressed up as an asylum claim, and  it  was
    properly dismissed by the judge as such, but  then  when  consideration
    was given to Article 8 the judge had reversed his initial decision.  In
    this respect, the factual errors were as follows.  First, the judge had
    stated (at paragraph 12) that, "It is not possible that she may  resort
    to self harm again if she  were  left  in  a  shelter  in  India  ...."
    However, the Appellant had never engaged in self harm.  To conclude the
    possibility of a shelter being available in her own native  country  on
    the basis that she may "resort to self harm again", when there  was  no
    evidence of any self harm having been inflicted before, was clearly  an
    error of law.  The report by Dr Anopana Kapoor of 24th  May  2018  does
    not refer to any self harm at all.  At page 25A there are letters  from
    the County Council assessment and at page 38A a report from a wellbeing
    centre, but neither of these make the remotest reference to self  harm.
    As against this, there was clear support from the two cousins available
    that  the  judge  had  referred  to  repeatedly.   The  conclusion  was
    unsustainable.

 9. Second, Dr Anopana Kapoor's report  was  highly  speculative  when  she
    concluded that the severity of the Appellant's symptoms could  be  such
    that "she makes mere suicidal thoughts" when there had been no evidence
    at all of any suicidal tendencies before.

10. Third, the judge with respect to Article 8 had plainly erred in  taking
    as his premise the proposition that, in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    child, "It is clearly in his best interests to remain in  the  UK  with
    his mother.  He  would  have  a  much  better  chance  of  securing  an
    education ..." (paragraph 11).   It  did  not  follow  that  the  "best
    interests" of the child are served by a physical  presence  in  the  UK
    because established case law states that the "best interests" of  young
    children is always to be with the parents, and if the Appellant, as the
    mother, was to be returned to India, then the child would go  with  the
    mother.  The child, after all, was only 3 years of age.

11. Finally, in the same way, the judge  wrongly  concluded  on  the  facts
    that, "If the Appellant were to be removed, and there  were  to  be  an
    interference with her family  life,  then  as  far  as  the  child  was
    concerned, he would leave facing a real prospect  of  ending  up  going
    into care or being abandoned by his mother", as there was  no  previous
    history of the mother having abandoned her child.

12. It was to be noted moreover, that no consideration was given to Section
    117B of the 2002 Act because the approach taken by the judge  had  been
    so much in favour of the Appellant.

13. For her part, Ms Charlton  relied  upon  her  skeleton  argument.   She
    submitted that it was not the case at all that  there  was  a  lack  of
    evidence.  Dr Anopana Kapoor's report was comprehensive and  clear  and
    provided the basis for the judge's conclusions in this case.  It was  a
    well respected psychologist that one was  dealing  with  here  and  the
    report was extremely well reasoned.  The Appellant had no family living
    in India that she  could  return  to  for  support  and  she  had  been
    abandoned by [TS] and she was  with  a  young  child  facing  the  grim
    prospect of returning to a hostile environment.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, the suggestion that the Appellant's son "would have  a
    better chance of securing an education and have a  much better standard
    of living" in India such that his "best interests" would be  to  remain
    in  the  UK  does  not  follow  in  the  light   of   the   established
    jurisprudence.  As the judge himself observed the son "is a very  young
    child and it is plain that he has no significant ties with the UK of  a
    linguistic, cultural or social nature.  He is  truly  of  an  adaptable
    age" (paragraph 11).

15. Second, the suggestion that the Appellant  may  "resort  to  self  harm
    again if she were left in a shelter in  India"  belies  the  fact  that
    there is no evidence to date of self harm on the part of the Appellant.
     I note the report  by  Dr  Anopana  Kapoor  that  the  Appellant  "may
    experience suicidal thoughts due to no support mechanisms or  financial
    aid", is not only without a tangible foundation in fact, but  overlooks
    the situation, as the judge had repeatedly found, that the  Appellant's
    two cousins would be in a position to provide precisely the  same  sort
    of support that they have done were the Appellant to be in India  which
    "could go much further in India  given  the  relevant  cost  of  living
    "(paragraph 10).  It is unexplained in the determination how  the  lack
    of support in India  squares  with  the  support  that  would  be  made
    available by the cousins to the Appellant in India.

Remaking the Decision

16. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her and the submissions that  I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this  appeal  only  to  the  extent  that  it  is
    submitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by a  judge
    other than Judge Wilsher under Practice Statement 7.2(b) because of the
    nature of the fact-finding process being such that it is  necessary  to
    reach clear findings of fact in relation to the Article 8 claim and the
    best interests of the child claim.

17. I should add that upon a reconsideration, it will be necessary to  look
    at the aspect of the claim relating to Mr [TS], a person  who,  notably
    had a relationship with the Appellant, whereupon a child was  conceived
    and then born to the Appellant, but where both parties had intended  to
    get married and had in fact seen a situation where  the  Appellant  had
    moved into his Luton home, only then  to  disappear,  in  circumstances
    where there must remain considerable doubt as to  his  whereabouts  and
    his true intentions.  This is a matter that will have to be  considered
    by the judge below.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Wilsher in accordance with Practice Statement 7.2(b).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    5th November 2016
