
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04422/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 2 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     DI
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is a remade decision following the identification of an  error
        on a point of law in  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal T Jones  (the  FtJ),  promulgated  on  14  February  2019,
        dismissing the appellant's asylum appeal against  the  respondent's
        decision dated 13 May 2016 refusing her asylum claim (but  granting
        her Discretionary Leave to Remain). The agreed narrow issue in this
        appeal is whether the appellant has rebutted the  presumption  that
        she constitutes a danger to the community of the UK  following  the
        issuance  of  a  certificate  under  s.72   of   the   Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) in the  decision  of
        13 May 2016.

   Background


     2. The appellant, a national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
        (DRC), was born in 1996. She and her twin sister left the  DRC  for
        Belgium when they were 4 or 5 years old. They remained  in  Belgium
        until they entered the UK following a short stay in  France  around
        the end of 2006 or the beginning of 2007. They were not present  in
        the UK with lawful leave. The  appellant  and  her  twin  underwent
        trauma and abuse in the DRC and serious physical, psychological and
        sexual abuse in Belgium and in the UK  from  family  members,  from
        those with whom they lived, and from other individuals.


     3. Between 21 May 2013 and 31 March 2014 the appellant  was  convicted
        of six criminal offences,  five  of  which  related  to  theft  and
        kindred  offences,  and  one  relating  to  public  disorder.  This
        occurred whilst she was in local authority care. The offences  were
        committed in the context of the appellant's membership of  a  gang.
        They included a conviction in respect of two counts of  robbery  on
        16 July 2013 for which she received a youth rehabilitation order of
        18 months, a conviction for violent disorder on  13  December  2013
        for which she received an 18 month detention  and  training  order,
        and a conviction of robbery on 31 March 2014 for which she received
        a sentence of 3 years detention in a young  offenders  institution,
        to run concurrently with her previous conviction. The offences were
        committed within a 5-month period between 27 December 2012  and  20
        May 2013. Her first conviction post-dated the  date  of  the  index
        (and last) offending.

     4. The appellant made an asylum claim in 2015. She feared  persecution
        in the DRC based on her sexual orientation (bisexual)  and  because
        she would be perceived as a witch. She subsequently also claimed to
        fear persecution as a lone vulnerable female.

     5. In his decision dated 13  May  2016  the  respondent  rejected  the
        appellant's claim to have rebutted the presumption  under  s.72  of
        the 2002 Act that she had committed a  particularly  serious  crime
        and constituted a danger to the community  of  the  UK.  Under  the
        relevant  legislative  provisions,   if   a   judge   upholds   the
        certification in an appeal he must dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum
        grounds  without  any  consideration  of  the  asylum  claim.   The
        respondent also excluded the appellant from a grant of Humanitarian
        Protection under paragraph 339D of the immigration rules.

     6. Under the  heading  'Assessment  of  future  fear'  the  respondent
        concluded that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the  Home
        Office policy on Discretionary Leave and therefore decided to grant
        her Discretionary  Leave  for  6  months.  The  respondent  however
        concluded that the appellant's removal would not breach  Article  8
        ECHR.

     7. In the First-tier Tribunal hearing the Presenting Officer explained
        that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  appellant's   credibility
        concerning a real risk of a  breach  of  her  protected  rights  on
        return to the  DRC  due  to  her  sexual  orientation.  Until  this
        concession the  respondent  had  not  expressly  conceded,  in  the
        Reasons for Refusal  Letter  or  otherwise,  that  the  appellant's
        expulsion to the DRC would breach her human rights.

     8. The FtJ heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  from  ED,  a
        Housing Support worker who had befriended the appellant in  January
        2016. The FtJ concluded that the appellant  had  not  rebutted  the
        s.72 presumption. In my 'error of law' decision promulgated  on  24
        May 2019 I concluded that  the  FtJ  materially  erred  in  law  by
        failing to distinguish between ED's view as  to  the  risk  of  the
        appellant reoffending (about which she had  no  concerns)  and  her
        view as to the appellant's vulnerability to exploitation (that  is,
        a risk only to the appellant  herself).  The  FtJ  also  materially
        erred in law by holding against the appellant the omission  of  any
        reference in her most recent  statement  to  victim  awareness  and
        coping strategies given that these had been fully dealt with in her
        detailed and lengthy  (61  pages)  first  statement.  There  was  a
        further error of law in that the FtJ was obliged to  determine  the
        appellant's human rights appeal pursuant to s.86 of  the  2002  Act
        but  failed  to  do  so.  As  the  respondent  conceded  that   the
        appellant's deportation to the DRC would expose her to a real  risk
        of Article 3 ill-treatment (and, by necessary implication,  Article
        8) it was not in dispute between the parties at the 'error of  law'
        hearing that the FtJ should have allowed the human rights appeal.


     9. I allowed the appellant's human rights appeal  and  set  aside  the
        FtJ's decision in respect  of  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal.  I
        adjourned the hearing  and  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
        adduce further evidence pursuant to rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

The hearing to remake the decision

    10. The appellant filed a further bundle of documents including,  inter
        alia, a further witness statement dated 10  July  2019,  a  further
        statement from ED dated 5  July  2019  and  a  Clinical  Psychology
        Report prepared by Dr Katherine Boucher dated 25 June 2019. On  the
        day of the resumed hearing Ms Moffat served a skeleton argument and
        a copy of an OASys assessment completed on 6 March 217.


    11. In light of the  medico-legal  report  from  Dr  Juliet  Cohen  the
        hearing was conducted in accordance  with  the  Joint  Presidential
        Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and  the  principles  identified  in  AM
        (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
        EWCA Civ 1123. The appellant was referred to by her first name, she
        was offered the opportunity of having breaks, she was not asked any
        overly leading questions, and the questions were appropriate to her
        identified medical needs.

    12. The appellant adopted her three full and detailed statements  dated
        25 April 2018,  19  October  2018  and  10  July  2019.  In  cross-
        examination  she  explained  that,  at  the  time  of   the   OASys
        assessment, she did not appreciate the nature of 'joint enterprise'
        offences and for that reason did not feel that she  was  guilty  as
        she had not herself been violent. She now fully accepted her  guilt
        and that her membership of the gang and  her  presence  during  the
        robberies constituted her  offence.  She  was  remorseful  for  the
        impact of her conduct on her victims. She now felt empowered to  be
        a better person. The appellant felt "a bit  down"  having  not  yet
        obtained a job but added that she had been working as  a  volunteer
        for over 10 months with Crisis.  She  was  nevertheless  optimistic
        that she would find a job and was continuing to make  applications.
        She was buoyed by the positive feedback she received the  following
        job interviews. Even if she didn't find a job this was not  "a  big
        issue" for her as she had other skills and  pursuits.  She  stated,
        "not getting a job will not make me turn to crime."  The  appellant
        described how she would call upon the  techniques  she  learned  in
        therapy if fearful of going out because of violence. She  sometimes
        smoked a joint of cannabis given to her by her friend. She  had  no
        contact with her former gang members and had even written  to  them
        explaining that she wanted no further involvement in the gang.  She
        did not go to south London.


    13. In her oral evidence ED said that the appellant regretted her  past
        offending. The appellant had joined the gang because it provided  a
        sense of family. ED did not  believe  the  appellant  would  become
        involved in any further criminal activity. The appellant had spoken
        of her regret for her past actions "pretty much all the time" since
        ED met her and spoke of her desire to help other young people.  The
        appellant had always shown remorse for her actions and now  noticed
        people in the community who were struggling or who  were  homeless.
        She demonstrates care for other people and always asked about  ED's
        family. ED had never seen any sign of the appellant being violence.
        The appellant was fearful of  violence.  When  she  hears  news  of
        stabbings the appellant phoned ED as she was anxious and scared  to
        go out. The appellant had experienced a difficult  time  trying  to
        get a job but ED admired  her  resilience.  Casual  employers  were
        reluctant to take her on because of her immigration status. Despite
        having little money and living in the capital the appellant had not
        committed any offence in the last 3 years. The  appellant  had  not
        maintained any contact with criminal gangs and had  not  gone  into
        south London. ED saw the appellant 2 or 3 times a year but spoke to
        her weekly and they also communicated by text. In addition  to  her
        own support the appellant also had a mentor from the Prince's Trust
        and was engaged in other activities with the Prince's Trust and now
        attended a small church.


    14. I recorded the submissions from both representatives which are,  in
        any event,  a  matter  of  record.  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the
        appellant's  offences  were  very  serious  and  that  her  current
        situation was  not  secure.  She  had  no  income  and  engaged  in
        occasional cannabis use. There was no evidence from the appellant's
        mentor at the Prince's Trust. Mr Avery could not say much about the
        Clinical Psychology Report but submitted that the  evidence  before
        me did disclose pressures on the appellant such that she may  still
        pose a danger to the community. Ms. Moffat relied on  her  skeleton
        argument and submitted that the appellant had been candid about her
        very limited drug use and  that  this  did  not  expose  her  to  a
        criminal element that could result in any danger to the  community.
        Mr Moffat noted that the appellant had  cut  off  all  associations
        with the criminal gang and that she had not offended in the 3 years
        since her release from immigration detention. I was referred to the
        evidence that the appellant volunteered for charities and that  she
        was capable of holding down a job. There was a wealth  of  evidence
        pointing to a material change in the appellant's circumstances  and
        her outlook on life. She had spent 6 years turning her life  around
        and took advantage of the opportunities offered to her  in  prison.
        There was now a support network for  the  appellant.  The  Prince's
        Trust mentor was not present for the simple reason that he  was  on
        holiday.  The  Clinical  Psychology  Report  indicated   that   the
        appellant now had a greater degree of  self-awareness  and  insight
        and that she posed only a low risk of reoffending.

Discussion

    15. Section 72 of  the  2002  Act  applies  "for  the  purpose  of  the
        construction and  application  of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
        Convention (exclusion from protection)"; see s.72(1). Section 72(2)
        of 2002 Act provides that:


             A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by  a  final
             judgment of a particularly serious crime and to  constitute  a
             danger to the community of the United Kingdom  if  he  is  (a)
             convicted in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an  offence,  and  (b)
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.


    16. Section 72(6) provides that that presumption is rebuttable:


             A presumption under subsection (2), (3) or (4) that  a  person
             constitutes a danger to the community is  rebuttable  by  that
             person.

    17. In EN (Serbia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department &  Anor
        [2009] EWCA Civ 630, the Court of Appeal held, at [45], "So far  as
        "danger to the community" is concerned, the danger  must  be  real,
        but if a person is convicted of a particularly serious  crime,  and
        there is a real risk of its repetition, he is likely to  constitute
        a danger to the community."


    18. In her skeleton argument Ms Moffat submitted that  the  appellant's
        offending did not  meet  the  threshold  of  'particularly  serious
        crime'. She submitted, with reference to  IH  (s.72;  'Particularly
        Serious  Crime')  Eritrea  [2009]  UKAIT  00012,  that  whilst  the
        appellant's offending was serious it was nevertheless  insufficient
        to exclude her from the protection of the Refugee  Convention.  The
        appellant was a minor at the time of her  offending  and  had  been
        subject to chronic physical and psychological abuse. Her  offending
        occurred in a short  space  of  time  during  which  she  regularly
        absconded from local authority care. The appellant was a vulnerable
        young person who had been exploited and abused by her peers in  the
        gang. I accept these points, but they are not  materially  relevant
        when determining whether the appellant  committed  a  'particularly
        serious crime'. The points advanced by Ms Moffat contextualise  and
        explain the roots of the appellant's offending, and  in  particular
        the index offence for which she received  a  sentence  of  3  years
        detention in a young offenders' institution, but they do not go  to
        the nature or seriousness of the  offence.  I  have  considered  in
        detail the Sentencing Remarks and  the  pre-sentence  reports.  The
        appellant was part of a gang who attacked the  victim  in  his  own
        room. The victim was punched and stabbed and had  to  beg  for  his
        life. the appellant knew of the existence of  the  knife  that  was
        used. The appellant did not participate in the actual violence, but
        she was present and took property from the victim's room while  the
        violence was occurring. The seriousness of the offence is reflected
        in the length of sentence of 3 years detention. I am not  persuaded
        that the appellant's offending did not  constitute  a  particularly
        serious offence.


    19. I now consider whether the appellant constitutes a  danger  to  the
        community  of  the  United  Kingdom.  My  starting  point  is   the
        appellant's criminal history. I have already considered  the  index
        offence, which was particularly serious. I note that the  appellant
        was not directly involved in the violence, but her involvement  was
        nevertheless significant. The OASys assessment completed on 6 March
        2017  indicated  that  all  the  appellant's  offending  had   been
        committed in the context of her gang membership. Although  she  had
        not played a leading role in each  of  her  previous  offences  her
        participation was still significant. She was identified as being at
        medium risk of reoffending and at medium risk  of  causing  serious
        harm. The factors contributing to the risk included the appellant's
        lack of stable accommodation, her gang affiliation, her immaturity,
        and  her  attitudes  and  thinking.  The  risks  were  nevertheless
        assessed as receding as there were indications that  the  appellant
        was meaningfully engaging in the supervision process, that  she  no
        longer maintained contact  with  the  gang,  she  had  matured  and
        developed internal controls, and she had displayed a shift  towards
        a more prosocial attitude. Factors identified as likely  to  reduce
        the  risk  included  the  appellant  engaging  with   developmental
        opportunities, forming more positive friendships  or  associations,
        engaging with psychology/counselling intervention if relevant,  and
        obtaining employment.

    20. The  March  2017  OASys  assessment  observed  that  the  appellant
        suffered from bouts of depression and  low  self-esteem  and  there
        were concerns about  her  vulnerability.  The  medico-legal  report
        prepared by Dr Juliet Cohen dated 25 April 2018 indicated that  the
        appellant  suffered  from  PTSD,  anxiety   and   depression.   The
        appellant's  joining  of  the  gang  was   demonstrative   of   her
        vulnerability to further abuse and exploitative  experiences.  This
        suggests that, as a vulnerable person,  the  appellant  may  be  at
        greater risk of re-engaging in criminal  behaviour.  This  is  also
        reflected in Dr Boucher's report in which the  appellant  presented
        as vulnerable in her attachment to others, and  at  risk  of  being
        exploited by others, which potentially increases her risk of  being
        involved  with  anti-social  individuals.  ED  also  expressed  her
        concern that the appellant's  vulnerability  put  her  at  risk  of
        further exploitation.  She  was  not  however  concerned  that  the
        appellant would join a gang or commit further crimes. At  paragraph
        37 of her first statement ED stated, "whilst  I  am  not  concerned
        about [the appellant] reoffending  or  getting  involved  with  the
        wrong people again, I am concerned about her naivety and  how  this
        contributes towards making her  vulnerable".  At  paragraph  39  ED
        expressed her concern that the appellant's vulnerability put her at
        risk of further exploitation. ED described in subsequent paragraphs
        certain situations in which the appellant's  vulnerability  exposed
        her to a risk of being taken advantage of  or  exploited.  None  of
        these related to the commission of further offences.  In  paragraph
        51 ED's concerns relating to the  appellant's  mental  health  were
        made in the context of self-harm and not expressed as  giving  rise
        to a risk of reoffending. I note from  her  1st  witness  statement
        that ED has experience in working with vulnerable  people  and  has
        worked in the charity sector for approximately 5 years.  I  find  I
        can attach weight to ED's observations relating to  the  nature  of
        the appellant's vulnerability.


    21. The March 2017 OASys report identified  the  instability  with  the
        appellant's accommodation as a factor contributing  to  a  risk  of
        harm to society. When the OASys assessment was made  the  appellant
        was in temporary B&B accommodation. I note that she now has her own
        flat and there appears to be  more  stability  in  respect  of  her
        accommodation. The report from Dr Boucher  however  indicated  that
        the appellant did not like living on the council estate as she  did
        not feel 'free' with all the difficulties in the community.

    22.  The appellant's candid admission that she very occasionally smokes
        cannabis indicates that, at least to  some  extent,  she  is  still
        willing to engage in behaviour  that  she  knows  is  criminal.  By
        associating with others who smoke cannabis and engaging in  illegal
        activity this must increase the risk that the  appellant  may  once
        again become involved in criminal behaviour.

    23. A further factor increasing risk that the appellant poses a  danger
        to the community in the UK is her unsuccessful attempts  to  obtain
        employment. I appreciate that this may be due in part to  reticence
        on the part of employers given the relative precariousness  of  the
        appellant's immigration status.  Her  criminal  record  is  however
        undoubtedly a factor that will continue to be held against her.  In
        her oral evidence she said that she wanted to find  a  job  to  get
        more income. Her financial situation  may  therefore  increase  the
        risk that she would return to her criminal ways, particularly given
        that her previous offending involved theft.

    24. There are however several important factors that, in my  judgement,
        significantly  reduce  the  likelihood  that  the   appellant   now
        constitutes a danger to the community. I found the appellant to  be
        a credible witness. Her evidence was given in a direct  manner  and
        without any  perceptible  embellishment.  Whilst  she  could  quite
        easily have lied about her occasional and limited cannabis use, she
        did not do so. There was nothing in  her  evidence  indicating  any
        attempt to 'pull the wool' over the Tribunal's eyes.  Her  evidence
        was both internally consistent and generally consistent  with  ED's
        evidence and the documentary evidence.

    25. I accept that the appellant is genuinely remorseful for  her  short
        but intense period of criminal offending. She readily  accepts  her
        guilt and, through her written and oral evidence, has  demonstrated
        an appreciation and awareness of the  harm  her  offending  caused.
        This  is  further  supported  by  reference   to   her   successful
        participation in victim  awareness  courses  undertaken  whilst  in
        custody. The  March  2017  OASys  report  indicated  that  she  had
        completed the Thinking Skills Programme and that the  feedback  was
        very  positive.  Whilst  impulsivity  and  consequential   thinking
        continued to be an issue at the date of the OASys assessment it was
        clear to the Probation Officer that the appellant had shown  growth
        in this regard. According to the  assessment  she  showed  no  pro-
        criminal attitudes in supervision sessions.

    26.  In her oral evidence the appellant explained that  she  now  feels
        empowered to be a better person. This assertion is supported by the
        evidence of both ED, who has known the appellant for  approximately
        3 � years, and Dr Boucher. ED said that the appellant had spoken of
        her regret pretty much all the time since they met. This  indicates
        insight by the appellant into  what  led  to  her  offending.  ED's
        evidence described manifestations of empathy by the appellant,  how
        she now notices other people struggling in the  community  and  how
        she desired to help  other  young  people,  and  gave  examples  of
        instances in which the appellant had  acted  upon  these  concerns,
        particularly with respect to other  young  and  vulnerable  people.
        This is further  supported  by  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
        committed support for the charity Crisis, for which she has been  a
        dedicated volunteer for the past 10 months.

    27. I have considered  with  care  the  report  from  Dr  Boucher.  She
        qualified from  the  University  of  Surrey  with  a  Doctorate  of
        Clinical Psychology in September 2007 and is a graduate  member  of
        the British Psychological Society and is registered with the Health
        and Care Professions Council. She has  worked  at  HMP  Bronzefield
        providing psychological assessment  and  treatment  and  conducting
        mental health,  personality,  cognitive  and,  significantly,  risk
        assessments. She previously worked for the John  Howard  Centre,  a
        Forensic  Medium  Secure  Unit  based  in  Hackney  which  provided
        inpatient  facilities  for  mentally  disordered   offenders.   The
        clinical  population  which  she  worked  had   often   experienced
        significant  trauma  in  the  past,  had   severe   mental   health
        difficulties, and presented with complex psychosocial difficulties.
        Dr Boucher is currently  a  partner  of  Vivamus  Psychologists,  a
        private psychology practice which she undertakes  risk  assessments
        and formulations for statutory agencies, medico-legal  reports  and
        psychological  therapy  for  individuals  with  complex  needs.  In
        preparing her report Dr Boucher considered  a  range  of  documents
        including previous pre-sentence reports, sentencing remarks, police
        records and OAsys assessment and assessed the appellant for 2 hours
        on 23 May  2019.  I'm  satisfied  she  is  suitably  qualified  and
        experienced to give a Clinical Psychological report and  to  assess
        the appellant's risk of future re-offending and her risk of harm to
        others.


    28. Using the Historical, Clinical, Risk Management approach  (HCR-20),
        a set of structured clinical risk assessment guidelines, Dr Boucher
        concluded that the appellant currently presents with a low risk  of
        future reoffending and that she currently presents with a low  risk
        of  harm  to  others.  In  reaching  this  conclusion  Dr   Boucher
        considered both static historical factors associated with levels of
        risk but also the dynamic nature of risk. Dr Boucher considered the
        particular circumstances of  the  index  offence  and  the  violent
        disorder offence and the time period in which all  the  appellant's
        offences occurred. Dr Boucher considered risk factors including the
        appellant's use of violence and other antisocial behaviour and  the
        nature of the appellant's relationships  with  others.  Dr  Boucher
        also considered, inter alia, the appellants response  to  treatment
        and supervision, the current levels of stability and her insight.

    29. Although Dr Boucher found that  the  appellant  had  a  significant
        amount of historical risk factors she presented no current  dynamic
        risk factors. Dr Boucher was of the  view  that  if  the  appellant
        resolved  some  current  risk  factors  such  as   employment   and
        immigration status there would be a further reduction in the number
        of potential future risk factors present. Dr  Boucher  specifically
        considered the March 2017 OASys assessment and noted that, when the
        weighted scores were examined, the majority of  identified  factors
        were statistic historical factors. As pointed out  by  Dr  Boucher,
        the HCR-20 allows the assessor to include clinical judgement rather
        than an actuarial result to formulate risk.  For  these  reasons  I
        find I can attach significant weight to Dr Boucher's report, and  I
        note that it was compiled over 2 years after the OASys  assessment.
        I note in particular Dr Boucher's observation  that  the  appellant
        displays  significant  motivation  to  change  her  behaviour   and
        lifestyle and has invested in a more helpful prosocial identity. In
        her interview with Dr Boucher the appellant maintained that she had
        'picked a  side'.  In  the  Clinical  Psychologist's  opinion,  the
        appellant now considers herself as a non-offender.


    30. I am additionally satisfied that the appellant  has  matured  since
        the  commission  of  her  offences  as  a  minor.  I  contrast  the
        observations of the Sentencing Judge  that  the  appellant  was  an
        immature  17-year-old  with   the   subsequent   observations   and
        descriptions of the appellant. The Thinking Skills Programme report
        praised the appellant for having a "mature outlook on life" and the
        appellant's mental whilst she wasn't present said that  she  showed
        "great maturity for your age". ED also observed that the  appellant
        now displays a mature outlook. I find that  the  appellant  is  now
        older, more mature and more experienced, and that she now has self-
        awareness that she did not have time  offending.  This  finding  is
        supported by the evidence from  Dr  Boucher,  who  found  that  the
        appellant has now developed  an  identity  that  is  prosocial  and
        provides her with meaning and worth.

    31. Whilst the appellant's continuing vulnerability is  a  factor  that
        may expose her to a risk of being exploited by unscrupulous persons
        for criminal purposes,  I  find  this  is  counterbalanced  by  the
        appellant's growing maturity and  her  ability  to  call  upon  the
        techniques she learned through courses in prison  and  through  the
        support networks upon which she can now rely (including the support
        from ED, the Princes Trust and her new church).


    32. The appellant has provided persuasive evidence of victim  awareness
        and the ability to harness coping or avoidance strategies.  In  her
        April 2018 statement (at paragraphs 213 and 214)  she  referred  to
        her engagement with victim awareness courses and indicated that she
        had learnt how a crime can impact upon a victim and how it can have
        much wider long-term effects. Through the Thinking Skills Programme
        the appellant is now able to  identify  'red  flags'  to  help  her
        recognise  'bad  friends'.  At  paragraphs  237  to  240  she  gave
        relatively detailed examples of how she  had  avoided  being  drawn
        back  into  criminality.  Other  coping  strategies  used  by   the
        appellant include self-talk and writing poetry about  homelessness,
        mental health and crime.

    33. It is not in dispute that all the appellant's offending was  linked
        to her  membership  of  a  gang.  The  Clinical  Psychology  report
        observed that the appellant looked at the gang as a family that she
        wanted to be part of and from which she received acceptance.  There
        are several other sources of evidence suggesting that,  because  of
        the appellant's traumatic upbringing,  she  regarded  the  criminal
        gang as a surrogate family. This was expressly  considered  in  the
        March 2017 OASys  report.  The  appellant  informed  the  probation
        officers that she joined the gang because it gave her  a  sense  of
        belonging and identity.  There is no reason for  me  to  doubt  the
        appellant's evidence that she  has  completely  extricated  herself
        from the criminal gang. This evidence  was  not  challenged  by  Mr
        Avery. According to Dr Boucher the appellant  now  recognises  that
        her relationships within the gang were abusive  and  that  she  was
        manipulated for sexual  and  financial  reasons.  In  Dr  Boucher's
        expert opinion the appellant's current  insight  into  the  harmful
        aspects of being a member  of  a  gang  protects  her  from  future
        vulnerability of being involved with a  gang.  The  fact  that  the
        appellant has cut all ties with the gang that she joined as a minor
        is a factor reducing her risk of harm to the community.

    34. Whilst I acknowledge that the appellant's  inability  thus  far  to
        obtain  remunerated  employment,  and  her  consequential   limited
        financial position, is a risk factor  when  assessing  whether  she
        would  return  to  her  criminal  behaviour,   I   find   this   is
        counterbalanced by her resilience  (as  remarked  on  by  ED),  her
        optimism that she will find a job (I note the  appellant's  account
        of the various job applications made and interviews  she  has  had,
        indicating that she has  a  persistent  desire  to  turn  her  life
        around, and I note that she gained 5 good GCSEs indicating that she
        has academic ability), and the fact that she has enveloped  herself
        in other activities including her volunteering work and her  poetry
        writing. In Dr Boucher's expert opinion,  although  financial  gain
        was a possible factor in the appellant's offending behaviour,  this
        was a significantly less motivating factor  than  her  wish  to  be
        accepted by the gang. I consequently  accept,  having  additionally
        noted that the appellant has  not  committed  any  further  offence
        since being released from immigration detention 3  years  ago,  her
        assertion that not getting a job would not cause  her  to  turn  to
        crime.


    35. Mr Avery pointed noted the absence of evidence from the appellant's
        mentor at the Prince's Trust. Ms Moffat however indicated that  the
        mentor was on holiday and could not attend  the  hearing  for  this
        reason. I note the various documents in the appellant's main bundle
        issued by the Prince's Trust  supporting  the  appellant's  claimed
        participation in the organisation, and the evidence from ED who had
        personal knowledge that the appellant did have a  mentor  with  the
        Prince's Trust. The Clinical Psychological  Report  indicated  that
        the appellant also had some support from a  Personal  Adviser  from
        Social Services and that she also  gained  support  from  going  to
        church. I additionally attach weight to the support provided to the
        appellant from ED. I consider this to be a significant  stabilising
        factor  in  the  appellant's  life.  Although  they  do  not  often
        physically see each other ED speaks to the appellant  approximately
        once a week and provides her with good advice and acts as a  mother
        figure.

    36. Whilst I have expressed concerns with  the  appellant's  occasional
        smoking of cannabis I am satisfied, on a holistic assessment,  that
        this does not indicate that she is a danger  to  the  community.  I
        note that her drug use consists of her friend  occasionally  giving
        the appellant a joint to smoke. Whilst I have acknowledged that the
        slippery slope on which the appellant's association with others who
        use drugs, and her own behaviour, may cause her  to  slide  towards
        further criminality, I find on the particular facts  of  this  case
        that the appellant has not exposed herself to the type of  criminal
        element that is likely  to  lead  her  to  pose  a  danger  to  the
        community. Whilst not in any  way  condoning  what  is  undoubtedly
        criminal, her behaviour is towards the lower end  of  the  criminal
        spectrum. This is relevant given that s.72 seeks to give effect  to
        Article 33(2) of the 1951 Refugee Convention  which  is  a  serious
        measure preventing an individual from having  the  benefit  of  the
        Convention. The occasional smoking of a joint is far  removed  from
        her previous  involvement  in  a  criminal  gang  that  engaged  in
        violence and robbery. I also find that her infrequent cannabis  use
        is outbalanced by the very significant extent,  already  described,
        to which the appellant has turned her life around. Given the nature
        and extent  of  the  appellant's  rehabilitation  and  her  clearly
        documented rejection of her past gang involvement and  her  pursuit
        of an otherwise law-abiding lifestyle,  I  do  not  find  that  her
        candid  disclosure  undermines  the  conclusions  of  Dr  Boucher's
        report.
    37. I have considered the evidence before me and I have weighed up  the
        factors supporting the presumption that the appellant constitutes a
        danger to community and the evidence undermining  the  presumption.
        Having particular regard to the 2019  risk  assessment  identifying
        the appellant as posing a low risk of harm and of reoffending,  and
        having found that the appellant has insight into the  circumstances
        that led to her offending and that she has  expressed  remorse  for
        her actions, and noting that she has cut off  all  links  with  the
        gang and that she has not offended since being  released  into  the
        community in 2016, and given the existing support structure now  in
        place, I find that the appellant has successfully rebutted the s.72
        presumption.


    38. The respondent accepts that the appellant would  be  exposed  to  a
        well-founded fear of serious ill-treatment if returned to the  DRC.
        Having found that the appellant has rebutted the  presumption  that
        she is a danger to the community, it follows that her asylum appeal
        is allowed.


Notice of Decision

The appellant's asylum appeal is allowed.
The appellant's human rights appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                                  24 July 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
