
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04306/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th July 2017                            |On 27th July 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A GRUBB
                       DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL E DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     S K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Myroslav Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    David Neale, Counsel
     Instructed by Migrant Legal Project (Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) we make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the Appellant and to the Respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is the Secretary of State's appeal, and she is  therefore
    the Appellant before us, for ease of reference we refer to the  parties
    as they were known at the First-tier.

 3. The Secretary of State was granted permission  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hodgkinson to appeal a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Coaster, promulgated  13th  December  2016,  allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  her
    protection and human rights claims.

 4. As identified in the grant of permission the  grounds  argue  that  the
    judge erred in the following manner:

         "The grounds argue that the Judge erred in  the  following  manner:
         Ground 1, in failing to resolve material conflicts in the  evidence
         of relevance to the appellant's claimed  sexuality;  Ground  2,  in
         adequately reasoning why she concluded that  the  appellant  was  a
         lesbian, and why she allowed the appeal; Ground 3,  by  failing  to
         take into account s.8 of the 2004 Act, which was relied upon by the
         respondent in  the  refusal  letter;  Ground  4,  when  considering
         Article 8, by failing  to  consider  Appendix  FM  and  the  public
         interest considerations set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act, or
         at all, as part of the proportionality assessment."

 5. Judge Hodgkinson granting permission found merit in  those  grounds  in
    the following terms:

         "When considered in the context of s.8  of  the  2004  Act,  it  is
         arguable that Grounds 1 and 2 have merit.   In  any  event,  it  is
         correct that the  judge  did  not  consider  s.8  as  part  of  her
         credibility considerations which, in itself, amounts to an arguable
         error of law.  In terms of Article 8, the Judge did not  take  into
         account the apparent fact that the appellant and her children could
         not meet the requirements of any Immigration Rule and  demonstrably
         failed to take into account any public interest considerations.  As
         a result, her consideration of Article 8 is also  arguably  flawed.
         The grounds as pleaded reveal arguable errors of law and permission
         is granted on all grounds."

 6. In the event when the matter came to be heard in the Upper Tribunal  Mr
    Diwnycz, for the Respondent, conceded that the decision must be read in
    the  round,  and,  at  paragraphs  76  to  81,  in  the  context  of  a
    considerable setting out of the  evidence  and  the  positions  of  the
    parties in the previous 76 paragraphs, the judge recognised the hurdles
    for credibility teased out in the grounds caused by:

      a) the marriage continuing through repeat applications

      b) the appellant's oral evidence to a judge in an earlier hearing that
         her marriage was subsisting,

      c) the chronology, in the context of the lateness of the assertion  of
         being gay

      d) and the only evidence in support having  arisen  after  making  the
         claim.

 7. As Mr Diwnycz recognised, the grounds  do  not  stand  up  to  critical
    scrutiny. In the same  way  that  it  is  clear  that  the  credibility
    concerns of the respondent have been adequately addressed, it is  plain
    that the judge has done enough to explain to  the  Respondent  why  the
    Appellant succeeded in her appeal. The grounds do not argue perversity.

 8. In light of the fair acknowledgment made by  Mr  Diwnycz  we  indicated
    that we did not need to hear from Mr Neale.

 9. In short, contrary to the grounds, the  judge's  reasoning  encompasses
    the adverse credibility points and is sufficiently reasoned.

10. With regard to the Secretary of State's Grounds of Appeal in respect of
    Article 8, whilst on their face they have more  merit,  they  take  the
    case no further because the Appellant has established  that  she  is  a
    refugee. Accordingly, there is no public interest in her  removal,  and
    the Article 8 dispute is otiose. It does  not  require  any  reasoning,
    either by the First-tier Tribunal Judge or,  in  the  context  of  this
    decision, by ourselves.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not reveal any error
    of law and it stands.



Signed                              Date 26 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 26 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
