

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/04283/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31st  July 2017                       | On 04th August 2017                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                    VK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Eaton, Counsel instructed on behalf of appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on the 7th June
    2017 dismissed his claim for protection.   The  appellant  underwent  a
    screening interview on 16th March 2017 and a substantive interview took
    place on 30th March 2017.

 4. The Appellant's immigration history and the basis of his claim  is  set
    out in the decision letter issued by the Secretary of State.  It can be
    summarised briefly as follows.

 5. The Appellant is a national of Albania. It was claimed that in 2013,  a
    family relative killed another person and  as  a  result  the  victim's
    family would take revenge on the killer's family by  way  of  a  "blood
    feud". Whilst the family sent emissaries to settle the matter, this did
    not succeed in the  family  went  into  self-imposed  confinement.  The
    appellant left Albania 2 to 3 months later arriving in  the  UK  in  or
    about March 2013. Since his arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  was
    claimed that his brother had stabbed two others in or  about  2016  and
    was detained in prison. The appellant stated that he would be harmed by
    their family members if returned to Albania. Thus in essence, the claim
    for  asylum  arose  out  of  two  incidents  which  gave  rise  to  the
    appellant's family members being a party to  active  blood  feuds;  the
    second being dependent upon what the appellant has  been  told  by  his
    family in Albania that occurred when he was in the United Kingdom.

 6. In a reasons for refusal letter dated 21st April  2017  the  respondent
    refused that application for asylum. In that decision,  the  respondent
    accepted his nationality but did not accept that  he  was  involved  in
    active blood feuds with different families in Albania.  The  respondent
    considered a newspaper article at paragraph 25 and set out a number  of
    issues of inconsistent evidence (25 - 30). Further inconsistencies were
    noted in relation to the second active blood  feud.  The  secretary  of
    state set out the country guides decision of EH  (Albania)  [2012]  and
    sought to apply  that  to  the  factual  account.  In  summary  it  was
    considered that the appellant would be able to return to his home  area
    in Albania  and  that  he  would  not  be  at  risk  of  harm.  In  the
    alternative, it was considered that he could access  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and in the alternative could internally relocate

 7. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 26th May 2017.

 8. The judge set out his findings at paragraphs [36] to [63]. In  relation
    to the first blood feud,  at  paragraphs  37  to  48,  the  judge  made
    reference to the appellant's inconsistent evidence and  that  this  had
    damaged his credibility. He therefore considered the further blood feud
    in the light of those findings and "with caution". In this  respect  he
    made reference to a vague chronology of claimed events and  that  there
    were further inconsistencies as to the dates given by the appellant and
    also in the names of the alleged victims  (paragraph  55).  Whilst  the
    appellant claimed  his  brother  had  been  sentenced  for  the  attack
    (question 61] that was found to be inconsistent with his claim that his
    brother was awaiting trial.  The  judge  considered  that  overall  the
    discrepant evidence led to the conclusion that the appellant could  not
    be relied upon to provide a reliable account. The judge  further  found
    that his claims were  inconsistent  with  the  objective  evidence;  in
    particular that his brother was in a public place with  permission  but
    this was inconsistent with the objective evidence relating  to  a  besa
    (EH at paragraph 71). He also found sufficiency of protection and  that
    it would not be unduly harsh to internally relocate. Thus the claim for
    protection was dismissed on all grounds.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers dated 21st June 2017. They were settled by Mr
    Eaton who has represented the  appellant  throughout  the  proceedings.
    Permission to appeal was granted by FTT Judge Bird  on  the  29th  June
    2017.

10. At the hearing before this Tribunal Mr Eaton relied  upon  the  grounds
    that were before the Tribunal.  Mr Eaton took the Tribunal through  the
    points raised in the written grounds and made specific reference to the
    documentation. He made reference to 4 pieces of corroborative  evidence
    which had not been either considered by the judge or given weight.  The
    first evidence was an attestation letter (p137-139) but  there  was  no
    consideration of that document within  the  determination.  The  second
    piece of evidence was from the appellant's mother. Whilst the judge did
    deal with this (paragraphs 54-55), the difference in name could not  be
    deemed as significantly different and  thus  the  judge  did  not  give
    proper consideration to that piece of evidence.  The  third  strand  of
    evidence related to court orders from the appropriate area (page 128  -
    130 translation). At page  130  made  reference  to  court  directions.
    Whilst the judge made reference to general  inconsistencies,  Mr  Eaton
    submitted that the judge made no findings of fact relating to the court
    documents  which  corroborated  his  factual  account  concerning   his
    brother's conduct but had made reference paragraph 43 to his failure to
    familiarise himself with documents sent from  Albania  to  support  its
    appeal. There was a fourth piece of  evidence  which  with  the  family
    certificate (page  126)  which  demonstrated  that  the  applicant  was
    related to  his  brother.  Whilst  the  judge  made  reference  to  the
    appellant's inability to demonstrate his relationship  with  cousin  he
    did not consider that piece of evidence in the round.

11. As to the country guidance decision of EH, he submitted  that  contrary
    to the finding made at paragraph 59 to 62 in  which  it  was  concluded
    there was sufficiency  of  protection,  EH  found  that  there  was  no
    sufficiency protection in the area from which the appellant  originates
    (see head note 3). Furthermore he misdirected himself when  considering
    paragraph 71 of EH where he found that the appellant's account that his
    brother left confinement with permission was not in accordance with the
    objective evidence. At paragraph 71 it demonstrates that a besa can  be
    given for an event.

12.  Mr Singh on behalf of the Respondent submitted  that  having  had  the
    opportunity to consider the grounds in the light of  the  determination
    and  the  submissions  which  were  directed  towards  the  documentary
    evidence, including the documents from the Court and the parts  of  the
    CG decision of EH, he conceded that there was a material error  of  law
    in the credibility findings. In  those  circumstances  he  invited  the
    Tribunal to set aside the decision and for the appeal to be reheard  so
    that all issues relating to credibility could be considered and in  the
    context of the documentary evidence and the CG decision of EH.

13. In the light of that concession made  by  Mr  Singh  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    it is the case that both parties agree that  the  determination  cannot
    stand and must be set aside.  I am satisfied that the submissions  made
    on behalf of the Appellant to which I have made reference to above  are
    made out. As set out earlier, the appellant factual  claim  related  to
    two active blood feuds in Albania to which the applicant's family  were
    a  party  to.  The  judge  gave  reasons  as  to  why  the  appellant's
    inconsistent account did not demonstrate that he was reasonably  likely
    to be involved in an active blood feud arising from the  first  set  of
    circumstances (see paragraphs 37 -48). However  whilst  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider the  evidence  of  the  further  blood  feud  with
    caution (see  paragraph  49)  their  were  documents  provided  by  the
    appellant which had not been taken into account  in  making  a  rounded
    assessment of whether or not there was in fact a  second  active  blood
    feud and therefore applying the country guidance decision of EH. Whilst
    the evidence of attestation letters were referred to in EH, it did  not
    necessarily mean that no weight could be attached to such documentation
    and thus an assessment was necessary. They were also documents  from  a
    court in the area and as Mr Singh stated  there  was  no  reference  to
    those court documents in the assessment. The judge did  make  reference
    to the mother's affidavit and noted that the spelling of the  name  was
    different to that given by the appellant. Whilst Mr Eaton submits  that
    this was  not  significantly  different  it  was  on  the  face  of  it
    inconsistent. It is not clear to me what was said by way  of  reply  to
    that different spelling. However, for the reasons set out  above  there
    was material which had not been considered  when  reaching  an  overall
    view as to whether there was an active blood feud in Albania. As to the
    country guidance decision of EH, paragraph 3 of  the  head  note  makes
    reference to the steps taken by the Albanian  state  to  improve  state
    protection but that that in certain areas where Kanun law  predominates
    those steps do not provide sufficiency protection  if  an  active  feud
    exists and affects the individual claimant.  The  applicant  originates
    from such an area. Furthermore, whilst  the  judge  made  reference  to
    paragraph  71  of  EH,  the  applicant's  account   is   not   arguably
    inconsistent with paragraph 71.

14.  Therefore for those reasons and in the light of the concession made by
    Mr Singh, the decision cannot stand and will be set aside.

15. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the Appellant's evidence in the  light  of
    all the documents, the decision of EH and any country  materials  post-
    dating EH; this is a case in which it  is  accepted  that  the  adverse
    credibility findings cannot  be  preserved.  Therefore  the  First-tier
    Tribunal will consider the matter afresh.

16.  In the light of those submissions  and  the  concession  made  by  the
    Secretary of State , I am satisfied that this is the correct course  to
    take and therefore I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    and it will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to hear afresh.




    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. It is set aside and it is remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


     Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  The direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Reeds
                             Date: 31/7/2017


