
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04561/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2019                             |On 29th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 SHOKHAN [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood for IAS
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    D Birrell, promulgated on 2nd  August  2018,  following  a  hearing  in
    Manchester  on  19th  July  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq, was born on 1st January  1993,  and
    is a female.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    25th April 2017, refusing her claim for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  born  in
    Rania, in Sulaymaniyah, in  the  IKR.   She  lived  at  home  with  her
    parents.  She had two sisters and a brother.  Her father was  a  member
    of the Komali Islami political party, he was a traditionalist.  He  was
    very controlling.  He  did  not  want  her  to  study.   The  Appellant
    persisted with her education and completed it in 2014.  She then  found
    herself in a relationship, which  she  confided  in  her  sister.   Her
    sister had been forced to marry someone else and  her  sister  was  not
    happy.  The Appellant married her  husband  contrary  to  her  family's
    wishes.  There were repercussions from the family who  expressed  their
    displeasure in no uncertain terms.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge accepted the basic nature of the  Appellant's  circumstances.
    It was accepted that  she  was  in  a  relationship  with  her  husband
    contrary to her  family's  wishes  (see  paragraph  69)  and  that  the
    Appellant had a well-founded risk of persecution at the  hands  of  her
    father and her brother as a consequence.  The judge also accepted  that
    the Appellant's account was substantially credible.

 5. However, what the judge did  not  accept  (at  paragraph  70)  was  the
    Appellant's claim that she could not now return because she had no CSID
    documentation.  The judge observed that,

         "She asserts that she left her CSID card with her partner's  family
         and told them to destroy it as she did not need it  (A148  to  149)
         but I note she has never asked them if they did destroy  it  and  I
         find it unlikely that they would do so given the importance of  the
         document ... I am satisfied that she has claimed her CSID has  been
         destroyed in order to frustrate the possibility of her removal ..."
         (paragraph 70).

 6.   The appeal was dismissed

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge, in concluding that the
    Appellant had not destroyed  her  CSID  card,  had  simply  engaged  in
    speculation.  This was important given that  much  of  the  Appellant's
    background evidence had been accepted by the judge.   This  meant  that
    the explanation with respect to a CSID card or to have been  viewed  in
    the context of the wider evidence which  the  judge  did  accept.   The
    judge needed to explain why the evidence on the CSID was being rejected
    in the manner that it was.  Indeed, the Appellant was not asked by  the
    judge if she had ascertained whether her CSID card was destroyed.

 8. Second, the it was held that there were direct  flights  to  Erbil,  so
    that if the Appellant were  to  be  returned,  she  could  be  directly
    returned to the  IKR.   There  was  no  such  evidence  served  on  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant's representatives were not  able  to  contest
    that evidence.  They did not even have sight of it.  It was accordingly
    material evidence that should have been brought to their  attention  if
    it existed and a failure to do so was a clear error of law.

 9. Third, if the Appellant's absence to a CSID,  was  dependent  upon  her
    being able to contact her family members, then this  in  itself  raised
    issues of viability that needed further consideration.

10. On 14th January 2019 permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 4th April 2019, Mr Wood submitted that  the
    first error in  the  judge's  determination  was  in  relation  to  the
    decision on the CSID card.  The Appellant asserted that she  had  given
    express instructions that it should be destroyed.  The judge  said  she
    was not satisfied.  Indeed, the judge goes on to then say

         "Even if it were destroyed that the Appellant could attend  at  the
         Iraqi Embassy in Manchester or complete a form online and meet  the
         Iraqi Government website  or  get  a  copy  of  her  CSID  card  in
         Sulaymaniyah.  It will be reasonable  for  the  Appellant  and  her
         partner to live  with  her  husband's  family  who  had  previously
         protected them and remain with them until they got on  their  feet.
         It is clear from the most  recent  country  guidance  that  a  male
         family member could visit civil registration office to obtain a new
         CSID card and in the Appellant's case that would  be  her  husband"
         (see paragraph 45).

12. Mr Wood submitted that if the CSID card had been destroyed  then  there
    was a huge question mark as to whether it could be  replaced.   But  in
    event, what this  shows  is  that  the  Appellant's  claim  always  was
    understood by the Respondent authority as a return  to  "Sulaymaniyah".
    That being so, his next ground of appeal was extremely important.

13. Second, the next ground of appeal, which led on  from  the  first,  was
    that, if the  return  was  envisaged,  and  understood  to  be  as  the
    Appellant being sent back to Sulaymaniyah, then for the judge  to  hold
    that there were direct flights to Erbil, was a matter that  had  to  be
    demonstrated on evidence.   The  Appellant's  side  had  seen  no  such
    evidence.  The judge could not  simply  say  that  flights  existed  to
    Erbil, without such evidence being presented, and the  Appellant  being
    afforded the opportunity to challenge it.

14. Third, there was the issue of the Appellant's protection within the IKR
    anyway.  Judge Birrell had taken the view  that  it  was  possible  for
    victims of honour crimes to be given protection and escape being traced
    by their family members in the IKR.  Judge Birrell was of the view  (at
    paragraph 74) that the evidence relied upon to support this  contention
    "appears  to  be  the  opinion  of  largely  unnamed  sources  and   is
    contradicted by the evidence on another (unnamed) diplomat ...".

15. However, Mr Wood submitted that this was not so because if one looks at
    the evidence at page 27 of the Appellant's second bundle, what  appears
    is the following:

         "4.3.1   Ability of Relatives to Track down Victims.

                Three sources refer to relatives being able  to  track  down
                women who had run away in KRI  [148].   In  line  with  his,
                UNHCR stated that, in KRI,  it  would  be  difficult  for  a
                victim of an honour crime to  escape  the  perpetrators  and
                seek protection from the authorities.  Journalist  Osama  Al
                Habahbeh said that a woman  fleeing  honour  killing  cannot
                hide anywhere in Iraq.  A western  diplomat,  however,  said
                there is no formal system for families to track  down  their
                own family members within KRI."

16. Mr Wood submitted that what the suggestion was that the Appellant would
    not be able to be safe in the IKR.  This was not to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant would not be safe throughout Iraq.   However,  the  Appellant
    was not being returned to the country of  Iraq  in  general.   She  was
    clearly understood to be returned to the IKR.  In that small  province,
    it was clear that there was  evidence  that  those  accused  of  honour
    crimes will not be safe.

17. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that first,  the  suggestion  that  "a
    woman fleeing honour killing cannot hide anywhere in Iraq" was  plainly
    incorrect, because on that basis every woman fleeing  an  honour  based
    crime would be able to seek asylum in the UK.   Second,  there  was  no
    reason to believe that the Appellant's father had  connections  in  the
    IKR to be able to locate the Appellant.  This was the  express  finding
    of the judge in relation to the position in IKR itself.  Judge  Birrell
    had made it clear (see paragraph  74)  that,  "there  is  therefore  no
    reason to believe that her father would have the connections, power  or
    influence to know that she had returned or to trace her if she chose to
    live elsewhere in the IKR".

18. In that case also, submitted Mr Bates, the judge observed how

         "Mr Wood argued that family members  can  trace  their  own  family
         members but the passage relied on (AB2 page 70) does  not  describe
         how this is possible and appears  to  be  the  opinion  of  largely
         unnamed sources and is contradicted  by  the  evidence  of  another
         (unnamed) diplomat" (paragraph 74).

19. Finally, Mr Bates submitted  that  the  issue  of  there  being  direct
    flights to Erbil, was a red  herring.   The  fact  here  was  that  the
    Appellant, if she did not have a CSID  card,  the  Appellant  would  be
    returned to Baghdad.  If she  then  had  a  CSID  card,  she  would  be
    returned to the IKR.  It has been well-known that  there  are  internal
    flights to various parts of the IKR and  this  is  the  procedure  that
    would then be followed.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

21. First, there is the issue of the CSID card.  The Appellant states  that
    "she left her CSID card with her partner's  family  and  told  them  to
    destroy it as she did not need it"  (paragraph  70).    The  judge  was
    sceptical about this.  Indeed,  in  a  country  as  heavily  previously
    documented as Iraq, and given in particular the difficulties  in  being
    able to acquire the CSID, the judge was entitled to disbelieve  such  a
    decision being taken by the Appellant,  which  directed  her  partner's
    family to destroy the CSID.  Mr Wood has submitted that the judge at no
    stage followed this up by asking the Appellant  whether  she  had  then
    proceeded to enquire of her partner's family whether they had destroyed
    the CSID.  It is unnecessary for the judge to do so.  It is  enough  if
    the judge, making a finding  of  fact  on  this  issue,  comes  to  the
    decision that this was simply improbable and unlikely to happen.  This,
    accordingly, was a decision that the judge was entitled to come to.

22. Second, assuming for a moment that the CSID had indeed  been  destroyed
    the latest  country  guidance  case  of  AAH  (Iraq  Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 is relevant.  The  head  note  of
    AAH makes it clear at paragraph 1(i) that what will be significant will
    be,

         "whether P has any other form of documentation or information about
         the location of his entry in the civil register.  An IMC  passport,
         birth/marriage certificates or an expired  CSID  would  all  be  of
         substantial assistance.  For someone in possession of one  or  more
         of these documents the process could be straightforward ...".

23. It is also made clear at head note 1(iii) that it is relevant  to  ask,
    "are there male family members who would be able and willing to  attend
    the civil registry with P?"  In this case there was  evidence  to  this
    effect.   Accordingly,  even  if  the  CSID  has  been   destroyed,   a
    replacement document could have been procured.

24. Third, there is the question of the Appellant being able to find a safe
    haven by relocating in the IKR.  The judge found (at paragraph 74) that
    the evidence produced before her "appears to be the opinion of  largely
    unnamed sources".  Mr Wood has replied that if one looks at page 27  of
    the Appellant's bundle, one finds there are  three  sources,  including
    one from the UNHCR, and this makes it quite  clear  that  "it  will  be
    difficult for a victim of an honour crime to  escape  the  perpetrators
    and seek protection from the authorities".  However,  the  judge  dealt
    with this in a manner which it was open to the judge to do.  She  makes
    it clear  that  there  was  also  included  "the  evidence  of  another
    (unnamed) diplomat" and what is said here is that "a western  diplomat,
    however, said that there is no formal system for families to track down
    their own family members within KRI".  Indeed, the judge had gone on to
    say that the Appellant would  be  able  to  find  protection  with  her
    husband's family which  she  had  previously  been  able  to  do"  (see
    paragraph 72).

25. Finally, there is the question  of  the  Appellant's  return  to  Erbil
    through a direct flight.   When  permission  was  given  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 14th January 2019, it was in terms that,

         "If it be the case that the only  evidence  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was in respect of the availability of  direct  flights  to
         Sulaymaniyah (a claim that would require substantiation by way of a
         signed statement from the Appellant's representative)  then  it  is
         arguable that the Tribunal erred in finding without  evidence  that
         there were direct flights to Erbil".

26. This was not the  only  evidence.   As  Mr  Bates  has  submitted,  the
    Appellant would be returned to Baghdad.  Enforcement proceedings are to
    Baghdad.  Indeed, it would seem, that insofar as there are  flights  to
    other parts of Iraq,  such  as  to  Erbil,  they  are  for  "voluntary"
    returnees.  This is not such a case.  Therefore, although the judge may
    well have erred in concluding in this respect, it  is  not  a  material
    error, because it does not affect the eventual outcome in any  material
    way.  If the Appellant's claim is rejected, and  dismissed  on  appeal,
    then she will be returned to Baghdad.  The decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, accordingly, did not fall into error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not amount to an error of  law.
 The decision shall stand.

An anonymity direction is not made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019

