
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04029/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2017                          |On 14 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    mr KM
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Reville, Counsel, instructed by MTC & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moran promulgated on 10 October 2017  in  which  he
    allowed the appeal of KM, to whom we shall  refer  as  'the  claimant',
    against the decision refusing his claim for asylum.  We shall refer  to
    the appellant in  this  appeal  as  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
    avoidance of any doubt or difficulty.

2.   The claimant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on [ ] 1987, who came  to
    the United Kingdom on 18 January 2011 on a Tier 4 Student visa.  He was
    granted further leave to remain until 30 December 2013.  However,  when
    his sponsor's licence was revoked, his leave to remain was curtailed to
    28 June 2013.  He had no valid leave after this  date  and  he  claimed
    asylum in 2016, on the basis that his Article 3 rights were engaged: he
    would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka as a result of being  perceived
    as an LTTE sympathiser who had escaped from detention.  His application
    for asylum was refused in a decision made  on  7  February  2017.   His
    appeal was heard by Judge Moran on 7th October  and  his  decision  was
    promulgated on 10 October 2017.

3.   The Secretary of State advances the appeal on the basis that the  judge
    made a material error of law in his determination.  The complaints are,
    firstly, that he failed to give clear reasons for accepting some of the
    claimant's evidence while rejecting other parts  of  it  and  that  his
    findings on the evidence were not clear.   Secondly,  it  is  submitted
    that there has been over-reliance on the medical evidence.  Thirdly, it
    is said there was an insufficient basis  to  find  that  the  claimant,
    being a non-Tamil would be at risk were he to be returned to Sri Lanka.



4.   It is quite clear that the judge accepted the core  of  the  claimant's
    account as  being  credible  but  also  rejected  other  parts  of  the
    claimant's account as not  being  credible.   In  MA  (Somalia)  v  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]  UKSC  49  Sir  John
    Dyson stated that it is for the  tribunal  to  decide  what  weight  to
    attach to lies and referred to the well-known Lucas direction given  to
    juries in criminal cases containing the reference to  people  sometimes
    lying in an attempt to bolster up a just cause.  The  material  passage
    appears at paragraphs 32 and 33 of his  judgment.   It  is  open  to  a
    Tribunal to accept some parts of the evidence of an  applicant  and  to
    reject those parts of the evidence that are untruthful.  A finding that
    a claimant is not wholly credible does not mean that  the  entirety  of
    their evidence must be rejected.  It was, therefore, entirely  open  to
    Judge Moran to disbelieve the claimant on some aspects of his claim but
    nevertheless accept that the core of his account was true.

5.   The judge  clearly  had  regard  to  the  case  of  MA  (Somalia).   In
    paragraph 27 of his decision and reasons he stated that he had

         "Formed the view that it was reasonably likely that the core of his
         account was true but that he had embellished certain parts  of  it,
         perhaps out of a fear that the truth may not be good enough for his
         claim to be allowed."

    Then, in paragraph 28, he set out in detail the  specific  findings  of
    fact that he made to the lower standard of proof.  Those findings  were
    that the claimant was of Sinhalese ethnicity from  a  middle-class  Sri
    Lankan family, who had trained to be an aerospace mechanic looking  for
    employment.  He worked for the government but the work in fact involved
    him working for the White Van Gang.  They were responsible for rounding
    up Tamils who were of interest to the government and  taking  them  for
    questioning at police or military centres.  He found that the  claimant
    worked for the White Van Gang but was not comfortable doing what he was
    doing.  He spoke to his family and journalists and attempted  to  leave
    the gang but was told that he could not as he had  signed  up  for  one
    year.  He carried on working for them for  one  month  but  decided  to
    leave when he heard that the journalist had been killed.  The same  day
    that he left he went home but he was captured there and taken away  for
    questioning.  He was detained for several months during  which  he  was
    seriously physically and sexually abused.  He has  scarring  from  this
    treatment  and  has  also  suffered  from  PTSD  as  a  result  of  his
    experiences.  He was able to escape by the payment of a bribe from  his
    father.  This bribe enabled him to be taken to a temple where he stayed
    for three months.  In the meantime, his father arranged for him  to  be
    granted a student visa to travel to the UK.  The payment of  the  bribe
    also enabled the claimant to leave the country on his own passport  and
    come to the UK.

6.   The judge also found there had been a number  of  visits  to  his  home
    address in Sri Lanka in recent years by the authorities who  have  been
    seeking to establish  his  whereabouts.   The  judge  agreed  with  the
    submission that there are circumstances in which he, as a Sinhalese Sri
    Lankan, was at risk from persecution from the Sri  Lankan  authorities.
    He found that it was reasonably likely that the claimant would  now  be
    on a stop list at the airport and that there was reference in GJ  to  a
    Sinhalese man being tortured as a result of suspected links to the LTTE
    (reference Appendix F para 22(vi)).

7.   We are satisfied that these findings  to  which  the  judge  came  were
    clear, reasoned and ones to which  he  was  entitled  to  come  on  the
    evidence.  Whether a different  judge  would  have  come  to  the  same
    conclusion is not relevant  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal.   The
    absence of documentary evidence is not fatal to the  judge's  findings.
    It was not an error to  make  findings  absent  supporting  documentary
    evidence and it was clearly a factor that he took into account.  So far
    as the claimant's health is concerned and the findings the  judge  made
    in relation to the medical evidence, there was clear physical  evidence
    referred to in the report of Dr Thomas  which  was  supportive  of  the
    account of the claimant.  There were findings of physical injuries that
    were, in the doctor's opinion, "highly consistent" with the  claimant's
    account and therefore the findings in relation to the claimant's mental
    health did not stand on their own  but  were  to  be  linked  with  the
    findings relating to the physical injuries that  were  consistent  with
    the claimant's account.  It was  open  to  the  judge  to  accept  this
    evidence and  to  find  that  the  claimant  had  essentially  given  a
    consistent account  in  relation  to  how  he  came  to  sustain  those
    injuries.  He was also entitled to find that the  claimant  had  simply
    embellished matters in relation to the  particular  role  that  he  had
    fulfilled when working for  the  White  Van  Gang  but  was,  in  other
    respects, giving a truthful account.

8.   In all these  circumstances,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to come to the conclusion that  the  appeal  of  the  claimant
    against the refusal of his claim for asylum on Article 3  human  rights
    grounds should be allowed and  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in
    relation to his decision.  For those reasons this appeal is  dismissed.






Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal against the Decision of First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Moran  is  dismissed  and  Judge  Moran's  Decision  is   accordingly
affirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 13 December 2017


Mr Justice Goss
