
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04596/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 |              On 23 September    |
|                                 |2020                             |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                FM (Albania)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This appeal was listed before me on 17 September 2020.  The day  before
    the hearing, I received a reply from the  appellant's  representatives,
    pursuant to rule 25 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Having reviewed the case as a whole in light of that response, I
    decided that it was not  necessary  for  there  to  be  a  hearing.   I
    arranged for the hearing to be vacated.  I gave the  following  reasons
    for that decision:

         "At 0910 on 16 September 2020, the appellant  filed  and  served  a
         reply  to  the  respondent's  rule  24  response  in  this  appeal.
         Helpfully,  that  reply   draws   together   the   directions   and
         correspondence which followed UTJ  Owens'  decision  to  grant  the
         appellant permission to appeal.  It  also  records  that  there  is
         agreement between the parties, not only as to the existence  of  an
         error of law in the decision of the FtT but also as to  the  relief
         which should follow.  It is agreed on both sides that the  decision
         of Judge McTaggart cannot stand and that the proper course  is  for
         the appeal to be remitted to be heard afresh before a  judge  other
         than Judge  McTaggart.   For  reasons  which  will  be  more  fully
         explained in my written decision, I agree with the parties.  It  is
         in those circumstances that I consider the application at  [11]  of
         counsel's reply to be well-made.  It is therein suggested  that  no
         useful purpose would be served by a hearing and that the proper and
         expedient course is for the hearing on 17 September to be  vacated.
         Given the wholesale agreement between the parties,  I  agree.   The
         hearing is therefore vacated and a short decision will be issued in
         due course, recording the outcome above."

Background

 2. The appellant is an Albanian national who was born on 10 June 2001.  He
    appeals against a decision which was issue by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    McTaggart  on  27  June  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal   against   the
    respondent's refusal of his claim for international protection.

 3. The appellant claimed asylum in November 2016.  It  was  not  until  30
    April 2019 that his claim was refused.  The gap was due,  in  part,  to
    delays in the consideration of his claim to be a victim of trafficking,
    which was not conclusively resolved, adversely to the appellant,  until
    9 August 2018.

 4. The protection claim was based on the appellant's fear of gangs in  his
    local area.  These gangs were said to be involved in the drug trade and
    various other aspects of criminality in the appellant's local area.  He
    said that he had suffered a number of violent incidents at the hands of
    these individuals and that he had decided to leave the country in  2016
    so as to avoid further problems.

 5. The respondent refused the appellant's claim for asylum on  credibility
    grounds.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant was absent and unrepresented before the FtT.   The  judge
    was satisfied that he had been given proper notice of the  hearing  and
    she 'resolved to proceed onwards in his  absence'.   She  accepted  the
    core of his account but concluded that he could turn  to  the  Albanian
    authorities  for  a  sufficiency  of  protection  and  that  he   could
    internally relocate  to  avoid  the  gangs  in  his  local  area.   She
    therefore dismissed the appeal.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. More than seven months later, permission to appeal was sought.  It  was
    initially refused by the FtT but  time  was  extended,  and  permission
    granted, by Upper Tribunal Judge Owens.  The reasons she gave for  that
    decision were materially as follows:

         "The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal is 7 months out of time. The written reasons were sent  on
         27 June 2019 and the application for permission was received by the
         First-tier Tribunal on 28 February 2020. When  considering  whether
         to extend time I have had regard to those principles in R (Onowu) v
         FtT [2016] UKUT 185 (IAC).

         The breach is significant and  serious.  The  explanation  for  the
         delay is that the appellant is  a  vulnerable  individual  who  has
         previously been the victim of violence. He arrived in the UK as  an
         unaccompanied minor and is currently being  supported  by  Kingston
         and Richmond social services under the Children  Leaving  Care  Act
         2000. Social services have accepted that they failed to ensure that
         the appellant  attended  his  substantive  asylum  appeal  hearing,
         believing that the appeal would be adjourned because they had found
         the appellant a new  representative  very  late  in  the  day.  The
         appellant then fled his supported accommodation on 28 June 2019 out
         of fear of being removed. It is said at that stage that he  had  no
         representation, was frightened and vulnerable. He was  subsequently
         detained in January 2020 and obtained a copy of the FTT decision in
         the course  of  judicial  review  proceedings.  His  representative
         sought the advice of counsel who drafted the out of time grounds of
         appeal. I accept that  social  services  have  provided  supporting
         evidence of the appellant's vulnerability and  the  reason  why  he
         failed to attend his original appeal hearing and I  accept,  having
         regard to all of the circumstances of the  appellant,  taking  into
         account his age and vulnerability, that there is a good reason  for
         the delay.

         I turn to the merits of the grounds. It is asserted that the  judge
         having found the appellant to be the target  of  criminal  violence
         and exploitation,  then  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  country
         guidance  cases  on  sufficiency   of   protection   and   internal
         relocation. I am in agreement that the grounds have  merit  and  on
         this basis I extend time to admit the  application  because  it  is
         fair and in the interests of justice. I give  weight  to  the  fact
         that this is a claim for protection involving  a  vulnerable  young
         person who through no fault of his own was not able to put  forward
         his claim before the FTT."

 8. Following Judge Owens' decision, the Upper Tribunal sent directions  to
    the parties.  Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  indicated  that  she  was
    minded to find that the FtT had erred in  law  and  to  set  aside  the
    decision  so  that  it  could  be  remade  de  novo.   The  appellant's
    solicitors did not respond to those directions.   The  respondent,  for
    her part, filed a reply to the notice of  appeal,  contending  (amongst
    other things) that the judge's credibility  findings  were  unsafe  and
    that the proper course, in all the circumstances, was for the  decision
    to be set aside as a whole and the  appeal  remitted  to  the  FtT  for
    rehearing de novo.  Given that new submission,  Judge  Canavan  ordered
    that the appeal should be set down for a hearing, so that the appellant
    had the opportunity to make submissions.

 9. In the response to the respondent's  reply,  it  was  accepted  on  the
    appellant's behalf that the  judge's  credibility  findings  could  not
    stand and that the relief suggested by the respondent  was  appropriate
    on the facts of this  case.   As  I  stated  in  my  directions  of  16
    September, it was clear in light of this  complete  agreement  that  no
    purpose was to be served by holding a hearing  at  public  expense.   I
    therefore directed under rule 34 that there  would  be  no  hearing  in
    order to resolve the question of whether the judge erred in law and, if
    so, the relief which should follow.

Discussion

10. It is to be recalled that Judge McTaggart was presented with silence on
    the appellant's side.  That is not a  criticism  of  the  appellant  or
    those who currently represent him; it is  simply  the  reality  of  the
    situation.  The conclusions  the  judge  reached  on  the  appeal  were
    unsurprisingly brief in the circumstances.  It  is  nevertheless  clear
    that the judge erred in law in failing to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding the appellant's account to be  credible  at  its  core  and  in
    failing to apply the country guidance on Albania in concluding that the
    appellant  could  relocate  or  that  he  could  avail  himself  of   a
    sufficiency of protection from the Albanian authorities.  Whilst  those
    conclusions may ultimately be reached in  an  appeal  of  this  nature,
    there were plainly relevant observations in the country guidance  (from
    AM & BM (Albania) CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) to  BF  (Albania)  CG  [2019]
    UKUT (IAC) to be considered before the judge could properly so decide.

11. In the circumstances, I agree with the parties that the decision of the
    judge contains errors of law such that it cannot stand.   I  set  aside
    that decision and order that the appeal shall be remitted to the FtT to
    be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge McTaggart.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of errors on points of  law  and
is set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is  remitted  to  the  FtT  to  be
heard afresh.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                           21 September 2020
