
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04278/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at                                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On  31st July 2017                       |On 9th August 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     HV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Fitzimmons, Couinsel instructed on behalf of
the Appellant

For the Respondent:    Mr P. Singh, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on the 5th June
    2017 dismissed his claim for protection.  The  Appellant's  immigration
    history is set out within the determination at paragraphs  1-4  and  in
    the decision letter issued by  the  Secretary  of  State.   It  can  be
    summarised briefly as follows.  The Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the 31st October 2014  concealed  in  a  lorry  and  claimed
    asylum. He was aged 16 and was  therefore  placed  in  local  authority
    care. He absconded and therefore on the 13th February  2015  his  claim
    was treated as abandoned. He was encountered on an enforcement visit on
    the 9th February 2017 at an establishment and denied  working  or  that
    he was a victim of trafficking. He underwent a substantive interview on
    the 7th  April  2017   and  a  Rule  35  report  was  written.  Further
    representations were received from his solicitors. On  the  20th  April
    2017 the Competent Authority wrote to the Appellant setting out reasons
    as to why it was not considered that he was a victim of trafficking and
    a decision letter was issued by the Secretary of State on the same  day
    in which his application for asylum was refused.

 4. The basis of the  Appellant's  protection  claim  is  recorded  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs [18 to [24] which  is
    also referred to in the detailed reasons for refusal.

 5. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 26th May 2017.

 6.  The judge set out  his  findings  at  paragraphs  [34]  to  [58].  The
    Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds are
    set out in the papers.

 7. The FTT (Judge Bird) granted permission to appeal  on  limited  grounds
    and effectively only granted permission on ground 3  which  related  to
    the credibility findings which had arisen  and  made  reference  to  at
    paragraph 42 of the determination.

 8. At the hearing before  this  Tribunal  Miss  Fitzimmons,  who  had  not
    drafted the grounds, submitted that she did not seek to advance  ground
    three. That was  a  ground  which  challenged  the  judges  credibility
    findings as to what had happened when the Appellant was encountered and
    whether or not there was an interpreter present on the  telephone  (see
    paragraphs 27 to 32). In particular at paragraph 31 it was asserted  in
    the grounds that the judge made an assumption that "big word" was  used
    and thus the Appellant had an interpreter. She directed the  Tribunal's
    attention to set out in the respondent's bundle at A1 which was a  copy
    of the CID note dated 9 February 2017 where it was  set  out  that  the
    Appellant "stated with the use of a big word interpreter  that  he  had
    entered the  UK  in  October  2014....".  In  those  circumstances  she
    submitted  that  ground  three  could  not  be  advanced.  However  she
    submitted that the grounds of  appeal  originally  had  numbered  three
    particular grounds. Ground one related to procedural unfairness and the
    second ground related to the  identification  of  the  Appellant  as  a
    victim of trafficking. The grant of permission  by  Judge  Bird  was  a
    limited grant and appeared to grant permission  only  on  ground  three
    which was now not being proceeded with. She therefore  sought  to  rely
    upon the original grounds as drafted by Counsel at the hearing  relying
    on grounds one and two. In this respect she  provided  a  copy  of  the
    decision  in  Ferrer  (limited  appeal  grounds;  Alvi)   [2012)   UKUT
    00304(IAC). However it was unnecessary to hear any further  submissions
    in this respect as Mr Singh, on behalf  of  the  respondent,  indicated
    that he had no objection to Counsel advancing grounds one and  two.  He
    was able  to  deal  with  those  aspects  and  it  did  not  cause  any
    difficulties. As the parties were in agreement with the  course  to  be
    adopted, I heard submissions from each of the parties relating to  both
    grounds one and two only.

 9. I have therefore considered ground one in the light of the  submissions
    that I have heard from both parties and by  reference  to  the  written
    documentation including the submissions made by  Miss  Fitzsimmons  and
    the rule 24 response provided on behalf of the Secretary of State dated
    the 12th July 2017. In that response it states that at paragraph 17 the
    judge gave adequate reasons for refusing the adjournment request and to
    do so was not procedurally  unfair  to  the  Appellant.  There  are  no
    reasons given as to why it was not "procedurally unfair" or  otherwise.
    In his oral submissions Mr Singh submitted  that  the  judge  gave  his
    reasons at paragraph 17 having considered the basis upon which  it  was
    put in the preceding two paragraphs. Whilst the grounds make  reference
    to the judge misunderstanding the submissions, there was  no  statement
    from that Counsel in the papers thus the judge properly considered  the
    basis of it. He submitted there was country evidence before  the  judge
    as indicated by DIJ woodcraft who had refused the  application  for  an
    adjournment prior to the hearing. There had also been an assessment  of
    the issue of trafficking in the negative reasonable grounds letter  and
    the refusal letter. Thus it  could  not  be  said  that  there  was  no
    consideration of his claim.

10. Whilst the application also made reference to  a  psychological/medical
    report, he stated that he had been fit and well to be  interviewed  and
    therefore as the judge stated it was "speculative". Therefore there was
    no procedural unfairness.

11. Having had  the  opportunity  to  consider  the  submissions  from  the
    advocates in the light of the determination and the  issues  raised,  I
    have reached the conclusion that the Appellant  has  demonstrated  that
    ground one is made out. In those circumstances it is not necessary  for
    me to make any further reference to ground 2  although  the  result  of
    finding an error of law on the basis of a procedural irregularity  will
    have the effect of the issue of whether he is a victim  of  trafficking
    to be revisited in the light of the expert evidence  assembled  on  his
    behalf.

12. I shall therefore set out my reasons as to why have I have reached that
    conclusion.

13. When considering this ground I have had the opportunity to look at  the
    Tribunal file which set out  the  previous  applications  made  for  an
    adjournment. I took the parties through these documents as  they  would
    not have had an opportunity to have seen them. I  read  those  previous
    applications within the timetable for this Appellant's hearing.  It  is
    common ground that on 4 May 2017 he lodged grounds of  appeal  and  the
    hearing of his appeal took place on 26 May thus there was a  period  of
    approximately 22 days from the lodging  of  the  appeal  to  his  final
    hearing. It is also the position that he was in  detention  and  whilst
    his solicitors had raised the issue  that  this,  being  a  case  of  a
    possible  victim  of  trafficking,  and  was  thus  not  suitable   for
    detention, he remained there. The difficulties with the process of such
    claims has been the subject of litigation in the High  Court  (and  the
    Court of Appeal). It is not  necessary  for  me  to  make  any  further
    reference to that litigation. Nonetheless, it  forms  the  backdrop  to
    this particular appeal.

14. Furthermore because of the time constraints it appears that  there  had
    been no prehearing case management review therefore issues relating  to
    missing evidence or clarification of the respondents evidence (in  this
    regard the CID note which was the subject of some discussion during the
    hearing)  or the importance of expert evidence did not take place.

15. The first application made on behalf of the Appellant was  made  on  18
    April and is set out in the respondent's  bundle  at  E2.  Whilst  Miss
    Fitzsimmons referred to it as an application for an adjournment it  was
    not strictly such an application and indeed it was not  treated  as  an
    adjournment request but as further representations. In that  letter  it
    was made plain to the  Secretary  of  State  that  further  documentary
    evidence was required to be collated before reaching a decision on  the
    asylum claim itself which included a medicolegal report and a  scarring
    report. Those  reports  were  considered  to  be  relevant  before  the
    decision was made and reference was made to the rule 35 report. At this
    stage there had been no update  from  the  competent  authority  as  to
    whether or not he was indeed a victim of trafficking.  That  being  the
    case, the letter made it plain that in the circumstances it was  not  a
    case suitable for the DAC  procedure.  It  does  not  appear  that  any
    request was acted upon and indeed the chronology demonstrates a refusal
    letter was issued on 21 April 2017 after those representations.

16. The first real application for an adjournment before the  Tribunal  was
    made on 15 May there does not appear to be a copy of the letter sent on
    the Tribunal file but reference was made to it in  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's solicitors renewing their application for an adjournment in
    a letter dated 19 May 2017. It records  that  the  earlier  adjournment
    request was refused because "the case for an expert report has not been
    made out."

17. The second request came in a letter dated 19  May  2017  which  was  in
    essence a renewal of the application that had been refused. The  expert
    evidence that was required was that  of  a  trafficking  expert  report
    which was deemed necessary to assess the Appellant's background and  to
    address the negative reasonable grounds decision. It was submitted that
    it was a report necessary to address the issues that had been raised in
    the negative decision and to give further analysis from the Appellant's
    viewpoint as to whether he was a potential victim of  trafficking.  The
    second report related to a country expert and this appears to be on the
    basis of a report to address risks of re-trafficking upon  return.  The
    letter made it plain that "the Appellant's matter is covered  by  legal
    aid and we have funding to cover the costs of the expert."  Thus  there
    were no funding issues at the time of that application  although  as  I
    stated to Counsel, there was no indication on the file that a letter of
    instruction had been provided along with the application.

18. That application was refused on 22  May  2017,  four  days  before  the
    hearing. The reason given was "the issue  is  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant  and  the  instruction  of  two  or  more   experts   appears
    speculative. In any event there is ample background material on Vietnam
    already."

19. Thus the hearing came before the first Tier Tribunal. The  judge  dealt
    with the preliminary issue of an adjournment, which properly  had  been
    renewed orally before the judge, at paragraphs 14 to 16.

20. At paragraph 14 the judge made reference to the previous adjournment to
    which I have just referred. Paragraph 15  set  out  the  basis  of  the
    submissions made on behalf of the Appellant.  It  is  clear  from  that
    paragraph as Ms Fitzsimmons submitted, that a country expert report was
    required on the issues of trafficking and that the Appellant's  account
    needed to be subject to expert analysis. It was also  asserted  that  a
    medical report was necessary to deal with the mental health issues.  At
    paragraph 16,  it  records  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    presenting officer. It  is  this  paragraph  that  is  the  subject  of
    discussion in the grounds for permission to appeal.  Couinsel  who  was
    present at the hearing  and  who  had  made  that  application  for  an
    adjournment also settled the grounds of  appeal.  At  paragraph  14  of
    those grounds, it was asserted that the first Tier Tribunal had made  a
    mistake at paragraph 16 when it was recorded that the "funding would be
    in place within 2 to 3 weeks". What the grounds say is that this was  a
    mistake and that the expert needed 2 to 3 weeks to complete the  report
    and for it to be served on the parties. An expert had  been  approached
    (the name of the expert had been given) and funding was in place.

21. As Mr Singh submitted, there was no witness statement from Counsel  who
    was involved. Miss Fitzsimmons had not drafted the  grounds  and  there
    was no further information from Counsel who had  been  present  at  the
    hearing. I also asked Miss Fitzsimmons whether  she  had  any  evidence
    from her instructing solicitors concerning any correspondence with  the
    expert identified but she did not have any evidence  with  her  at  the
    hearing. Nonetheless,  there  is  no  reason  to  disbelieve  Counsel's
    assertion at paragraph 14 of the grounds that there  appears  to  be  a
    mistake or misunderstanding as to the factual basis of the  adjournment
    at paragraph 16 of the determination. The earlier correspondence that I
    have referred to made it plain that funding was in place and  therefore
    the submission recording that the correct funding  would  be  in  place
    within "2 to 3 weeks" is not consistent with the earlier letter  of  19
    May. I therefore approach the question of the adjournment on the  basis
    that there had been a misunderstanding as  to  the  timescales  and  of
    therefore considered this issue in  accordance  with  procedural  rules
    applicable and the relevant case law.

22. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the Tribunal to  adjourn
    a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives  under  the  Rules
    which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to"  when  exercising  any
    power under the Rules. It follows  that  they  are  the  issues  to  be
    considered on  an  adjournment  application  as  well.  The  overriding
    objective is deal with cases fairly and  justly.  This  is  defined  as
    including "(a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate to
    the  importance  of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  the
    anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal;
    (b) avoiding unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
    proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that  the  parties
    are able to participate fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special
    expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay  so  far  as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues".

23.  In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it was held
    that If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally. In practice, in most  cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged  on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the
    test to be applied is that of fairness: was there  any  deprivation  of
    the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

24. I also have in mind, of course, what was said by the Court of Appeal in
    the judgment of Moses LJ in the well-known  case  of  SH  (Afghanistan)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 :
    "The principle applicable to the request for an adjournment  to  adduce
    evidence on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  was  not  in  dispute.  It  is
    fundamental that the  parties  should  be  allowed  to  answer  adverse
    material by evidence as well as argument (see, e.g., In Re. D [1996] AC
    593 at 603) and all the more so where the subject  matter,  such  as  a
    claim for asylum, demands the  highest  standards  of  fairness."(  see
    paragraph 8).

25. As set out earlier in the  determination,  the  timescale  between  the
    refusal of his application  and  the  hearing  was  short  indeed.  The
    Appellant was also in detention and therefore for his part, the ability
    to assemble and provide evidence was limited.  Similarly  in  terms  of
    time,  those  instructed  by  the  Appellant  were  also   under   time
    constraints. It is not a case whereby they failed to  act  quickly  but
    that they made applications for further time to  obtain  material  that
    they thought necessary to  advance  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  his
    protection claim. The background of the type of claim  that  was  being
    advanced, which was as a potential victim of trafficking, must also  be
    borne in mind. There had been no provision made for a  case  management
    review and therefore issues  such  as  expert  evidence  had  not  been
    ventilated orally before a judge prior to the hearing.

26. The chronology above also indicates that the solicitors had  asked  for
    further time to obtain evidence before the reasonable grounds  decision
    had been issued (and also the decision  reached  by  the  Secretary  of
    State. However, there does not appear to have been any answer to  those
    representations and the reasonable grounds decision which was  negative
    was made on the same day as the refusal of his protection  claim.  Thus
    there had  been  little  time  for  the  Appellant  solicitors  provide
    evidence on his behalf dealing with the issues of  trafficking  and  in
    particular the negative reasonable grounds decision.

27. It is right that the judge did make reference to the  country  material
    that he had before him. However there are  a  number  of  agreed  facts
    which could be seen as indicative of trafficking. They are as  follows;
    that the Appellant entered the United Kingdom aged 16. He was placed in
    social services care but went missing from care thereafter.  There  was
    evidence before the Tribunal that victims of trafficking do go  missing
    in such circumstances (although other reasons  were  given),  that  the
    Appellant's  account  of  being  trafficked  is  consistent  with   the
    background evidence as  to  the  history  of  trafficking  within  that
    country and that between 100 to 200 victims are  identified  each  year
    and that miners often go missing. He was found working in  a  nail  bar
    (although he claimed not to be working at that time). This again  is  a
    factor and could be seen as  supportive  of  the  claim  to  have  been
    trafficked.

28. Whilst the judge did make reference to the material, in the absence  of
    any report dealing with these issues from the Appellant's  perspective,
    the credibility  findings  were  made  in  the  light  of  the  country
    materials which were general  in  content  and  not  specific  to  this
    Appellant and the particular facts that he sought to advance.

29. I am satisfied that had it been the position that the reports indicated
    (both on trafficking and expert country material) would be available in
    the short span of 2 to 3 weeks that  a  short  adjournment  would  have
    provided the Appellant with a fair opportunity to  challenge  both  the
    reasonable grounds decision and the credibility findings set out in the
    decision letter. It was  not  a  long  period  of  adjournment.  In  my
    judgement, reasons have  been  given,  when  based  on  the  particular
    factual and chronological background which demonstrates that  it  would
    have been in the  interests  of  fairness  and  justice  that  such  an
    opportunity to provide the reports was merited and as such may have  an
    impact on the decision making process and the decision  reached.  I  do
    not consider that the grounds are made out where it is submitted that a
    psychological report was necessary. There does not  appear  to  be  any
    evidence to demonstrate any basis for such a report. However as I  have
    reached the conclusion that I am satisfied that there was a  procedural
    unfairness, for the reasons set out above, that will be a matter to  be
    considered in due course.

30. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the Appellant's evidence in the  light  of
    the expert evidence provided and for the issues to be determined in the
    light of all the relevant evidence.

31. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh. The Appellant solicitors will be required to provide  a
    timetable for the provision of the expert evidence and should do so  by
    setting those issues out  in  correspondence  and  for  the  first-tier
    Tribunal to consider whether there should be a case management review.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is hereby set aside; it shall be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.  The  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 4/8/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

