
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04956/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2016                           |On 20 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                               Manmohan Singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Professor W Rees of Counsel, instructed by Quality
Solicitors    Orion
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose date of birth is  given
    as 1 January 1993.  He is a Sikh.  He arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely in October 2015 and on 30 November  2015  claimed  asylum
    because he feared persecution on return to Afghanistan  on  account  of
    his religion.  He is single and has no dependants.  His  mother  tongue
    is Punjabi.

The Respondent's Decision

 2. On 4 May 2016  the  Respondent  refused  his  claim  for  international
    protection.  She accepted he came from Afghanistan  but  did  not  find
    credible his claim to be a Sikh or to have suffered persecution or ill-
    treatment on that account and concluded he would not be at real risk on
    return to Afghanistan.  On  17  May  2016  the  Appellant  through  his
    solicitors lodged notice of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended,  in  particular  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are brief and generic
    referring to Articles 2 and 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and a risk of persecution on account of his religion.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 3. By a decision promulgated on 25 October 2016 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal N M Paul dismissed the appeal.  He  found  that  although  the
    Appellant is a Sikh his account of claimed persecution or ill-treatment
    in Afghanistan was not credible and he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. On 17 November 2016 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Murray
    granted the Appellant permission to appeal on the ground  that  it  was
    arguable the Judge had failed to apply the guidance in the decision  in
    TG & Others (Afghan Sikhs Persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT  00595
    (IAC).  The permission also referred to the ground for appeal that  the
    Judge had given no explanation why  the  Appellant's  claim  could  not
    succeed under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  since  there  were  significant
    obstacles to his integration on return.  Further, what  the  Judge  had
    found to be unsatisfactory about the Appellant's claim was insufficient
    to justify its rejection, taking into account the  trauma  suffered  by
    the Appellant and that the Judge had sought corroborating evidence.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 5. The Appellant attended the hearing. It became apparent in the course of
    my opening introduction that he understood very little English.

 6. Professor Rees relied on the grounds for permission to which  reference
    has already been made.  He then turned to the Judge's treatment or lack
    of treatment of the guidance in TG and referred me to paragraph 119  of
    the decision and in particular sub-paragraphs  (iii)-(v).   There  were
    very significant obstacles to the re-integration of  the  Appellant  on
    return to Afghanistan and the unsatisfactory aspects of the Appellant's
    evidence were insufficient to justify  the  Judge's  dismissal  of  his
    claim.  The Judge had failed to consider the  trauma  suffered  by  the
    Appellant on leaving Afghanistan and the  loss  of  his  parents.   The
    Judge had  referred  to  the  absence  of  corroborative  evidence  but
    corroboration in asylum appeals was frequently not a possibility and at
    law was not a requirement.  Professor Rees referred  to  the  Appellant
    having an elder brother who has been in the United Kingdom  since  2001
    and is a United Kingdom citizen.  He mentioned the Appellant's  brother
    could not be present because he  was  temporarily  out  of  the  United
    Kingdom and added that the brother was very religious.

 7. Professor Rees then turned to the Respondent's response under Procedure
    Rule 24.  The response asserted that "in the light of the core elements
    of persecution in Afghanistan being found unreliable and incredible  at
    paragraph 21 (of the decision)  the  grounds  fail  to  identify  which
    circumstances  would  give  rise  to  persecution  upon  return."   The
    Appellant  had  suffered  persecution  in  Afghanistan  and  would   be
    destitute on his return. The Judge  had  not  fully  dealt  with  these
    aspects at paragraphs 21 and 22 of his decision.  The  Appellant  would
    be unable to relocate in  the  light  of  the  evidence  summarised  at
    paragraph 119(v) of TG and he would not be  able  to  relocate  without
    undue hardship.

 8. At paragraph 4 of the Rule 24 response the Respondent  had  exaggerated
    the position when addressing the Appellant's  grounds  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had suffered trauma and
    had lost his parents and a brother.  The  Appellant  has  continued  to
    assert his claim for asylum or, alternatively,  his  entitlement  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) because there were insuperable difficulties  to
    his reintegration on return to Afghanistan.

Submissions for the Respondent

 9. Mr Nath relied on the Respondent's response under  Procedure  Rule  24.
    The Appellant relied on the Judge's finding  in  paragraph  22  of  the
    decision that the Appellant is a Sikh.  The Judge had referred  to  the
    country guidance case of TG at paragraph 11 of his decision and  indeed
    it had been expressly addressed by the Respondent at paragraph 64-68 of
    the Respondent's original decision.  Although it might be  argued  that
    the Judge could have dealt with the guidance in TG  at  greater  length
    than he did in his decision, he had adequately  taken  account  of  the
    guidance and considered it.

10. The findings about the lack of evidence  and  the  vague,  evasive  and
    unsatisfactory answers to questions about  what  had  happened  to  the
    Appellant in Afghanistan were supported by the finding in paragraph  18
    of the Judge's decision about the evidence or lack of evidence from the
    Appellant's brother.  On such evidence as there was before  the  Judge,
    his treatment of the claim under Article 8 whether  within  or  outside
    the Immigration Rules at paragraph 23 of his decision was satisfactory.
     This included the brief  treatment  of  the  factors  referred  to  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

Reply for the Appellant

11.  Professor  Rees  reiterated  that  the  Judge  had  not   sufficiently
    considered the guidance in TG.  He wished to make  it  clear  that  the
    Appellant's claim under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights was only within the  Rules  and  so  in  this  case  limited  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  He continued that once the Judge had found in
    favour of the Appellant's claimed religion, he should have looked  more
    closely at the guidance in TG.

Findings and Consideration

12. The first point to note is that the Appellant's grounds  of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal did not raise any claim under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention nor any ground based on private and family life  in
    the United Kingdom which might have engaged paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This is notwithstanding that the  Respondent  dealt
    at paragraphs 79-84 of her decision letter  with  any  potential  claim
    under Article 8 whether within or outside the Rules.  It  appears  that
    the Appellant's claim under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was  argued  before
    the Judge on Article 3 grounds and then in a lesser version  under  the
    guise of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

13. Notwithstanding the Upper Tribunal's standard direction  there  was  no
    further evidence or other documents filed for the Appellant.  I  accept
    the force of that direction may have been somewhat reduced by reason of
    the refusal of the Upper Tribunal to arrange  for  an  interpreter  but
    nevertheless the Appellant had been alerted  to  the  possibility  that
    further documentary evidence might be filed with the permission of  the
    Upper Tribunal.

14. The record of the interview of the Appellant and his statement  do  not
    point to any potential claim in respect of private and family  life  in
    the United Kingdom which could be  made  based  on  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on  Human  Rights  either  within  or  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  In the circumstances the Judge's brief disposal  of
    any Article 8 claim is sufficient.  It is of  note  that  paragraph  23
    dealing with this aspect of the claim was based on a  consideration  of
    the Appellant's private and  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    evidenced by the opening words "the fact is that the Appellant has been
    in the country for a very short period of time and has not  established
    any significant family ties".  The statement of the Appellant's brother
    of 27 September 2016 gives no details of the private  and  family  life
    that the Appellant and his brother shared in the  United  Kingdom.   It
    comprised a number of general statements asserting risks to Sikhs  both
    male  and  female  in  Afghanistan.   There  is  no  reference  to  any
    particular circumstances in which the  Appellant  or  indeed  even  his
    brother had  been  involved.   His  statement  is  in  similar  if  not
    identical form to the statements given by  other  more  distant  family
    members  and  friends  and  the  only  indication  that  a   particular
    individual, Manjit Singh Rajwansi, is the Appellant's brother  is  that
    he is described as his brother in a letter of 28  September  2016  from
    the Gurudwara Guru Nanak Darbar in the Appellant's bundle. There was no
    other evidence from the Appellant's brother and  indeed  there  was  no
    explanation either before the Judge or before me for the absence of any
    other documentary evidence from the brother or documentary evidence  to
    explain his absence.  On the basis of the evidence which was before him
    the Judge was entitled to deal with the claim based on the  Appellant's
    private and family life in the United Kingdom in the manner in which he
    did.

15. The burden of proof, albeit to the lower standard, is on the Appellant.
     The Judge was entitled at paragraphs 18-21 of the decision to take the
    points about lack of  sufficiency  of  the  evidence.  I  find  he  was
    justified in and gave adequate reasons for finding in effect  that  the
    Appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proof.

16. Given that the Appellant had failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof
    and that  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  TG  had  made  it  clear  that  any
    consideration of whether an individual member of the Sikh community  is
    at real risk  of  persecution  upon  return  to  Afghanistan  is  fact-
    sensitive, and the  Judge's  adverse  credibility  finding,  there  was
    little if any need for the Judge to engage at length with the  guidance
    in TG because the guidance said  that  the  consideration  of  risk  on
    return was fact-sensitive.  The Appellant had failed to  establish  any
    particular or individual facts and circumstances upon which  the  Judge
    might have been required to make a finding under TG.   It  is  of  note
    that a claim under Article  15(1)(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    2004/83/EC was neither raised in the original  grounds  of  appeal  nor
    indeed argued before the Judge.

17. For these reasons I find that on the  evidence  which  was  before  the
    Judge and there has been no suggestion that  there  is  any  additional
    evidence which might be considered by the Upper Tribunal, the Judge was
    entitled to reach his conclusions and gave adequate reasons  for  them.
    On the evidence before the Judge I  do  not  find  that  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal would have come to any other conclusion  and  that
    whatever complaints might be made about  the  brevity  of  the  Judge's
    decision they are not such as to show that the Judge made any  material
    error of law such that his decision should be set aside.

18. The consequence is that I find there is no material error of law as  to
    find the setting aside of any part or the whole of the Judge's decision
    and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymisation

19. The Judge anonymised his decision  and  made  an  anonymity  direction.
    There was no application  at  the  hearing  before  me  for  it  to  be
    continued and at the end of the hearing I informed Professor Rees  that
    I  saw  no  reason  for  continuing  the  anonymity  direction  or  the
    anonymisation  and  unless  I  heard  promptly  from  his   instructing
    solicitors with good reasons to continue them, I would discontinue both
    the anonymity direction and the anonymisation of the decision.  I  have
    heard nothing further on the issue and  so  this  direction  and  order
    shall no longer apply.



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  any  material
    error of law such that it should be set aside and it shall stand.

    The Appellant's appeal has been dismissed.

    Anonymity direction discontinued.


Signed/Official    Crest                                                Date
19.xii. 2016
Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
