
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04305/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 July 2021                               |On 17 August 2021             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    S B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by Tower Hamlets Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the respondent made on 18
    March 2018 to refuse  the  appellant's  asylum  claim,  her  claim  for
    humanitarian protection and her claim pursuant to Articles 2, 3  and  8
    of the Human Rights Convention.  Her appeal against that  decision  was
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 8 October 2019.   For  the  reasons
    given in a decision of 24 October 2019 that appeal was dismissed on all
    grounds.  For the reasons set out in my decision of  18  January  2021,
    that decision was set aside in its entirety.  A copy of my decision  is
    attached.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 5  January  1968  in  Ogun
    State.  She was married to OAB with MBA born  May  2004  and  MOB  born
    March 2008.

 3. On her return from a visit to London in 2013, the  appellant  saw  that
    her younger son, MOB, had marks put on his abdomen.  She  was  told  by
    her husband that they were the mark of  a  cult  known  as  the  Ogboni
    meaning that his son would be forced to join when he was 18.   She  did
    not miss this and fled with her sons to Zaria in the north of  Nigeria.
    Her husband found out he was there and she returned then to Lagos where
    she stayed for about two months.   Wishing  to  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom she contacted her husband and asked  him  to  renew  the  sons'
    passports promising that she would not run away again.  He did so  and,
    so she had them, she returned to her friend  in  Lagos.   She  and  her
    siblings sold land and bought plane tickets travelling to London.

 4. Shortly after arrival she met Mr  Williams,  who  was  a  friend  of  a
    friend, and she became pregnant with her daughter, F, who was  born  in
    the UK on 21 November 2014.  The appellant's case is  that  on  return,
    her husband will find her and force her son to be  initiated  into  the
    Ogboni; she also fears domestic violence at the  hands  of  her  former
    husband.  The appellant claimed asylum on 4 April 2017.

 5. In addition, the appellant's case is that her daughter, F, is a British
    citizen and that it would be a breach of  her,  and  the  rest  of  the
    family, Article 8 rights to require them to return to Nigeria.  That is
    in particular also because F has specific medical needs as a result  of
    her suffering serious burns in an accident in the United Kingdom.

The Respondent's Case

 6. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter dated March 2018
    and in a supplementary letter dated 16 September 2019.

 7. The respondent considered that it was inconsistent for the appellant to
    have returned to her husband if she feared he would force her son  into
    a cult.  It was also observed that the sons' passports had  been  valid
    from 10 February 2012 until 9 February 2017 and thus, at the  time  she
    claimed  to  arrange  passports  for  them,  they  already  had   valid
    passports.  It is noted also in the appellant's  evidence,  as  regards
    the reasons for her coming to  the  United  Kingdom  were  inconsistent
    including that she wanted to obtain a British passport for her daughter
    [47].  The Secretary of State drew inferences adverse to the  appellant
    for her failure to claim asylum on arrival and  subsequent  delay.   It
    was noted in particular that she had not claimed asylum until  after  a
    decision had been taken to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 8. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant had a  genuine
    and subjective fear on return to Nigeria and in any event that any fear
    was  not  objectively  well-founded  as  there  would   be   sufficient
    protection from the authorities noting also that there was no  evidence
    of compulsory membership.  It was considered  also  that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection for her  were  she  the  victim  of  domestic
    violence and that in any event it would be reasonable to expect her  to
    relocate elsewhere within Nigeria.

 9. The respondent did not consider  either  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules  or  that
    there were exceptional circumstances pursuant to paragraph  GEN.3.2  of
    the Rules that her removal would be disproportionate, having had regard
    also to the best interests of the children.

10. Although the Secretary of  State  did  not  initially  accept  that  Mr
    Williams had the right of abode  and  that  therefore  the  appellant's
    daughter was not a British citizen, in the letter of 16 September  2019
    it was confirmed that he had the right of abode but it was not accepted
    that he was the daughter's father given the  appellant  arrived  on  12
    March 2014 and gave birth on 21 November 2014, just over 36 weeks after
    her arrival  and,  in  the  absence  of  evidence  that  she  was  born
    prematurely, and the credibility issues raised in the  letter,  it  was
    not accepted that he was the biological father.

The Hearing

11. The appellant gave evidence in Yoruba with the assistance  of  a  court
    interpreter.  In addition I had before me the following:

      1) Respondent's bundle.

      2) Respondent's additional refusal letter.

      3) Appellant's bundle.

      4) Appellant's supplementary bundle.

      5) CPIN Nigeria: internal relocation.

      6) Excerpts from EASO, Country of Origin  Information  Report  Nigeria
         targeting of individuals November 2018.

      7) Refugee Documentation Centre, Ireland, Nigeria:  research  compiled
         by the RDI 8 June 2010 - Information on Ogboni cult in Nigeria.

12. In addition to these, I have also taken into account the  CPIN  country
    background note January 2020,  act  as  a  protection  March  2019  and
    medical healthcare issues Nigeria January 2020.

13. The respondent also sought  to  rely  on  two  Country  Guidance  cases
    regarding the Ogboni:

    BL (Ogboni cult, protection, relocation) Nigeria CG [2002] UKIAT 01708.



    WO (Ogboni cult) Nigeria CG [2004] UKIAT 00277.

    Mr Tufan also sought to rely on NA (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2021] EWCA  Civ
    953.

14. The appellant adopted a witness statement adding that she had  seen  Mr
    Williams on 13 March, the day after arrival.  She  said  that  she  had
    last seen a doctor about her daughter's burns in July and she was  seen
    every two months.  She had at the time of  the  accident  suffered  56%
    burns.

15. In cross-examination, the appellant  confirmed  she  had  been  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2011, 2012, 2013 and finally  had  arrived  in  2014.
    She said that she had funded these visits from money given  to  her  by
    her ex-husband and she usually came with her children.  She  said  that
    she and her siblings had sold land in 2014 and that was when they  (she
    and her sons) "ran".  She said the land belonged to all of them but the
    money had been given to her as she was the one with problems.  She said
    that she and her siblings were  6  in  number:  only  one  remained  in
    Nigeria.

16. The appellant said that she had fled  to  Zaria  and  stayed  with  her
    mother's sister.  Her husband had found out and  threatened  her,  told
    her to leave and she then went  to  Lagos  and  it  was  then  she  was
    introduced to Mr Williams who was the brother of her  friend  and  they
    had started to talk on the telephone.

17. The appellant said that her husband found out that she was in Lagos and
    that at that time she had a valid visa but her sons did not.  They  had
    to get their visa from him, that she had pretended that they wanted  to
    go on holiday to London with Majid.  She said let  him  get  the  visa,
    that they should then go on holiday and then he could be initiated into
    the cult.  She said he got the visa for them.

18. Asked about the report from Professor Katona  regarding  her  PTSD  she
    said she had been told initially to go for counselling and she  did  so
    every Wednesday.  There was no re-examination.

19. Mr Tufan relied on the  refusal  letters,  submitting  that  there  was
    nothing in the material to suggest that the Ogboni cult or its  members
    have the power to persecute people within Nigeria.  He  submitted  also
    it was averred then that most of the members were Yoruba relying on  WO
    at [18] and [24].  He submitted having had regard to the CPIN given the
    size and population of Nigeria that the appellant could relocate within
    the country.

20. Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant could  not  provide  evidence  to
    show that her family would not be able to support her  financially  and
    that she could get assistance with her medical condition - PTSD  cannot
    return.  He submitted further that the appellant could relocate.

21.  Turning  to  Article  8,  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that,  relying  on  NA
    (Bangladesh), the natural expectation is that the child would return to
    Nigeria with the parent although she is receiving skin grafts it  is  a
    slow process, there was no right to remain.

22. In response, Mr Eaton relied on his skeleton argument, submitting  that
    the appellant was credible and that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  gone
    wrong in assuming that the Ogboni were largely benign.  He submitted it
    was evident from the IRBD, a credible source, that  membership  of  the
    cult was relevant and it was clear that it  had  a  propensity  to  use
    violence.

23. Mr Eaton submitted further that the appellant's  ex-husband  had  shown
    that he was driven on this issue: she had sought to relocate twice  and
    she had been tracked down, the threats being  made  to  her  aunt.   He
    submitted that she would not be safe and, as a  single  woman,  with  a
    British citizen daughter, she would be at risk.  He  submitted  further
    that Article 8 claim was made out, the guidance from the  Secretary  of
    State being in the past that they would not normally seek to  remove  a
    family where there was a British citizen  child.   In  addition,  their
    daughter  had  long-term  serious  and  proper  health  problems  which
    required ongoing treatment.

The Law

24. It is for the appellant to show to the lower standard that she  or  her
    children are at risk of persecution on return to Nigeria.  In assessing
    the appellant's case, I have considered all the evidence in  the  round
    in the medical report from Dr Katona and in the light of the background
    evidence regarding the Ogboni cult.  The "country guidance" are now  of
    a significant vintage.  The first, BL, contains little of relevance and
    little reference to any evidence.  At its highest  it  states  at  [10]
    that there is a lack of objective material supporting  the  proposition
    that police will not or cannot exercise control of the Ogboni  nor  had
    any Convention reason been identified [11].

25. In WO the Tribunal had reference at [13] onwards  to  the  CIPU  Report
    which noted that the Ogboni were a secret society.   It  was  therefore
    hard to obtain reliable information about them.  They also  noted  that
    the society had been powerful historically and at  [17],  the  Tribunal
    noted that there was no authority for the proposition that  the  Ogboni
    have any significant  membership  drawn  from  tribes  other  than  the
    Yoruba.  They also agreed that their power had been curtailed [19]  and
    nothing to support the account of a  level  of  physical  attacks  [20]
    perpetrated by them in that case.  Some  support  for  the  appellant's
    claim arises from what is recorded by the Tribunal at [21] and [22].

26. The material from EASO dates from June 2017 and confirms the  existence
    of the Ogboni and states, relying on a fact-finding mission carried out
    by the French agency OFPRA 2016 that:-

         "According to a 1960 research article, members of secret  societies
         claim to have mystical power,  thereby  affording  them  power  and
         privilege over non-members; societies had  a  selective  membership
         requiring qualification to enter the cult;  the  right  to  'impose
         sanctions' on those who reveal the inner codes  and  procedures  of
         the group to outsiders ...  The Ogboni Society is a caste of Yoruba
         priests who elected and controlled the Oba, the Yoruba  king.   The
         Ogboni  had  great  political  and  societal  powers  (they   could
         ultimately force the Oba to withdraw or kill himself) and  it  used
         to  be  highly  prestigious  to  become  a  member.   According  to
         interlocutors of the  OFPRA  fact-finding  mission,  membership  is
         hereditary for the eldest son or daughter, who  joins  voluntarily,
         even  Christians.   However,  the  Ogboni's  influence   has   been
         declining since the  1990s.   Nowadays,  as  OFPRA's  interlocutors
         remarked, money is a  greater  means  to  access  political  power.
         Secret societies are not visible and members are  supposed  not  to
         share their secrets with outsiders.  One interlocutor compared them
         in this respect with the Freemasons.

         Even when rich and influential people deny that they are members of
         such cults, many people assume they are, simply on the  basis  they
         are rich and powerful".

27. At section 7.3  it  is  noted  that  there  are  different  recruitment
    patterns but this section is concerned mostly with Campus cults.

28. In the second EASO Report, which builds on the 2017 Country  Focus,  it
    is observed that one source, Canadian Immigration  and  Refugee  Board,
    characterises the Ogboni society as a criminal organisation.  It  notes
    that membership is declining and that "The only Yoruba parts of Nigeria
    where  they  still  have  some  real  influence  on   the   traditional
    administration of the cities are in the Ebga, Egbado and Abeokuta parts
    of Nigeria [Ogun and Lagos State]".  Another source, does give  them  a
    greater role, often part of the elite working in the police,  judiciary
    and  government  institutions.   It  is  noted  also  at  3.10.4   that
    membership is primarily voluntary but social pressure and  intimidation
    to join can occur especially if the person has  a  close  history  with
    personal knowledge of the Ogboni and that new members are submitted  to
    initiation rites and carry specific insignia.  The  intimidation  tends
    to occur (3.10.6) where the person has a personal  knowledge  or  where
    the parent has pledged the person would be his or her successor in  the
    society.  Refusal to join in such cases is difficult.  That said it  is
    also said "recent information on such cases could not be  found  within
    the timeframe of this report."

29. Further, it appears that the  secrets  in  terms  of  rituals  are  not
    revealed (IRBD, 14 November 2012, AB  pp6  to  8).   It  is  difficult,
    however to attach much weight on the article from a Nigerian  newspaper
    about the pressure being put on someone to  get  someone  to  join  the
    Ogboni.

30. The IRBD report from 2000 states that no  information  on  that  Ogboni
    ritual in which the first born male child is ritualistically cut on the
    face could be found.  That said there was a passage which reads:-

         "The anthropology professor also described the only  incidence  she
         could think of where the society might actively pursue a person who
         did not want to join was if that person's parents  had  'dedicated'
         their child to the society, sometimes before they were  born,  then
         the society could go after the person and force  them  to  join  to
         ensure the fulfilment of the parents' promise.  As such they  might
         not be approached by the society until they are  thought  ready  to
         join."

31. In terms of sufficiency of protection, it is important to note that the
    appellant's case is that she would returned  as  a  single  woman  with
    children.  In the CPIN on  actors  of  protection  at  [2.3.11]  it  is
    stated:-

         "However, effective protection is not likely  to  be  available  in
         areas where there is armed or civil conflict including  some  parts
         of  northeast  Nigeria,  the  Niger  Delta  and  the  Middle  Belt.
         Further,  women,   LGB   persons   and   non-indigenes   may   face
         discrimination which  prevents  them  from  being  able  to  access
         effective protection (see country policy and information  notes  on
         Women  fearing  gender-based  harm   or   violence   and   Internal
         relocation)".  That note is not available.

32. That said, the section on women in the  CPIN  Country  Background  Note
    from January 2020 at section 16 includes material indicating that women
    face significant problems including a lack of a comprehensive  law  for
    combatting violence against women and in respect of  domestic  violence
    (16.2); and, that the level of domestic violence is very high.

33. With  regard  to  single  women,  the  indication  is  that  there  are
    difficulties, and at section 16.8 there  is  material  suggesting  that
    police often turn away domestic violence victims  if  they  report  the
    offence continuing to view the issue as a private matter  which  should
    remain within the boundaries of the marital home and the  police  often
    refuse to intervene in  domestic  disputes  or  blame  the  victim  for
    provoking the abuse.

34. With regards to internal relocation, at [2.2.5] it stated that a person
    fearing a non-state actor is likely to be able to relocate  to  another
    part of Nigeria depending on the nature of  the  threat  but  "however,
    relocation may be more difficult for  single  women  and  non-indigenes
    without access to support networks."

35. In assessing the appellant's evidence, I  have  considered  it  in  the
    round through the prism of the background material and bearing in  mind
    that she suffers from PTSD.  That, I accept, following the report  from
    Dr Katona may make it difficult for her to recall matters  although  in
    this case the PTSD  is  related  primarily  to  what  happened  to  her
    daughter who was badly scalded and scarred when  she  was  young.  That
    happened in the United Kingdom.

36. With regard to the scarring  on the MOB's abdomen,  this  is  noted  by
    Southwark Social Services in the material provided by them  and  it  is
    evident from their interview with him that he said that the scarring on
    his stomach was carried out by his father with three or four men.

37. The appellant also said in response to [Q28] that it is the father  who
    is looking for MOB and not her per se [27].  She was  asked  about  the
    cult [Q50 onwards] and what she said, about a grandfather joining  then
    the father and then initiating sons, is consistent with the  background
    material.  It is not inconsistent with the material that  she  did  not
    know about the cult until her husband told her  about  it,  given  that
    membership is secret. Given what was done to MOB, it is plausible  that
    she would leave to go to Zaria to stay with a  relative  and  that  the
    former husband would seek to find them.

38. It is, however, difficult to understand  why,  if  the  father  was  so
    insistent on having control over his son, that he traced her  to  Zaria
    and made threats that he acquiesced in obtaining  a  visa  which  would
    allow the appellant to take MOB out of Nigeria and out of his  control.
    That aspect of the claim causes me significant concern.

39. I accept that the appellant went to live in Lagos in  her  account  and
    she did not know how to find out that they were in Lagos.   [Q94].   It
    is also evident that she volunteered  the  information  [101]  that  in
    2013, early 2014 her husband renewed  the  passports  for  another  six
    months and that she had convinced the husband to renew the passports as
    she had said they are not going to run away.  She  said  that  she  had
    contacted him and that he would have  found  out  they  were  in  Lagos
    anyway.  [Q109].

40. In her witness statement she said that she contacted  her  husband  and
    returned to Abeokuta with the children [9] and she  explains  that  she
    refers to extending the visa for six months as what she  had  meant  to
    say rather than the  passports.   That  is,  I  consider,  a  plausible
    explanation as a passport must be renewed for six months.  But there is
    little explanation for a failure to claim asylum for some three  years.



41. I consider also that it is wholly implausible that the appellant's  ex-
    husband, who at best is a very controlling individual who  had  pursued
    her across Nigeria would have given her the  opportunity  to  take  the
    child he wanted to initiate into the cult, out of the country.

42. There is nothing implausible in  the  appellant  knowing  some  details
    about the Ogboni cult as she explains in her  interview  that  she  had
    seen films about them and similar publicly available material; it  does
    not follow that she learned about it from the husband.

43. Why her husband put a mark on their son I simply do not know.   In  her
    screening interview,  to  which  I  accept  care  must  be  taken  when
    attributing weight, her answers at 3.1 are somewhat  confused.   Whilst
    the refusal letter does at paragraph 45 (refer to  the  appellant  when
    offered assisted voluntary return), stating that she  left  Nigeria  to
    flee domestic violence from her husband, that has not been produced.

44. Drawing these factors together, I note that there are positive  factors
    to be taken into account.  The account of what had happened in  Nigeria
    is broadly consistent and  the  appellant's  second  son  has  scarring
    consistent with tribal initiation.  While I am mindful of  the  dangers
    of attaching too much weight to delays in claiming asylum, in this case
    there is little or no proper explanation for the delay.

45. Taking all of these factors into account, I am not satisfied  that  the
    appellant's account of her husband pursuing her with threats  is  true.
    Nor am I satisfied that he maintains any adverse interest in her or his
    sons, given he was prepared to assist in them leaving Nigeria.

46. I accept that MOB has been scarred and I note  his  evidence  given  to
    Social Services some years ago that it was done by his father and  four
    other men.  I am in the circumstances satisfied that he has been marked
    by some ritual regarding the Ogboni but it does not mean that he is  at
    imminent risk.  He is not yet 18 and there is no  indication  that  his
    father is dead or that he would at any  time  proximate  to  return  be
    forced to take up a position within any cult.

47. Given that I am not satisfied that there is any risk to  the  appellant
    or her son MOB and seven years have elapsed since they left Nigeria, is
    it not necessary for me to consider whether a sufficiency of protection
    or whether internal relocation would be necessary. I therefore  dismiss
    the appeal on asylum grounds.

48. Given that I am not satisfied that the appellant faces any risk of ill-
    treatment on return to Nigeria, I am not satisfied that she is entitled
    to humanitarian protection.

49. I turn next to the claim based  on  article  8  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases

    (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
    public interest.

    (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
    interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
    persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
    to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

    (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
    interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
    persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
    financially independent, because such persons-

         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

    (4) Little weight should be given to-

         (a) a private life, or

         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
    a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
    precarious.

    (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
    United Kingdom."

50. Paragraph 276(1) ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules provides:

    276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:

    ...

    (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK
    for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) and it
    would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

51. The first issue in dispute is whether the  appellant's  daughter  is  a
    British citizen.

52. The starting point is that there is a presumption in law that  the  man
    named on a birth  certificate  is  the  father.   Whilst  that  can  be
    displaced, the parties seeking to do so must do so on  the  balance  of
    probability.

53. In this case the inference from the Secretary of  State's  position  is
    that the appellant and/or Mr Williams lied when registering the  birth.
    The basis for that is circumstantial in that it relates to the date  of
    birth of the child, less than 40 weeks after the appellant  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom.  I take judicial not of the fact that the  expected
    date of delivery is calculated from the last maternal period.   If  the
    appellant arrived on 12 March 2014, on day 14 of  her  cycle,  expected
    due date of delivery would have been 7 December making  delivery  about
    two weeks early rather than 4, hence not premature.  I am not satisfied
    that the Secretary of State has shown to the  necessary  standard  that
    the appellant has perpetrated a fraud and on that basis I am  satisfied
    that daughter F is a British citizen.   Further, although I have doubts
    about the appellant's evidence, there is the evidence of  Mr  William's
    application for a passport for F, and his registration  as  the  father
    long before the asylum claim was made which I take into account, and  I
    find dispels  any  doubts  that  may  flow  for  some  aspects  of  the
    appellant's case.

54. On that basis, the daughter is a qualifying child as are  both  of  the
    older sons as they have now lived in the United Kingdom in excess of  7
    years.

55. I turn next to NA (Bangladesh) at paragraphs 29 to 30

    29.      It follows from that analysis that the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         was right to reject  the  submission  that  "the  powerful  reasons
         doctrine" remained good law: to put it more plainly, the seven-year
         provision does not create a presumption in favour of  a  seven-year
         child, and thus their  parents,  being  granted  leave  to  remain.
         Accordingly, ground 1 of the appeal must fail.

    30.  It is important, however, to emphasise that the approach  approved
         by Lord Carnwath in KO (Nigeria) does not provide for a presumption
         in the opposite direction. It represents no  more  than  a  common-
         sense starting-point, adopted for the reasons given at paras. 18-19
         of his judgment. It remains necessary in every case to evaluate all
         the circumstances  in  order  to  establish  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK,  with  his  or  her
         parents. If the conclusion of the evaluation is that this would not
         be reasonable, then the  "hypothesis"  that  the  parents  will  be
         leaving has to be abandoned and the  family  as  a  whole  will  be
         entitled to leave to remain. (To spell it out: in  the  case  of  a
         qualifying child that will be under paragraph 276ADE  (1);  in  the
         case of the parents it will be under article  8,  applying  section
         117B (6); and in the case  of  any  non-qualifying  child  it  will
         derive from the fact that the parents have leave.) Ms  Masood  made
         it clear that the Secretary of  State  acknowledged  that  in  that
         evaluation the fact that the child had been in the UK for more than
         seven years would be a material consideration.

56. I start from the position that the daughter is a  British  citizen  who
    continues to require significant input from the NHS  to  which  she  is
    entitled for the burns she suffered as a child.  I accept that she  has
    ongoing needs including further skin grafts and I accept also that this
    is a significant point in her favour.  I accept also that both  of  the
    boys have undergone spent a significant part  of  their  lives  in  the
    United Kingdom.  They have grown, their adolescence has been here and I
    accept the material provided that they now have ties with the education
    system here and with peer groups and friends outside the family.

57. Given what was disclosed by the children to Social Services  and  given
    that I accept that the appellant is now estranged from her  husband,  I
    consider that there would, on the basis of the material  regarding  the
    position of  single  women  in  Nigeria,  be  some  difficulty  in  her
    relocating there without support.  I accept that the "powerful reasons"
    doctrine does not apply.

58. I approach the facts of this  case  on  the  "real  world"  basis.  The
    appellant has no leave to be here and neither  do  her  sons.  But  the
    daughter has every right to be here as a British Citizen.  Further,  if
    it is not reasonable for her to go to live in Nigeria, then her  mother
    (and siblings) need to be given leave.

59.  I  consider  that  on  the  facts  of  this  case  in  particular  the
    difficulties arising for the daughter who  is  a  British  Citizen  and
    would be compelled to leave if her mother were  removed,  and  who  has
    significant health needs which would not be met adequately  in  Nigeria
    to the standard here, that it would not be reasonable to expect her  to
    leave. I find that her best interests require  her  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom to get the care to which she is entitled.  While I  have
    not accepted the appellant' case as regards  asylum,  I  am  satisfied,
    having had regard to the material from Social Services that there is no
    contact with family in Nigeria; that the relationship with  the  former
    husband has broken down and that the appellant would  be  returning  to
    Nigeria as a single woman with three children.   I find that she  would
    find it difficult to adjust again to life there, and would struggle  to
    provide accommodation and support for her children.

60. With regard to the specific ages between  which  the  appellant's  sons
    spent in this country that it would not be reasonable to expect them to
    leave the United Kingdom and accordingly her sons meet the requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.

61. In all  the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  also  that  there  would
    accordingly be very compelling circumstances  such  that,  pursuant  to
    Section 117B(6), of the 2002  Act,  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    expect the appellant to leave the United Kingdom and therefore I  allow
    her appeal on that basis.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by:

      a) dismissing it on asylum grounds and humanitarian grounds.

      b) Allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 29 July 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04305/2018V


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|By Skype for Business                         |                              |
|On 4 November 2020                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    S B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel instructed by Tower Hamlets Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal was conducted remotely via Skype for business. Neither
    party objected, and although the video feed failed on several
    occasions, it proved possible to continue the hearing using audio only.



 2. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge MacDonald dismissing her asylum, protection and
    human rights case and upholding the decision of the Secretary of State
    to refuse that.

 3. The appellant's case is this.  She is a victim of domestic violence
    from her former husband.  The ex-husband had unknown to her taken both
    of their sons to an Ogboni Fraternity meeting at which the younger son,
    who was 5 years of age at the time, was chosen.  He was scarred in
    according with the tradition on the left-hand side of his abdomen and
    as a consequence would have to join the Ogboni upon turning 18.

 4. The appellant's account is also that she had fled the family home with
    her sons and stayed for four weeks with her cousin's family in Zaria in
    Northern Nigeria.  She was tracked down there by the ex-husband, who
    made threats to her and to the cousin's family.  She then ran away to a
    friend in Lagos but when he saw the threats which she had received he
    too asked the appellant and her children to leave.  It was as a result
    of that that she fears persecution on return to Nigeria.

 5. In addition, since she has come to the United Kingdom the appellant was
    in a relationship, albeit for a short time, with a Mr William, who it
    now appears is a British citizen or had the right of abode at the time
    of the appellant's daughter's birth and I will turn to that in more
    detail in my decision later, it forming part of ground 3.  The
    Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's account and at the
    time of the writing of the refusal letter did not accept that Mr
    William had the right of abode or was settled in the United Kingdom.

 6. The judge heard evidence from the appellant, who was represented by Mr
    Eaton as she is today.  There was also put before the judge a bundle
    which contained amongst other things a report from the European Asylum
    Support Office("EASO") on country conditions in Nigeria.  There was
    also before the judge a medical report from Professor Katona relating
    to the appellant's mental health.  In addition to these there is also
    substantial documentation from Southwark Social Services because the
    family had been of concern to them for a number of years.

 7. The judge took the appellant's case at its high point and concluded
    that he was not satisfied that the appellant was at risk from the
    Ogboni.  In doing so he did consider the report from the European
    Asylum Support Office and it was noted that he was provided with a
    number of articles from Nigerian newspapers which suggested that they
    were more dangerous than the background information by EASO supported
    but attached no weight to them on the basis that they go against the
    considered and detailed content of the country information produced by
    the government-sponsored bodies.  The judge concluded that he was not
    persuaded that the Ogboni posed a threat either to the appellant, her
    son M or the appellant's other children if any returned to Nigeria and
    dismissed the appeal pursuant to Articles 2 and 3.

 8. In turning to Article 8 the judge considered first that he was not
    satisfied that F, the appellant's daughter born in the United Kingdom,
    was a British citizen as he was not satisfied on the basis of a
    submission made to him by the Secretary of State, who had by this point
    accepted that Mr William did have either a right of abode or indefinite
    leave to remain, was in fact F's father, and the judge also concluded
    that having read the social enquiry report, it would not be
    disproportionate to require the children to leave Nigeria.  He did not
    turn his mind in any great detail to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 9. The appellant applied for permission to challenge that decision on
    three grounds:

10. First, that the judge had erred in his assessment of the evidence of
    the threat from the Ogboni in that in particular he had failed properly
    to explain why he had rejected the objective evidence which he had
    found to contradict the EASO report and failed in particular to take
    into account evidence from the Canadian IRB, failed to give weight to
    the evidence that the first applicant's husband had made threats
    against her of sufficient severity that they fled to family who later
    asked them to leave, failed to take into account that the younger child
    had been the victim of torture in the terms of the ritual scarring and
    did not take in account that she had been the victim of domestic
    violence.

11. Second, that the judge had failed to consider other factors regarding
    the risk of very significant obstacles on return, specifically the
    report of Dr Katona indicating that the appellant has PTSD, and a
    deteriorating mental state; and, also the material from Southwark
    Social Services indicating concern on that point.

12. Ground 3, that although at all material times the respondent had
    proceeded on the basis that F was her father's daughter it was only in
    the 16 September 2019 that it was said that the issue was raised of
    whether F is the daughter and the judge failed to give weight to the
    evidence Mr William himself clearly considered F his daughter in 2015
    when he had been added to the birth certificate as her father at the
    time she was born and also had applied for a passport for her in 2015.

13. I turn first to ground 1.  I am satisfied that the judge had failed to
    give reasons for failing to take into account the material other than
    that set out in the EASO report.  The judge has not explained why the
    evidence is contradictory and it would appear that rather than being
    contradictory or inconsistent it simply fills in gaps.  The EASO report
    is relatively limited in that it takes a "broad brush" approach as to
    the existence of the Ogboni but gives no detail of any specific
    incidences in which the Ogboni cult had been involved in any
    activities.  That is not the same with the newspapers and it is not the
    same with regard to the report from IRB in Canada.

14. Whilst it is open to a judge to attach different weight to material
    because for example one source is seen as more authoritative than
    another, the simple fact that it comes from a government-sponsored
    source is not a sufficient reason for rejecting material and more to
    the point, it does not apply to the material supplied by IRB in Canada,
    which is a well-recognised and government-sponsored body.

15. With regard to the suggestion by the Secretary of State that this is in
    fact immaterial because the threat to the appellant is not imminent and
    indeed the threat to her son is not imminent in the sense that it would
    not apply to him until he were 18, at which point he would be at risk
    from the Ogboni society if he did not want to participate in their
    activities.  I consider that this is not made out.

16. As Mr Eaton submitted, the threat is already in existence, there have
    been threats to the appellant because she has resisted the activities
    of the father, who, I accept, cannot in reality in these circumstances
    be separated out from the Ogboni cult, he would appear to be carrying
    out his activities in line with what they would want as he is a member
    of the cult himself and to that extent it cannot be said that this is
    simply a fear of what would happen at some indeterminate point in the
    future and accordingly, it is arguable that there would be an imminent
    risk on return, given what had happened in the past, the judge having
    proceeded on the basis that he took the case at its highest, which by
    implication includes the evidence that the appellant has suffered at
    the hands of her husband and that he had traced her twice across
    Nigeria, and for these reasons, I consider that ground 1 is made out.
    I would also add with respect to ground 1 that the judge did fail to
    note that the younger son had been subject to ill-treatment.  Although
    this is perhaps of less materiality than the other reasons the ground
    is made out.

17. Ground 2.  The Secretary of State has very fairly conceded in this case
    that the reasoning is not sufficient.  I agree.  The judge has not, in
    assessing whether the appellant would have difficulty on relating and
    particularly in looking after her children when returned to Nigeria,
    had regard to the evidence of Professor Katona as to her suffering from
    PTSD which is worsening and a deteriorating mental state which would
    render her unable to work to support herself and her children.  It
    would have been open to the judge to disagree with that opinion, given
    proper reasons, but he simply has not engaged with it.

18. The judge has in reality not engaged either with the material from
    Southwark Social Services.  There is a detailed report which details
    concerns but the judge has, and I say this with some concern, quoted
    selectively from that material and has omitted relevant material, and
    to that extent his reference at paragraph 91 that the boys were doing
    well at school is selective, and I am satisfied he has failed to give
    proper consideration to all the evidence on that point.

19. With regards to ground 3, I note that the Secretary of State is not
    conceding that Mr William is the father of F but is in effect conceding
    that the reasoning that the judge gave is not sufficient.  It is, I
    consider it fair to say, that the judge had not had regard to the fact
    that Mr William had in 2015 been present at the registration of F's
    birth.  As a matter of law he would have to have been present to
    register the birth for his name to be put on the certificate as he was
    not at that point, nor has he ever been as far as I am aware, married
    to the appellant.  That was not taken into account nor that he had in
    2015 applied for a passport.  These are material matters and are
    relevant to the issue of paternity when what the Secretary of State is
    seeking to do here is to say that, on no particularly good evidential
    basis, the judge should have looked behind an official document,
    specifically a birth certificate, and for these reasons also I consider
    that ground 3 is made out.

20. Accordingly, for these reasons I find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and I set it
    aside.

21. Having invited the parties to address me as to how the decision should
    be remade, I consider that it would be appropriate to retain the appeal
    in the Upper Tribunal.



Notice of Decision & Directions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

 3. Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and  the  UTIAC  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of the view that
    the forthcoming hearing in this appeal can and should be held  face-to-
    face on a date to be fixed as it may be necessary to have further  oral
    evidence.

 4. Any party wishing to adduce further evidence must serve it at least  10
    working days before the next hearing,  accompanied  by  an  application
    made pursuant  to  rule  15  (2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 explaining why it should be permitted




       Signed                                Date 9 November 2020


       Jeremy K H Rintoul
       Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

