





Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04072/2017

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th February 2018                          |On 23rd February 2018         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                     HB

                         (Anonymity Direction made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Deborah Revill Counsel instructed by Hunter Stone
Law   Solicitors

For the Respondent :   Ms Isherwood  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Bangladesh. Having considered all the
    circumstances,  I  consider  it  appropriate  to  make   an   anonymity
    direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M P W Harris.  By decision promulgated on 27  June  2017
    Judge Harris dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of
    the respondent to refuse her asylum, humanitarian protection or  relief
    otherwise on human rights grounds either under  Articles  2  and  3  or
    under Article 8.

 3. By decision dated 6 December 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  Kamara  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in the following terms:-

     2 It is arguable that in refusing  the  application  to  adjourn  this
    protection appeal for the appellant to be adequately  represented,  the
    judge  arguably,  failed  to  adhere  to   the   guidance   in   Ngaiwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 481 (IAC).

 4. It is only on the basis of the refusal of the  adjournment  application
    by the appellant that leave was sought and granted. It is  argued  that
    in refusing the adjournment the judges failed to consider whether there
    was good reason to adjourn and failed to take consider whether the case
    could be fairly and justly determined.

    Factual background

 5. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom in 24  October  2009  to
    study.  It  appears  that  the   appellant   stopped   studying   after
    approximately 9 months because she could no longer  afford  the  course
    and living expenses. The appellant did  not  have  leave  to  work.  On
    ceasing studying the appellant did not leave  the  United  Kingdom  but
    remained.

 6. It is also to be noted that the appellant had at the time and  has  now
    at least 2 brothers in the United Kingdom with their families. There is
    no suggestion that the brothers and/or their families are in the United
    Kingdom without lawful leave. Prior to coming to the UK  the  appellant
    claims that she was living with her elder brother  and  his  family  in
    Bangladesh.

 7. In 2011 the appellant met KM, who is also a  Bangladesh  national.  The
    appellant met KM, whilst she was working in a  shop.  It  appears  that
    they became friends,  exchanged  telephone  numbers  and  ultimately  a
    relationship developed.

 8. The appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside
    the rules on 13 October 2012. This  was  refused  on  8  October  2013.
    Despite the refusal of the  application,  the  appellant  continued  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 9. In January 2014 the appellant told her sister-in-law that she wanted to
    marry KM. It is suggested  that  the  appellant's  brothers  and  their
    families in the United Kingdom agreed to the  marriage  but  the  elder
    brother in Bangladesh did  not.  It  is  claimed  that  the  family  in
    Bangladesh wanted the appellant to marry a cousin in Bangladesh.

10. The appellant married KM on the 4th May 2014. KM's status to enter  and
    remain in the United Kingdom prior to the application  is  unclear.  At
    the time of the present application he  became  a  dependant  upon  the
    appellant's application. It does not appear that KM otherwise  had  any
    status to remain in the UK in his  own  right.  The  appellant  and  KM
    appear to be living with  one  of  the  appellant's  brothers  and  his
    family.

11. On the 7th October 2016 the appellant claimed asylum. The basis of  the
    appellant's claim was that she could not return to Bangladesh with  her
    husband as her family in Bangladesh did not accept her marriage and she
    and her family would be at  risk  on  return  to  Bangladesh  from  her
    brother and from the cousin.

12. The substantive asylum interview took place on 7  April  2017.  At  the
    time of the interview the legal representatives for the appellant  were
    MR Solicitors, who were in attendance at the interview.

13.  The application for international protection  or  right  otherwise  to
    remain on human rights grounds was refused by decision dated 13th April
    2017. MR Solicitors on the 26th April lodged  a  Notice  of  Appeal  on
    behalf of the appellant. MR Solicitors  by  covering  letter  with  the
    grounds of appeal notified the Tribunal on the  26th  April  that  they
    were acting on behalf of the appellant.

14. Thereafter by fax dated the 27th  April  2017  Hunter  Stone  Law  gave
    notice that they were representing the appellant. That fax was sent  at
    17.35 hours on the 27th April and stamped as received on  the  28th  at
    Arnheim House, the IAC Tribunal back office.

15. As part of the submission before me it  was  being  asserted  that  the
    appellant was dissatisfied with  the  work  of  MR  Solicitors  but  no
    details or substance have  been  given  as  to  the  reasons  for  such
    dissatisfaction.  Equally there is no evidence from  MR  Solicitors  to
    confirm or deny any of the later allegations made  against  them,  that
    they did not  expeditiously  send  the  file  to  the  appellant's  new
    representatives. It may be that they had a right  to  retain  the  file
    until the appellant paid for the work done. Such is speculation at best
    and is not to be acted upon. However there is no evidence from MR.

16. By Notice from the Tribunal dated and sent out on 27th  April  2017  by
    Hatton Cross hearing  centre  the  appellant  and  MR  Solicitors  were
    notified that the Pre-Hearing Review of the appeal would take place  on
    the 11 May 2017 with the full hearing listed for  the  25th  May  2017.
    Clearly the notice was sent out at a time  prior  to  receiving  notice
    that Hunter Stone Law were acting. The notice of hearing was also  sent
    to the respondent.

17.  As stated Hunter Stone Law by fax stamped  as  received  on  the  28th
    April 2017 notified the Tribunal that they were acting.  Whilst  Hunter
    Stone Law have alleged that  they  also  notified  the  respondent,  as
    asserted in paragraph 4 of the grounds applying for  leave  to  appeal,
    the respondent has denied that they were ever given notice. No evidence
    has been submitted by the Hunter Stone Law to  substantiate  that  they
    gave notice to the respondent.

18.  The  respondent  maintain  that  they  had  not  had  notice  of   any
    representative other than MR. The respondent served their bundle in the
    case on MR Solicitors.  The respondent's bundle  was  received  by  the
    Tribunal on 19 May 2017.

19. By fax of the 10th May 2017 timed  at  18.02  Hunter  Stone  Law  again
    notified the Tribunal that they  were  acting  and  provided  a  signed
    authority to act from the appellant. With that letter Hunter Stone  Law
    submitted a Reply Notice for  the  Pre-Hearing  Review.  By  the  Reply
    Notice the appellant and the representatives were indicating that  they
    were ready to proceed with the appeal. Indeed in the grounds for  leave
    it is acknowledged that as far as the appellant and  Hunter  Stone  Law
    were concerned the case would be ready to  proceed  on  the  25th  May.
    Again  there  is  no  evidence  that  Hunter  Stone  Law  notified  the
    respondent or requested a copy of the bundle from the respondent.

20. Within the reply notice no witnesses  other  than  the  appellant  were
    identified or named; no expert report was required; no technical issues
    or issues of law were notified or raised, whether in the notice  or  in
    the covering letter. There was no other material information. There  is
    no suggestion  that  other  members  of  the  appellant's  family  were
    intending to give evidence.  The evidence appears to have  been  coming
    from the appellant alone.

21.  I would note that there was nothing to prevent Hunter Stone  Law  from
    taking a statement from the appellant or indeed from any other  witness
    and dealing with the issues raised in the  refusal  letter.   The  case
    remained listed to proceed on the 25th May.

22. On 23 May 2017  timed  at  11.57  by  fax  Hunter  Stone  Law  made  an
    application for an adjournment. The grounds set out are:-

     i) They had not received their client's previous file of  papers  from
        the previous representatives, MR Solicitors.

    ii) The only document, which the appellant had, was the refusal letter.
        The copies of the screening  interview  and  substantive  interview
        were with the previous solicitors, as well  any  recording  of  the
        interview. Hunter Stone Law knew of  no  reason  why  the  previous
        solicitors had not forwarded the file.

   iii) They had requested the transfer of the file on 27 April 2017 with a
        follow-up letter  of  8  May.  They  had  telephoned  the  previous
        solicitors on 12 May and been promised the file would  be  sent  on
        the 15th May.

    iv) They further contacted MR, although no date  is  given,  and  again
        discovered that no action had been taken to send the file.

     v) They had not received the respondent's bundle.

    vi) In the circumstances they  felt  that  they  could  not  fully  and
        properly prepare the appellant's  claim.  In  the  absence  of  the
        screening interview or the substantive asylum interview they  could
        not prepare a detailed statement from  the  client  and  could  not
        address the issues raised in the reasons for refusal letter.

   vii) They requested that the appeal be adjourned for 4 weeks.

23. The application for an adjournment was considered by  Designated  Judge
    Manuel at Hatton Cross and the application  was  refused.  The  reasons
    given for refusing the application are: -

    The appellant entered the UK  in  2009.  She  has  had  ample  time  to
    prepare. The previous  solicitors'  file  is  not  needed.  This  is  a
    straightforward appeal.

24. Clearly the judge was satisfied  that  there  was  no  good  reason  to
    adjourn and that the case could be justly  determined  given  that  the
    appellant had had ample time to put her case in order.

25. By fax of 24  May  timed  at  16.26  Hunter  Stone  Law  renewed  their
    application. Amongst other things it was suggested that it was material
    that the appellant's problems had only started after  she  married  and
    not in 2009 as suggested in the original  refusal  of  the  adjournment
    application. The appellant had married in 2014 and had  known,  on  her
    version of events, that her family in Bangladesh did not agree  to  the
    marriage at that time. The appellant  had  had  3  years  in  which  to
    prepare her claim and had not  claimed  asylum  for  some  three  years
    during which time she had been able to instruct solicitors and  ensured
    that she was represented at the asylum interview.

26. It is further suggested that in an asylum appeal it was  necessary  for
    the appellant to have the screening and substantive asylum interview to
    enable solicitors to prepare a statement. This was an appeal centred on
    the appellant's account and the credibility of that account. There  was
    nothing that prevented the solicitors taking a  statement  setting  out
    the basis of the appellant's claim.  There  was  nothing  stopping  the
    solicitors from requesting a bundle from the respondent if that was all
    that was necessary to prepare the case.

27. The respondent's bundle other than  the  interviews  contain  a  single
    document submitted by the appellant from  the  Bangldesh  Islami  Satir
    Shongsta, which merely confirms the appellant's address in  Bangladesh.
    There were no other supporting evidence or documents submitted  to  the
    respondent.

28. As a final matter in paragraph 14 of their renewed application  for  an
    adjournment Hunter Stone Law set out the following:-

     14 Please note that if the Tribunal is still not minded  to  grant  an
    adjournment in this case we have advised the Appellant  not  to  attend
    the hearing as we have been unable to advise her in detail in  relation
    to her case  without  the  necessary  papers.  We  cannot  prepare  the
    appellant for the hearing and address the issues  raised  in  the  RFRL
    without the file of papers. As such if an adjournment is not granted in
    this case and the Tribunal still wish to proceed with the hearing  then
    we request that the Tribunal make  a  decision  on  this  case  on  the
    information before them  and  will  proceed  with  the  onwards  appeal
    process in relation to this issue.

29. On 25 May 2017 the appeal  appeared  before  Judge  Harris.  The  judge
    considered the adjournment request as is evident from paragraphs  8  to
    12 of the decision. Having refused the adjournment the judge went on to
    decide the appeal on the  basis  of  the  evidence  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

30. As set out above the only basis for challenging the decision  of  Judge
    Harris is that an adjournment should have been granted.

    Legal framework

31. In exercising the power to grant an adjournment Rule 2, 4 and 28 of the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 are relevant. They provide: -

    2 Overriding objective and parties' obligations to cooperate  with  the
    Tribunal

    (1) The overriding objective of these Rules is to enable  the  Tribunal
    to deal with cases fairly and justly.

    (2) Dealing with the case fairly and justly includes-

    a) dealing with the  case  in  ways  which  are  proportionate  to  the
    importance of the case, the complexity of the issues,  the  anticipated
    cost and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal;

    b) avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
    proceeding;

    c) ensuring, so far as is practical,  that  the  parties  are  able  to
    participate fully in the proceeding;

    d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; and

    e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible with  proper  consideration  of
    the issues.

    4 Case management powers

    (1) Subject to the provisions of the 2007 Act and any other  enactment,
    the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.

    (2) The Tribunal may give a direction in relation  to  the  conduct  or
    disposal of proceedings at any time, including  a  direction  amending,
    suspending or setting aside an earlier direction

    (3) In particular,  and  without  restricting  the  general  powers  in
    paragraphs (1) and (2), the Tribunal may-...

    (h) adjourn or postpone a hearing

    ....

    28 Hearing in a party's absence

    (1) If a party fails to attend the hearing  the  Tribunal  may  proceed
    with the hearing if the Tribunal-

    (a) is satisfied that the party has been notified  of  the  hearing  or
    that reasonable steps have been  taken  to  notify  the  party  of  the
    hearing; and

    (b) considers that it is in the interests of justice  to  proceed  with
    the hearing

32.  The  appellant's  representatives  are  seeking  to  assert  that   in
    accordance with the overriding objective the case could not be  decided
    justly and fairly.  The appellant's representatives seek to  rely  upon
    the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418.  It  has
    to be noted that the case is  based  upon  the  2005  Procedure  Rules.
    However it is suggested that the principles set out  in  the  case  are
    applicable in the present case.

33. In Nwaigwe the representatives of the appellant's  representatives  had
    written to the Tribunal indicating that the appellant was ill and could
    not attend the hearing. The judge had heard the appeal but in so  doing
    had considered whether there was good reason to  adjourn  and  not  the
    element of whether the appeal could be fairly  and  justly  determined.
    [see paragraph 10]. The judge  had  accordingly  failed  to  apply  the
    dominant test of fairness and had misdirected himself.

34. The Nwaigwe case makes reference to SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA
    Civ 1284. While the  case  was  a  case  dealing  with  the  fast-track
    procedure, it still involved a request for an adjournment. Lord Justice
    Moses at paragraph 8 states:-

    8 The principle applicable to the request for an adjournment to  adduce
    evidence on  behalf  of  the  appellant  was  not  in  dispute.  It  is
    fundamental that the  parties  should  be  allowed  to  answer  adverse
    material by evidence as well as argument (see, e.g., In Re. D [1996] AC
    593 at 603) and all the more so where the subject  matter,  such  as  a
    claim for asylum, demands  the  highest  standards  of  fairness  (R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ex-parte Fayed [1998] 1  WLR
    763-777)

35. In the headnote of Nwaigwe Mr Justice McCloskey sets the matter out  in
    the following terms: -

    If a Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    consideration; permitting immaterial considerations to intrude; denying
    the party concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply the correct  test;
    and acting irrationally. In practice, in most cases the  question  will
    be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his  right  to  a
    fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is  challenged  on  fairness
    grounds, it is important to recognise that the question for  the  Upper
    Tribunal is not whether the FtT (First-tier Tribunal) acted reasonably.
    Rather, the test to be  applied  is  that  of  fairness:  was  there  a
    deprivation of the affected parties right to a fair hearing?

36. Reliance is also placed on the case of AK (Iran) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ
    941. I note within the decision of Lord Justice  Sedley,  paragraph  12
    onwards, the issue with  regard  to  adjournment  was  that  the  legal
    representatives had abandoned the appellant the day before and were not
    in attendance at the hearing. The appellant was in  attendance  at  the
    hearing. The comment by Lord Justice Sedley at paragraph 13  is  worthy
    of note:-

    13... we are concerned that any lawyer should consider  it  permissible
    to withdraw from representing client the day before the  hearing,  when
    no alternative representation is available.

37. In the present circumstances Hunter Stones Law are not suggesting  that
    they were withdrawing from representing the  client  merely  that  they
    were refusing to accept the decision of the Tribunal and were  advising
    their client not to accept the decision of the Tribunal. Indeed  Hunter
    Stones Law continue to act for the appellant even  instructing  counsel
    to represent  the  appellant  before  me.  Hunter  Stone  Law  had  not
    abandoned the appellant but had flouted the order of the  Tribunal  and
    determined not to comply with  the  Tribunal  decision  to  refuse  the
    adjournment. They had not abandoned their client  but  decided  not  to
    attend and advised their client not to attend.

38.  The conduct of the solicitors, Hunter Stone Law, is not one that is to
    be commended and leaves much to be desired.

39. However equally it is  for  an  appellant  to  pursue  their  claim  to
    protection with due expedition and diligence. There was much to be made
    of the point by the judge who originally refused the  adjournment  that
    this was a simple case given the responses within the Reply Notice. The
    evidence consisted of the account given in interview by the  appellant.
    There was nothing otherwise in the evidence. Had the appellant and  her
    representative attended, there was no additional evidence  produced  by
    the respondent that would take them  by  surprise.  The  basis  of  the
    assessment of the case by the respondent had been on the basis  of  the
    appellant's account alone.

40.  As no other evidence had been submitted it was in principle  a  matter
    of taking a statement from the appellant. No other witnesses have  been
    notified. No expert evidence was required. No technical  areas  of  law
    had been raised. No other  documentary  evidence  had  been  submitted.
    There was in the  circumstances  no  good  reason  for  adjourning  the
    hearing. Even at that stage had approaches been made to the  respondent
    no  doubt  a  copy  of  the  bundle  could  have  been  obtained.   The
    respondent's bundle are available as attachments to emails.

41. I note that at the time of the hearing before me  there  was  still  no
    appellant's bundle and no application to admit  further  evidence.  The
    directions from the Upper Tribunal are that the cases should  be  ready
    to proceed to be reheard if an error  of  law  is  found.  I  put  such
    considerations aside as I am considering the circumstances  as  at  the
    time of the decisions to refuse the adjournments.

42. As pointed out in the cases a person  should  have  an  opportunity  of
    answering any adverse evidence. In the instant case the  only  evidence
    was the interviews. The Reasons for Refusal Letter had clearly set  out
    the issues. Judge Manuel and Judge Harris had  specifically  considered
    the nature of the evidence against the appellant and was satisfied that
    there was no good reason for an adjournment.

43. I would note in concluding the issue of whether  the  appeal  could  be
    fairly  decided  Judge  Harris  specifically  considers  the  issue  of
    fairness as is evident from penultimate sentence of paragraph  12.  The
    judge specifically considers the issue of fairness and whether  or  not
    an individual could have a fair  hearing  and  gives  reasons  why  the
    failure of the appellant to attend would undermine the very claim  that
    she could not receive a fair hearing.

44. There is nothing to indicate that had the appellant attended and  given
    evidence, that a judge may have found that  the  appellant's  case  was
    credible, truthful and correct. On the basis of such findings the judge
    would then have to apply the law to the evidence and determine  whether
    or not on the appellant's version of events the appellant had made  out
    that she was entitled to international protection.

45. It was not the denial of the adjournment, which prevented the appellant
    from attending  and  giving  evidence.  It  was  the  decision  by  the
    appellant not to attend, albeit on the advice  of  her  solicitors.  As
    stated it is not for solicitors to ignore and flout Court  or  Tribunal
    rulings, although that may be reflect in other orders  rather  than  in
    determining that an appeal should proceed. It was for the appellant  to
    attend and give evidence. If  it  became  apparent  that  there  was  a
    problem with the non-attendance of the representatives on  the  day  or
    that otherwise the appellant was seriously prejudiced by reason of  the
    fact that she did not have the Home Office bundle then clearly  it  may
    be that the refusal of the adjournment at that stage  deprived  her  of
    the opportunity of a proper hearing. In the present circumstance it was
    for the appellant to pursue her appeal with due diligence  and  it  was
    her failure and the failure of  her  representatives  to  do  so  which
    prevented her from participating in the hearing.

46. That was a decision  of  the  appellant  and  her  representative.  The
    appellant has a duty to pursue her claim to international protection in
    an appropriate and effective manner.

47. Further to that one has to consider the reasons given by  Judge  Harris
    for refusing the  adjournment.  The  judge  has  clearly  examined  the
    circumstances and has given detailed reasons in the judgement as to why
    he determined that he could fairly and  justly  decide  the  case.  The
    judge had raised a number of issues and initially as pointed out in the
    reply  by  the  respondent  those  had  not  been  challenged  by   the
    appellant's representative. If the only issue  was  collection  of  the
    file, then as pointed out by the judge there was nothing  to  stop  the
    appellant collecting her file from  her  previous  representatives.  If
    they required copies of the interviews, again there was nothing to stop
    the representatives seeking copies from the respondent.

48. As a final matter I would note  the  directions  issued  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal indicate that if there is found to be  an  error  of  law  the
    remaking of the decision will take place at the same  hearing.  Despite
    acknowledging that they had received the Home Office bundle  since  the
    hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  no  further  evidence  has  been
    submitted in support of the appellant's case. No application  has  been
    made under rule 15 (2 a) for the admission of further evidence.

49. In the circumstances I do not find that there is any material error  of
    law in the decision of Judge Harris. The judge was entitled to  proceed
    with  the  hearing.  The  judge  took   into   account   all   relevant
    considerations in assessing whether  or  not  the  appeal  should  been
    adjourned. In that event the judge  has  considered  not  only  whether
    there was good reason but also whether or not it was fair and just.  In
    the circumstances the judge was entitled to determine the appeal on the
    basis of the evidence before him.

50. For the reasons set out I find that there is no error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

    Notice of Decision

51. The appeal of the appellant is dismissed.



Signed



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Dated 18th February 2018

