
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04415/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On 5th November 2019                 |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|at Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |                                     |
|And 1st September 2020               |On 11th September 2020               |
|(by way of remote oral hearing at    |                                     |
|Field House)                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation on 5th November 2019:
For the appellant:     Mr J Markus instructed by Aman Solicitors Advocates
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior home Office Presenting Officer

Representation on 1st September 2020:
For the appellant:     Mr S Saeed of Aman Solicitors Advocates
For the respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, an Afghan citizen born in August  2000,  arrived  in
         the UK in early 2016 and claimed asylum on  25th  April  2016.  His
         claim was refused by the respondent and his  appeal  heard  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal on 18th July 2019 and dismissed for reasons set
         out in a decision promulgated on 9 August 2019.

      2. His claim was based on a number of reasons which were  rejected  by
         the First-tier Tribunal judge in a detailed decision. Permission to
         appeal was sought by the appellant, and granted, to  challenge  the
         decision in relation to one issue only - the issue of a blood feud.

      3. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that  a  blood  feud  developed
         between the appellant's older brother, Sher, and a warlord,  member
         of Parliament and person of great influence - Commander Naqib.  The
         feud arose  out  of  the  relationship  between  Sher  and  Naqib's
         daughter. He found that Naqib had issued a threat to  kill  members
         of the family, that Sher had disappeared, and another older brother
         Shams had been killed. But the judge concluded that although  there
         had been a blood feud, it was no longer active on  account  of  the
         appellant's age at its instigation and a severe case of revenge had
         occurred.

      4. The appellant relied upon two grounds of appeal:

         Ground 1:     that there was nothing in the appellant's evidence or
         in the evidence  of  Mr  Omarzada  (whose  evidence  has  not  been
         challenged) to suggest that the blood feud had concluded; the judge
         had failed to take  into  account  Mr  Omarzada  evidence  that  he
         reported that had the appellant not left then  he  too  would  have
         faced a threat to his life.

         Ground  2:      that  although  the  judge  considered  the   UNHCR
         Guidelines, there was nothing in those Guidelines  which  suggested
         that the feud the judge had concluded had been resolved,  could  be
         or would have been resolved in the way suggested by the judge.

      5. Mr Omarzada is a family friend. His evidence in so far as  relevant
         to the grounds of appeal was that he travelled to  Afghanistan  and
         whilst there he met Sher in 2014 who told him that he and his  wife
         were living in constant fear from her father and  they  feared  for
         their safety and that of his family members. That was the last time
         he met Sher.  In 2018 he travelled  again  to  Kabul  to  find  out
         further information about Sher. Whilst there  he  met  a  gentleman
         named Khawany who had assisted the appellant. Khawany  informed  Mr
         Omarzada that Sher had been kidnapped and there was no  information
         about him, and that Shams had  been  killed  in  Kabul  because  of
         Sher's marriage to  Naqib's  daughter.  He  told  Mr  Omarzada  the
         appellant's father had been killed in a Taliban controlled area.

      6. The First-tier Tribunal judge recorded

             "57. The central account given  by  Mr  Omarzada  was  largely
             unchallenged  and  intact  since  I  found   him   to   be   a
             straightforward and reliable witness ...

             ...

             62.  I was  satisfied  that  the  witness  [Mr  Omarzada]  was
             generally reliable. I accept that part of his account at least
             was based on what he was told by a third party. However, it is
             consistent with the Appellant's account, albeit he  had  heard
             the details form his mother who speculated  about  the  reason
             for the death and kidnapping. Nonetheless, given  the  witness
             evidence and his meeting with Khawany, I am satisfied  that  I
             can give credence to  the  overall  account  especially  as  I
             accept that there was a dispute and the suggestion that  Naqib
             was a person of great influence and a warlord was not  put  in
             issue. There was no challenge to Mr Amerada's evidence that he
             had met Khawany and that the latter told him about the killing
             and kidnapping and the death of the Appellant's father and the
             family escape from Afghanistan.  So  while  I  was  unable  to
             accept the Appellant's evidence alone, based on  his  mother's
             speculation and taking account of concerns I had about general
             credibility of the Appellant  (of  which  more  below)  I  was
             satisfied to the lower standard following the witness evidence
             and the corroboration it provided.

             ...

             101. I have not been referred to any specific  evidence  about
             blood feuds.  However  within  the  very  comprehensive  UNHCR
             'Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the internal  Protection
             Needs of Asylum Seekers from Afghanistan' a section is devoted
             to the issue. Although the section is short it is based  on  a
             significant range of source material  some  of  which  I  have
             considered.

             102. It is accepted that blood feuds can  arise  from  murders
             but also other triggers including family matters. Blood  feuds
             can last for  decades.  Under  the  customary  law  system  in
             principle revenge must be taken against  the  offender.  Under
             certain  circumstances  the  offender's  brother   and   other
             patrilineal kin may become targets. In general revenge is  not
             taken against women and children. When the Appellant's brother
             married Naqib's daughter  the  Appellant  was  just  11  years
             old....

             103. It is the Appellant's case that revenge has  been  taken,
             not only against  the  offender,  his  brother  Sher  who  was
             allegedly kidnapped, but also through the death of  Shams.  It
             appears that the murder and  kidnapping  occurred  some  years
             after the disputed marriage and in Kabul  where  Naqib  had  a
             position of influence.

             104. For these reasons, I am not satisfied that the  Appellant
             has shown that he is at real risk. I accept  that  if  he  was
             likely to be in danger  of  being  attached  for  purposes  of
             revenge then a grant  of  international  protection  would  be
             appropriate ...

             ...

             106. However, on the specific  facts  of  this  case  and  the
             Appellant's claim that  a  very  severe  act  of  revenge  has
             occurred and given his age at the  relevant  time,  I  do  not
             conclude that he is at real risk at the hands of Naqib as part
             of a blood feud."

         Error of law decision

      7. On 5th November 2019 I heard submissions from  the  representatives
         of both parties and made the following decision:

             "1.  There are a number of difficulties  with  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal judge's conclusion that the appellant is  not  at
                  risk because of the blood feud.

               2. The judge accepts  the  evidence  of  Mr  Omarzada,  which
                  relays information from a third  party,  in  reaching  his
                  finding that the appellant's family were the subject of  a
                  blood  feud.  Although  the  judge  does  not  accept   Mr
                  Amerada's opinion that the appellant is at risk  from  the
                  Afghan authorities and the Taliban:

                      "63.  ...  While  I  accept  that  Mr  Omarzada   has
                           understandably kept up to  date  with  events  in
                           Afghanistan and indeed visited in 2014 and  2018,
                           he did not suggest in his statement that  Khawany
                           had told him  of  any  adverse  interest  by  the
                           Afghan  authorities  in  the  Appellant  or   the
                           Taliban."

                  the judge gives no reason or explanation for rejecting the
                  statement by Mr Omarzada that he had been told by  Khawany
                  that if the appellant had not  left  when  he  did  "there
                  would have been a great threat" and yet accepted the other
                  information relayed by Khawany. It would of course be open
                  to the judge to reject some of Mr Amerada's  evidence  but
                  reasons for such rejection are to be [provided]  accepted.
                  The judge in this instance has not rejected that  part  of
                  the evidence save in a conclusion that the blood feud  has
                  finished.

               3. The judge refers to having considered some of  the  source
                  material referred to in the UNHCR Guidelines although  the
                  source material was not actually in the bundle. I  do  not
                  accept Mr Markus' submission that the judge has undertaken
                  research off his own volition - the  substantive  document
                  was in the appellant's bundle and it is reasonable for the
                  judge to examine source material that  led  to  the  UNHCR
                  Guidelines but the judge has not  identified  what  source
                  material he actually looked at, what it said, its date and
                  he says he only looked  at  some  of  it.  The  judge  has
                  plainly taken account of the source material  but  in  the
                  absence of setting out what it said it is not possible  to
                  identify why this formed part of the basis for the judge's
                  conclusion that the appellant was no longer at risk.

               4. The Guidelines refer to blood feuds sometimes lasting  for
                  decades; this seems to contradict  an  assumption  by  the
                  judge that because the appellant was a child at  the  time
                  then he would no longer be at risk. If that were the  case
                  then one would not expect blood feuds to last for  decades
                  or generations.

               5. Although the Guidelines refer  to  "in  principle  revenge
                  must be taken against the offender", in this case  revenge
                  has been extracted not only against  the  offender  (Sher)
                  but  also  another  brother,  Shams.  The  judge  has  not
                  explained how he reached the conclusion  that  this  meant
                  that further revenge would  not  be  sought,  particularly
                  given Khawany's view, or why the fact that there were  two
                  incidents of revenge  as  oppose  to  simply  against  the
                  'offender' that did not provide a  reason  for  concluding
                  that in this case the generality did not apply.  Nor  does
                  he explain on what basis he reached  the  conclusion  that
                  the severity of the revenge could result in termination of
                  the blood feud.

               6. Taking these matters as a whole I am  satisfied  that  the
                  First-tier Tribunal judge has failed to  provide  adequate
                  reasons for his conclusion that the appellant  is  not  at
                  risk on return to Afghanistan. The judge has erred in  law
                  such that I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal judge in so far as he finds the appellant not  to
                  be at risk on return from the blood feud, a decision to be
                  made on that issue at a resumed hearing."

      8. I made directions for the resumed hearing to be heard:  submissions
         only and for a fresh bundle documents to be filed and  served.  The
         pandemic COVID-19 then intervened hence  the  delay  in  the  final
         determination of this appeal. The  resumed  hearing  was  held  via
         Skype for Business.  Although  there  were  some  initial  problems
         arising out of difficulties with  the  respondent's  server,  these
         were resolved, and all  parties  and  I  were  satisfied  that  the
         hearing was satisfactorily concluded.

      9. The appellant had filed a further witness statement of Mr  Omarzada
         and an expert report by Dr Giustozzi together with  copies  of  the
         UNHCR annual report for 2019, the UK Home  Office  CPIN  20  August
         2019 and  the  EASO  country  of  origin  information  report.  The
         respondent provided at the  hearing  the  CPIN  on  anti-government
         elements  dated  June  2020  and  the  CPIN  on  the  security  and
         humanitarian situation, dated May 2020.

     10. In accordance with further directions made, the parties had  agreed
         the list of issues for the Upper Tribunal to decide. These were  as
         follows: -

          a) Having regard to the unchallenged findings made by the  First-
             tier Tribunal that the appellant's family were the subject  of
             a blood feud, is the appellant himself at risk as a result  of
             that blood feud?

          b) If so, is it reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  relocate  to
             Kabul?

          c) Following AS (Afghanistan), the country  guidance  case  being
             considered by the Upper Tribunal,  is  there  a  general  risk
             under article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive  that  the
             appellant will be harmed if he returns to Afghanistan?

     11. In the light of the further witness statement from Mr Omarzada, the
         respondent informed the Tribunal she wished  to  cross-examine  him
         and so arrangements were made for an interpreter to be  present.  I
         heard oral evidence from Mr Omarzada whose English  was  very  good
         but, where the question was complex or his answer was  complex,  he
         had the assistance of an interpreter. I heard oral submissions from
         Ms Cunha on behalf of the respondent and from Mr Saeed on behalf of
         the appellant.

         Consideration

     12. Mr Omarzada was cross examined at length  in  connection  with  the
         evidence set out in his most recent statement  which,  in  essence,
         referred to his most recent visit to Afghanistan  in  2019.  Whilst
         there, he said that he had gone  to  Khawany's  butcher's  shop  in
         Kabul in order to make enquiries as to the appellant's  family,  as
         requested by the appellant. He said that the appellant had told him
         that he had made several attempts to contact Khawany by calling his
         phone number "but the phone seemed to be  off".  Mr  Omarzada  said
         that  in  September  2019,  during  the  course  of  his  visit  in
         Afghanistan, he went to the shop, but Khawany  was  not  there.  He
         relayed the conversation that he had with the current owner  during
         the course of which he received information that Khawany  had  been
         threatened by  Commander  Naqib  "in  relation  to  a  matter  that
         involved distant family members called Shams and Sher Mohammed."

     13. The exact nature of the communication between the current owner  of
         the butcher's shop, the witness and how he obtained the information
         in connection with the reason why Khawany had  left  the  butcher's
         shop was the subject of intense cross-examination by Ms  Cunha.  Ms
         Cunha asked, in particular, why the  witness  had  asked  questions
         about Commander Naqib when it  seemed  that  the  mere  mention  of
         Commander Naqib resulted in  fear  and  the  possibility  that  the
         witness himself and his family could come to some risk through  the
         asking of questions.

     14. Ms Cunha submitted that Mr Omarzada had not verified  with  anybody
         what he had been told by the current owner of the  shop,  he  could
         not recall the name of the current  shop  owner  and  that  it  was
         inherently implausible that such a conversation  could  have  taken
         place given the level of fear that Commander Naqib engendered.  She
         submitted it was implausible that this Commander would be  randomly
         spoken of between people who had not previously met. She  submitted
         that if  the  Commander  did  in  fact  have  an  interest  in  the
         appellant's family as  claimed,  then  he  would  have  pursued  Mr
         Omarzada because Mr Omarzada 'had been asking questions'.

     15. I am satisfied that Mr Omarzada's evidence  was  that  he  had  not
         directly questioned the current butcher shop owner about  Commander
         Naqib and  Shams  and  Sher  Mohammed.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         information that Khawany sold the  shop  because  of  threats  from
         Commander Naqib was volunteered to Mr Omarzada by  the  shop  owner
         who was relying on what he had heard. This was  not  a  case  of  a
         random  person  going  into  a  random  shop  and  randomly  asking
         questions of an unknown quantity  or  quality  but  a  case  of  an
         individual going to a shop where he previously knew the  owner  and
         engaging in conversation with the current owner. I  do  not  accept
         the submission that it is inherently implausible for a conversation
         to take place between someone who knew the previous owner  and  the
         new owner as to the whereabouts  of  the  previous  owner,  or  for
         information to come out during the conversation of the new  owner's
         understanding why the previous owner had left.

     16. Ms Cunha's submitted that the account by  Mr  Omarzada  was  untrue
         because, given the fear  that  Commander  Naqib  was  held  in,  Mr
         Omarzada would not have placed himself and his family  at  risk  by
         asking questions. This was not the evidence. Mr Omarzada made clear
         that he himself had no issue with the Commander and  there  was  no
         need for the Commander to 'come  after  him  or  his  family'.  The
         evidence was not that Mr Omarzada  initiated  the  questions  about
         Commander Naqib but that  it  arose  during  the  conversation;  Mr
         Omarzada did not ask questions directly about Commander Naqib.  His
         evidence was that when Commander Naqib was referred to, he did  not
         ask any more detailed questions.

     17. Ms  Cunha  submitted  that  no  weight  could  be  placed  upon  Mr
         Omarzada's evidence about the conversation with the  owner  of  the
         shop not only because of the matters referred  to  above  but  also
         because Mr Omarzada had failed to undertake any verification of the
         information, could not recall the name of the new  shop  owner  and
         that the expert and country evidence did not support the claim that
         the Commander would seek revenge upon the appellant.

     18.  There  was  no  requirement  for  Mr  Omarzada  to  undertake  any
         verification of the information he received from the owner  of  the
         butcher's shop. Mr Omarzada's evidence consisted  of  relaying  the
         conversation  he  had  with  the  shop  owner;  it   was   not   an
         interrogation, and nor could he be expected to have  undertaken  an
         interrogation. As for not recalling the name of the shop owner now,
         that is hardly surprising given the time  that  has  elapsed;  that
         does not  reflect  adversely  upon  his  evidence.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal judge found Mr Omarzada to be generally  reliable  and  to
         have given consistent evidence. I also found Mr Omarzada's evidence
         to be honestly and consistently given. Although Ms Cunha questioned
         Mr Omarzada closely about the community organisation  that  he  was
         involved with and seemed to be implying  during  cross  examination
         that Mr Omarzada's evidence may have been tainted because of  these
         community links, this was  not  a  submission  that  she  made.  Mr
         Omarzada was a close friend of one of the appellant's brothers  and
         this evidence was not the subject of challenge either in the First-
         tier Tribunal or before me.

     19. Ms Cunha drew attention to a difference in the appellant's  account
         as to  whether  his  brother  had  eloped  with  Commander  Naqib's
         daughter or whether the feud  had  arisen  because  of  a  marriage
         between the Commander's daughter and the appellant's  brother.  She
         submitted that the Commander's daughter would not have been able to
         marry the appellants brother without her father's consent  although
         I was not directed to any evidence to support this  submission.  It
         seems that Ms Cunha was submitting that either the inconsistency in
         the appellant's account as to whether it was  an  elopement,  or  a
         marriage cast doubt on the claim overall, or  that  if  the  couple
         were in fact married then the feud could no  longer  exist  because
         the Commander's consent must have been given. Ms Cunha did not make
         this submission in so many words and I am driven to the  conclusion
         that she placed little weight upon this distinction. In  any  event
         whether there was an elopement or a marriage I  am  satisfied  that
         there  was  a  dispute  that  led  to  Sher  being   abducted   and
         disappearing. As the First-tier Tribunal judge found,  the  eloping
         brother has disappeared, and the other brother had been  killed  in
         Kabul by Commander Naqib or  under  his  authority.  There  was  no
         challenge to that finding of the FtT  judge  by  the  Secretary  of
         State and those findings stand.

     20. Ms Cunha submitted that the claim by the appellant did  not  amount
         to a blood feud. She submitted that Dr Giustozzi's report not  only
         relied upon evidence that was  several  years  old  but  also  gave
         details of very few honour killings, that there had been no  recent
         evidence of any increase or decrease in  such  killings,  that  the
         focus  in  Afghanistan  had   now   changed   given   the   ongoing
         negotiations, that the focus of Commander Naqib had  been  resolved
         namely the disappearance  of  the  perpetrator  and  there  was  no
         evidence that the elopement/marriage of his  daughter  would  be  a
         priority given that the perpetrator had  already  disappeared.  The
         appellant's claim that he would  be  pursued  was,  she  submitted,
         neither plausible nor reasonable. Ms Cunha submitted that there was
         no evidence that a child, now an adult, returning years later  (the
         elopement took place in 2011) would be a target. She submitted that
         Shams could have been killed because he was looking  for  Sher  and
         that 'technically'  the  Commander  had  got  what  he  wanted  and
         therefore  the  dispute  ended.  She  submitted   that   with   the
         disappearance/death of Sher the Commander would have achieved  what
         he wanted. She relied upon Dr Giustozzi's  report  which  she  said
         demonstrated that it was a case of resolving  honour  and  not  the
         commencement  of  a  blood  feud;  Shams  "may  have  been   killed
         accidentally". The appellant would not, she submitted, be  actively
         looking for his missing brother and that the death of  Shams  could
         not demonstrate that the appellant would now be at risk. Although I
         was provided with two CPIN reports by Ms Cunha, she did not draw my
         attention to any particular  sections  of  those  reports.  I  have
         nevertheless considered them.

     21. Dr Giustozzi's report is lengthy and a  considerable  part  of  the
         report deals with issues around the Taliban. Mr Saeed very properly
         relied upon pages 14 to 18 only of the report. In paragraph  9,  Dr
         Giustozzi states

             'adultery or unacceptable relations of any  kind  between  men
             and women are a very common source of blood feuds  and  honour
             killings. Honour killing remains very  common  in  Afghanistan
             and in many regions the police openly admit that they  do  not
             interfere with how the clans settle their accounts.'

         It is correct that much of the source  material  relied  on  by  Dr
         Giustozzi pre-dates 2014. His report goes on to say:

             '13. Feuds are between families; the fact that a member of the
             family might not have had anything to  do  with  the  original
             incident starting the feud does not mean in any  way  that  he
             will be less affected. So a male member would be  at  risk  of
             being targeted with physical violence in a feud, and a  female
             member might be at risk to being traded in a settlement to the
             feud, even if they had no role in starting the feud...

             14. Blood feuds are pursued with impunity even in Kabul  city.
             ...'

     22. Section 7 of the EASO report deals with  blood  feuds  and  revenge
         killings. The report explains that

             'blood feuds for revenge- taking can be the result of personal
             violence or wrong-doing that is seen as being against  honour,
             disputes   involving   land,   or   family    conflicts    and
             relationships.... Those who are empowered to exact revenge are
             the patrilineal descendants of someone  wronged,  against  the
             patrilineal relatives of the  perpetrator,  with  the  aim  of
             restoring balance between groups and individuals.... Shame  is
             connected to the behaviour of women. Women's behaviour is seen
             in society only as a reflection of the  reputations  of  their
             families and male family members, specifically.  Women  cannot
             accumulate honour or better the standing of the  family,  only
             men can do  this  by  protecting  their  property,  and  their
             families. Therefore, protection of the family  women's  honour
             is a primary concern of Pashtun men, and under the concept  of
             Namus, it is the duty of men to protect the owner of the women
             they are responsible for; failure to do so results in  a  loss
             of respectability in the eyes  of  others.  Namus  is  thus  a
             frequent  cause  of  conflict....  feuds   can   go   on   for
             generations.... Disputes may also become violent  over  honour
             issues; a woman's refusal of  marriage,  eloping,  or  running
             away to escape an arranged marriage, for example,  can  result
             in revenge killings or spark feuds.'

     23. Section 10 of the May 2020 CPIN report draws attention to the  EASO
         report  as  a  reference  point.  The  report  does  not  seek   to
         distinguish the EASO comments on honour killings/blood feuds.

     24. The background  material  including  the  report  by  Dr  Giustozzi
         acknowledges that a blood feud can start with a transgression which
         offends the so-called honour of the main protagonist. In this  case
         the  undisturbed  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is   that
         Commander Naqib  considers  his  honour  to  have  been  besmirched
         because of the elopement/marriage of  his  daughter  with/to  Sher.
         Contrary to the submissions made by Ms Cunha there was no  evidence
         before me that Shams had been killed accidentally or that  in  this
         case the abduction/disappearance of Sher had led to the  conclusion
         or satisfaction of the Commander's "honour". The Secretary of State
         in the reasons for  refusal  letter  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge's findings do not  distinguish  between  honour  killing  and
         blood feuds. An elopement/marriage  can  in  certain  circumstances
         trigger a feud. The list of agreed  issues  to  be  decided  by  me
         includes the question "Having regard to  the  unchallenged  finding
         made by the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant's  family  were
         the subject of a blood feud, is the appellant himself at risk as  a
         result of that blood feud?" I do not accept Ms  Cunha's  submission
         that this was not a blood feud.

     25. The First-tier Tribunal judge incorrectly concluded that  the  feud
         had been satisfied and that the appellant would  no  longer  be  at
         risk. There was however no evidence to suggest that was  the  case.
         At its very essence, the  appellant's  brother  had  eloped/married
         Commander Naqib's  daughter  contrary  to  the  agreement  of  both
         families; that brother had been  abducted/disappeared  and  another
         brother, Shams, killed in Kabul. That killing,  combined  with  the
         evidence of Mr Omardaza and Khawany is such that there  can  be  no
         conclusion other than that the appellant would be at risk of  being
         killed by Commander Naqib or under the authority of Commander Naqib
         because of the behaviour of Sher. That Commander Naqib, who  it  is
         acknowledged is a powerful Commander within the  Afghanistan  power
         structures, may be focused on other matters because of the  various
         negotiations that are pending at present, does not mean that if the
         appellant were to reappear in Afghanistan the opportunity would not
         be taken to kill him.

     26. The answer to that first question is, on the basis of the  evidence
         before me, yes.

     27. The second question concerns  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the
         appellant to relocate to Kabul. In determining this question I take
         account of the fact that Shams was killed in Kabul  and  note  that
         Khawany himself fled Kabul as a  result  of  threats  that  he  had
         received. If the appellant is able to hide in Kabul, Kabul city  or
         elsewhere in Afghanistan then he would plainly not be  at  risk  of
         being killed. His claim is not that he is at risk of indiscriminate
         violence or  that  he  requires  general  humanitarian  protection.
         Rather his claim is that  Commander  Naqib  is  a  powerful  enough
         person to be able to trace him wherever he  goes.  The  appellant's
         evidence to the First-tier Tribunal that the  family  had  moved  a
         short distance away from their  original  home  because  they  were
         moving to an area that was not under  the  influence  of  Commander
         Naqib, was accepted. A similar possibility may  continue  to  exist
         somewhere in Afghanistan but the significant difficulty that arises
         is that  the  lines  and  areas  of  control  and  authority  shift
         frequently;  the  appellant  would  not  know  on  his  return   to
         Afghanistan where the particular areas of authority now lie and  in
         any event wherever he was he would be expected to disclose  who  he
         was and where he came from. Word would, I am  satisfied,  make  its
         way back to Commander Naqib that he had arrived in the country  and
         where he was. The reach of the Commander is extensive and  includes
         Kabul. I am satisfied that the Commander,  no  matter  that  he  is
         focused on wider scale  negotiations,  would  seek  to  avenge  his
         honour. The satisfaction of honour is a matter of great importance,
         as identified in the EASO report and impacts upon  all  aspects  of
         life. The appellant would not be able to avoid risk.  There  is  no
         adequacy of protection available in the appellant's circumstances.

     28. The answer to the second question  is  therefore  'No'  it  is  not
         reasonable for the appellant to relocate to Kabul or Kabul city.

     29. I am satisfied that the appellant is at risk of being killed  as  a
         result  of  a  blood  feud  involving  Commander   Naqib   as   the
         perpetrator; that in  the  light  of  the  considerable  background
         evidence available about the lack  of  police  protection  in  such
         cases and the power of the Commander there  is  no  sufficiency  of
         protection; internal relocation  is  not  an  option  open  to  the
         appellant both in terms of relocation within Kabul city  and  Kabul
         where the reach of Commander Naqib is  such  that  the  appellant's
         whereabouts would become known and revenge would be extracted.




    Conclusion

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant
    is not at risk of  being  persecuted  because  of  the  blood  feud  if
    returned to Afghanistan.

    I remake the decision and allow the appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent refusing the appellant international protection.


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker Date 7 September 2020
