
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/04012/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 17th December 2018  On 17th January 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    M Y M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton (Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's asylum claim was rejected by the Secretary of State for
    the reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the * and his appeal
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mays in a decision promulgated
    on the 21st of May 2018. The Judge accepted that the Appellant was a
    minor and a vulnerable witness and Iranian as he claimed, that his
    father had had some involvement in the KDPI and the family had fled
    Iran with his parents being killed in crossing the sea to Greece. The
    Judge found that the Appellant would not be of interest to the Iranian
    authorities and could safely return.

 2. The grounds argue that having found the Appellant would be interrogated
    on return and would relate what he knew of his father's activities when
    questioned the Judge erred in finding that that would not place him at
    risk in Iran. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. In submissions at the hearing reliance was placed on HB (Kurds) Iran CG
    [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC). It was argued by Mr Eaton that the positive
    findings made by the Judge in the context of the guidance in HB was
    more than enough for the appeal to have been allowed as the case showed
    that any level of involvement created a risk. It was also argued that
    there were contradictory findings as to why the family had left Iran.

 4. Referring to paragraph 80 of HB it was argued that there was evidence
    before the Upper Tribunal of a risk based on family association
    although no specific findings were made the Upper Tribunal noted the
    evidence before them. That was supported by the contents of the
    relevant CIG set out in paragraph 12 of the grounds. There was no
    tolerance of any form of dissent regarding Kurds and perception was
    sufficient. Family members were detained, ill-treated and harassed.
    Paragraph 42 was relevant to the weight given to the 2 experts. From
    paragraph 93 of Annexe B there was a likely assumption of political
    activity down the male line.

 5. The Appellant had left Iran via the KRI which would increase the level
    of suspicion. The error was regard to the level of activity of the
    Appellant's father and the totality of what he did and the question
    would be how the Appellant would be treated on his return. He could not
    be expected to hide his involvement.

 6. For the Home Office Mr Tarlow argued that in paragraph 86 there was
    little detail of any activity and although in paragraph 88 it was found
    that the family had left because of their activities the Judge had been
    unable to make a finding on the type of interest. Paragraph 80 of HB
    did not extend to family. Given that the Appellant was a child the
    conclusions were sustainable even under HB.

 7. In reply Mr Eaton referred to paragraph 94 and the specific reference
    to the CIG.

 8. Although not material the observations in paragraph 89 are not
    inconsistent, the Judge was aware that something arose that led to the
    family leaving Iran but "not exactly what it was" and that Judge had
    noted that there was an element of speculation. In any event this is
    hardly central and the Appellant benefitted from a what was effectively
    an acceptance of his overall credibility with regard to events. The
    issue is whether the Judge was entitled to find, in the light of the
    decision in HB that because he was a child and not involved the
    Appellant would not be at risk on return.

 9. From the headnote in HB it is clear that the Iranian authorities do not
    require much to have their suspicions aroused with regard to Kurdish
    rights and perceived supporters and once aroused overreact. Many of the
    features of the Appellant's circumstances, his being a Kurd, having
    travelled through the KRI and having left illegally would not by
    themselves place him at risk on return but would lead to additional
    questioning.

10. This in turn leads to the case effectively turning on what the effect
    of his information about his father's known, albeit limited,
    involvement with the KDPI would have on his treatment by the Iranian
    authorities when that was made to known them during questioning. HB was
    promulgated on the 12th of December 2018 and through no fault of his
    own could not have been aware of the guidance that it contained.
    Nevertheless the case is declaratory, I note that it was heard in
    February and May 2018 and so the guidance and the evidence relied on
    relates to the time that the Judge was considering this appeal. In the
    circumstances it would be an error of law to apply the guidance that
    now applies.

11. Although a minor at the date of the hearing the Appellant would not
    have been returned until an adult and he has now reached that
    milestone. Given the hair trigger approach of the Iranian authorities,
    the evidence that the political opinions of adults is imputed down the
    male line and the departure via the IKR added to the finding that the
    Appellant would give the authorities any information requested lead me
    to find that to the lower standard, on the unchallenged findings of the
    Judge, the Appellant would be at risk of persecutory treatment on
    return. It is difficult to see that someone aged 17 would be treated in
    practical terms differently from an 18 year old.

12. In reaching the opposite conclusion, albeit relying on the situation as
    it was then understood, the Judge made an error of law and the decision
    cannot stand. For the reasons given the appropriate course of action is
    to set the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mays aside and to
    remake the decision allowing the appeal of the Appellant.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake the decision and allow the appeal of M Y M on refugee grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)



Fee Award

The Appellant did not pay a fee to bring his appeal and accordingly a fee
award is not appropriate.


Signed: [pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 8th January 2019

