
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04245/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st April 2019                             |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  M. A. I.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Ennals made following a hearing at Manchester on 27th April 2018.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Sudan and a member of the Bergo tribe from
    Mujhajariya village in Darfur.

 3.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  claimant's  nationality  and
    ethnicity and that his village had been attacked by government  forces.
    He did not accept that the claimant himself was arrested, detained  and
    then released, nor that he was of any interest to the authorities.   He
    argued that the country guidance  cases  of  AA  (non-Arab  Darfuris  -
    relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056  and  MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG
    [2015] UKUT 10 should no longer be followed.

 4. The judge recorded that he was obliged to follow country guidance cases
    unless very strong reasons, supported  by  cogent  evidence,  had  been
    adduced justifying him not doing so.  The Secretary of State  bore  the
    burden to justify such a departure.

 5. The judge wrote as follows:

         "She relies on the policy document referred to in  para  13  above.
         This relies on three documents: an  Australian  Government  country
         report from April  2016;  a  joint  Home  Office/Danish  Government
         report from August 2016, and a letter from the British  Embassy  in
         Khartoum of September 2016.  These reports indicate,  according  to
         the HO document, that a substantial population of non-Arab Darfuris
         live in Khartoum and surrounding areas and are  able  to  go  about
         their daily lives.  It was suggested that levels of  discrimination
         were linked to  how  politically  involved  someone  was.   The  HO
         guidance, and the decision letter in this  case,  argued  that  the
         evidence of these three reports suggested that there was no  longer
         systematic discrimination against non-Arab Darfuris, on  the  basis
         of their ethnicity alone, at least around Khartoum".

 6. The judge concluded as follows:

         "The appellant's bundle  includes  reports  from  2018  from  Human
         Rights Watch, UN  News  Centre  Sudan  and  Amnesty  International,
         attesting to the ongoing  dire  humanitarian  situation  in  Sudan.
         They do not specifically address whether non-Arab Darfuris  are  at
         risk solely on the grounds of their  ethnicity.   While  the  three
         reports  relied  on  by  the  respondent  do  indeed  suggest  that
         ethnicity alone may not be such a clear  risk  factor,  it  is  not
         clear to me from the Home  Office  guidance  note  the  extent  and
         nature of the research carried out for each report.  It is also not
         clear that they are reporting an improved  situation,  rather  than
         putting a different view in relation to an unchanged situation.

         While I note the conclusions of the  reports  relied  upon  by  the
         respondent, I am not persuaded that she has present  the  necessary
         very strong grounds supported by  cogent  evidence  to  justify  me
         departing from the earlier country guidance".

 7. On that basis he allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had not properly engaged with the evidence placed before him.
     Had he directed himself to the footnotes within the  report  he  would
    have appreciated that it consisted of information  from  a  variety  of
    sources which made the assessment of  the  situation  within  Sudan  at
    different points in time between 2005 and 2017.  The joint Fact-Finding
    Report sets out in its  introduction  that  it  was  undertaken  during
    various missions  during  2016.   29  various  sources  were  consulted
    including various NGOs and the report sets out  in  full  its  term  of
    reference in its appendix.  It was not suggested that the judge  should
    research the footnotes but they and the  appendices  and  introductions
    clearly identify the time period which the report covers, the terms  of
    reference and the sources relied upon.  The report required no  further
    research beyond the documents.  The judge did not address what elements
    of the Secretary of State's evidence concerned him and failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting it.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Kelly but upon  re-
    application granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley.

Submissions

10. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds but admitted that  he  was  not  aware
    that his argument had been successful in other cases before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

11. Mr Hussain submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  simply  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof upon him by producing evidence which was
    capable of overturning a series of country guidance cases over a period
    of ten years.  The Country Policy and Information Note upon  which  the
    Secretary of State relied did not contain the original source material.
     To his knowledge there were more than a dozen cases  where  First-tier
    Judges had been overturned by the Upper Tribunal when they  had  sought
    to depart from  the  country  guidance  cases  on  the  basis  of  this
    material.

Findings and Conclusions

12. The judge did not err in law.  He was  presented  with  a  CPIN  Report
    which contains a number of  footnotes  referencing  the  material  upon
    which the report's conclusions rely.  The source  material  itself  was
    not before the judge.  If the Secretary  of  State  is   attempting  to
    overturn a series  of  country  guidance  cases,  coming  to  the  same
    conclusion that non-Arab Darfuris are not able to live a normal life in
    Khartoum, then he needs to provide all of the evidence  upon  which  he
    seeks to rely including source material.  As  the  judge  said,  it  is
    quite unclear from the CPIN whether it is the Secretary of State's case
    that the situation has improved since the country guidance  cases  were
    decided, or whether it is simply the Secretary  of  State's  view  that
    they ought to have reached a different conclusion.

13. In these circumstances, there is no error of law in his concluding that
    the Secretary of State had not discharged the burden upon him.



Notice of Decision

14. The original judge did not err in law.  His decision stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 19 April 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

