
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04840/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 April 2019                |On 1 May 2019                   |
|Prepared on 15 April 2019       |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reynolds, Counsel for E1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, made a  protection  claim  in
       March 2016 upon being arrested on suspicion of  immigration  offences
       whilst using the identity SA. In the course of making that protection
       claim he claimed to  have  most  recently  entered  the  UK  in  2004
       following the grant of entry clearance as a work permit  holder.  The
       Appellant's initial protection claim was based upon the claim that he
       had been at risk of harm from his father in Bangladesh  since  before
       he left that country, as a result of a land dispute with his  father.
       Latterly the Appellant claimed that this was  a  misunderstanding  of
       the protection claim that he had tried to make, and  he  had  claimed
       that the land dispute was not between the Appellant and  his  father,
       but between the Appellant's family, and others. He also claimed to be
       at risk of harm because he and his father were supporters and members
       of the BNP.
    2. In the  course  of  advancing  his  protection  claim  the  Appellant
       admitted that  he  had  pursued  in  the  identity  AJ,  a  dishonest
       application for ILR, based upon the lie that he had entered the UK in
       1996, and had compounded that  lie  by  pursuing  an  appeal  to  the
       Tribunal on that basis. He had made no claim in the  course  of  that
       appeal that he faced any risk of harm upon return to Bangladesh.
    3. The protection  claim  was  refused  on  1  February  2017,  and  the
       Appellant's appeal against that decision was then heard and dismissed
       by First Tier Tribunal Judge Davey in a decision  promulgated  on  17
       October 2018. The Judge concluded that the Appellant's  evidence  was
       wholly unreliable, and rejected his claim to be at risk  of  harm  in
       Bangladesh as fiction.
    4. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was  granted  by
       Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 18 December 2018 on  the  basis  it  was
       arguable the Judge had failed to indicate that he  was  applying  the
       correct low standard of proof when considering  the  evidence  relied
       upon by the Appellant, although  the  grant  of  permission  was  not
       limited to that ground.
    5. A Rule 24 Notice was lodged on 9 January  2019  in  response  to  the
       grant of permission to appeal. In it the Respondent asserted that the
       grounds were in reality no more than a  disguised  disagreement  with
       the Judge's decision, and that his adverse findings were well open to
       him on  the  evidence.  It  was  asserted  that  it  was  of  pivotal
       importance that the Upper Tribunal recognised; (i) the extent of  the
       Appellant's dishonesty in his dealings with the Respondent,  and  the
       Tribunal, and, (ii) that his behaviour was simply  inconsistent  with
       that which was reasonably to be expected of  an  individual  who  had
       arrived in the UK with a genuine belief that he was at real  risk  of
       harm in his own country.
    6. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule 15(2A) for  permission  to
       rely upon further evidence. Thus the matter came before me.


The challenges
    7. Mr Reynolds did not appear below, and he was not the  author  of  the
       grounds. As Mr Reynolds put the matter  the  Appellant  advanced  two
       challenges to the decision.
    8. First, it was asserted that the Judge's approach to  the  credibility
       of the Appellant's evidence was flawed as a result of (a) his failure
       to make an adequate self direction as to the applicable low  standard
       of proof, and, (b) an excessive  concentration  upon  the  s8  issues
       raised by the Appellant's dishonesty. It was argued that  the  result
       was that none of the adverse findings of fact were safe. Thus grounds
       1 and 2 were taken together, and it was argued the appeal  should  be
       remitted for rehearing afresh.
    9. Second, it was asserted that the Judge's approach to  the  Article  8
       appeal was flawed as a result of his failure to  recognise  that  the
       Appellant was genuinely a carer to  his  uncle.  Accordingly  it  was
       argued that both the Article 8 rights of the Appellant, and his uncle
       were engaged by the  decision  under  appeal;  Lama  (video  recorded
       evidence - weight- Article 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT 16. The extent of  the
       interference in the lifestyle of the  Appellant's  uncle  that  would
       result from the Appellant's removal from the UK was said to  be  such
       as to render the decision disproportionate, even after having had due
       regard to the relevant public interest.


  The challenge to the credibility findings
   10. The central difficulty for the Appellant's challenge to  the  adverse
       credibility findings is that when the decision is read as a whole, it
       is in my judgement quite clear that the Judge did apply  the  correct
       standard of proof to the evidence. The Judge may not have spelled out
       at any length a self direction as  to  the  burden  and  standard  of
       proof, but the failure to do so in some formulaic style does not,  of
       itself, disclose an error of law in his approach. What  is  important
       is substance, rather than some formulaic style.
   11. I am satisfied that in this decision this experienced Judge did  have
       the correct standard of proof in mind, and that he was  applying  it.
       Thus he referred to "a real likelihood" that the activities in the UK
       relied upon by the Appellant "were likely  to  generate  any  adverse
       interest in him by the AL government". In paragraphs 32 and 33 and 36
       the Judge referred to the  absence  of  a  "risk"  to  the  Appellant
       because the evidence he relied upon as creating such a risk  was  not
       credible. In contrast there is no passage in  the  decision  that  Mr
       Reynolds on behalf of the  Appellant,  can  point  to  as  indicating
       through the Judge's choice of language that he was applying (or  even
       might have been applying) the wrong standard of proof.
   12. The Judge was perfectly entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that  the
       Appellant had lied both to the Respondent and to the  Tribunal  about
       when he entered  the  UK,  and,  that  he  had  pursued  a  dishonest
       application for ILR based upon that lie. After all, those  lies  were
       admitted before him by the Appellant.
   13. Moreover the Judge was obliged to take note of  the  undisputed  fact
       that the Appellant had used a different identity  when  pursuing  the
       application for ILR, and the appeal against its  refusal.  Again,  no
       other conclusion was rationally open to him.
   14. The Judge did look at, and consider, the explanation proffered by the
       Appellant for that behaviour. He was obliged to do  so  in  order  to
       consider  what  weight  he  could  attach  to  that  behaviour   when
       considering the reliability of the evidence that the Appellant relied
       upon in the course of the  appeal  with  which  he  was  seized.  The
       conclusion that he reached, namely that the  Appellant's  explanation
       for his deceptive behaviours was itself false, was again one that was
       well open to him, and it was adequately reasoned.
   15. There was no excessive focus upon s8 issues.  Given  the  Appellant's
       admitted past conduct, the Judge was obliged to consider whether this
       post arrest protection claim was another fiction. I accept as Ouseley
       J did in CJ (on the application of R) v Cardiff County Council [2011]
       EWHC 23, the importance of the  approach  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  v  SSHD
       [2002] Imm AR 318. Documentary evidence  along  with  its  provenance
       needs to be weighed in the light of all the  evidence  in  the  case.
       Documentary  evidence  does  not  carry  with  it  a  presumption  of
       authenticity, which specific evidence must  disprove,  failing  which
       its content must be accepted. What is required is  its  appraisal  in
       the light of the evidence about its nature,  provenance,  timing  and
       background evidence and in the light of all the other evidence in the
       case, especially that given by the claimant.
   16. The Judge made a clear finding that the FIR documents relied upon  by
       the Appellant were false  [29].  He  did  so  after  looking  at  the
       evidence in the round, and after giving  adequate  reasons  for  that
       conclusion. He was entitled to reach that conclusion on the  evidence
       before him, and arguably any  contrary  conclusion  would  have  been
       perverse, since the documents described the Appellant as having  been
       present in Bangladesh in February 2018, and as having  been  arrested
       and questioned then. Even on his own account that was plainly untrue.


  The challenge to the Article 8 appeal decision
   17. It was argued on behalf of the Appellant before the Judge that in any
       event his position as a carer for an uncle meant that  he  should  be
       granted leave to remain on the basis of a "private  life"  Article  8
       claim. In a 56 paragraph witness statement, over 10 pages, only three
       short sentences were devoted to this element of his case;
           Moreover I live with my uncle MA and  I  look  after  him  as  a
           primary carer. We are dependent on each other and we have strong
           ties. There my removal from the UK will break the family unit in
           the UK


   18. The uncle's evidence was that he was dependent emotionally  upon  the
       Appellant, who in turn was financially dependent upon him. He said he
       had received (unspecified) kidney surgery, suffered ill  health,  and
       could not perform daily tasks.  Thus  the  Appellant  helped  do  the
       shopping, took him to medical appointments, and reminded him to  take
       his medication. GP  records  relating  to  the  uncle's  health  were
       produced [ApB p145-153]. These  did  not  record  any  need  for  the
       Appellant to provide care services of any kind to his uncle,  and  Mr
       Reynolds did not seek to suggest that they did.
   19. The Judge noted that the evidence placed before him did  not  explain
       why it was claimed that the Appellant should be the only person  able
       to provide any care required, and considered that any care  needs  of
       the Appellant's uncle could be met either by other family members, or
       by social services. Mr Reynolds, correctly, did  not  seek  to  argue
       that this was a misunderstanding of the evidence [37].
   20. I also note from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge KSH Miller
       dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  conducted  in  the  identity  AJ
       against the refusal to grant him ILR, that it was the same uncle  who
       gave false evidence as to when the Appellant entered the UK.
   21. Whilst both the Appellant, and his uncle, undoubtedly have a "private
       life" in the UK, it is quite clear that the  evidence  placed  before
       the Judge failed to give a reliable, comprehensive and proper picture
       of what  that  life  actually  consisted  of.  Thus,  the  Judge  was
       perfectly entitled to conclude that he was not satisfied that  either
       the Appellant's or his uncle's Article 8(1) rights  were  engaged  by
       the decision under appeal [38].
   22. In any event, even if the Judge were wrong about that, (and I am very
       far from accepting that he  was)  the  Appellant's  case  before  the
       Judge, as it was before me, was based upon the simple assertion  that
       as  a  carer  for  a  British   citizen   it   was   (without   more)
       disproportionate to remove the Appellant from the UK.  That  argument
       is in my judgement based upon a  complete  mis-understanding  of  the
       decision in Lama (video recorded evidence - weight - Article 8  ECHR)
       [2017] UKUT 16. It is not enough to establish simply that a  claimant
       is to some degree a carer for a third party in order to render in all
       circumstances their removal from the UK disproportionate.
   23. The evidence in this case fell well short of  establishing  that  the
       removal of  the  Appellant  would  prevent  a  third  party  who  was
       receiving care from him, from being able to remain  in  the  UK,  and
       continue to make a significant contribution to the society of the UK.
       The facts of this case are not those of Lama. Indeed the evidence  in
       this appeal falls well short of  establishing  that  the  Appellant's
       removal would have any  material  effect  upon  the  third  party  in
       question. In any event, the entire basis for  the  decision  in  Lama
       itself, has recently been questioned in Thakrar (Cart JR, Article  8,
       Value to Community) [2018] UKUT 336.
   24. In this case, any "private life" relationship relied upon as existing
       between the Appellant and uncle as carer, must have been  established
       whilst the Appellant  was  present  in  the  UK  unlawfully.  In  the
       circumstances the Tribunal is required to give little weight  to  it;
       s117B(4).
   25. The Judge also noted that the Appellant did  not  demonstrate  either
       fluency in English,  or,  financial  independence.  Thus  the  public
       interest in his removal was enhanced by these failures,  in  addition
       to the enhancement to the public interest in  his  removal  that  was
       already afforded by his previous dishonesty; AM (s117B) Malawi [2015]
       UKUT 260, Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58.
   26. In the circumstances the Judge's decision upon the Article  8  appeal
       was well open to him, and was adequately  reasoned.  I  am  satisfied
       that on the findings of fact made by the Judge no  Tribunal  properly
       directing itself could have come to any other decision than that  the
       appeal should be dismissed. Thus, in my judgement, the Appellant  has
       failed to demonstrate any material error in the Judge's  approach  to
       the Article 8 appeal.


Conclusion
   27. Accordingly, notwithstanding the terms in which permission to  appeal
       was granted, I confirm the Judge's decision to  dismiss  the  appeal.
       There is no material error of law in the approach taken by the  Judge
       to the appeal that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.



  DECISION


  The Decision of the First Tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  17
  October 2018 contained no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  to
  dismiss the Appellant's appeal which requires that  decision  to  be  set
  aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
  Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Appellant is  granted
  anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report  of  these  proceedings
  shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to
  the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
  direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 29 April 2019


