
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/04664/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 April 2018                          |On 13 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     NM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

    1.   The appellant, a citizen of Iran, has appealed against a  decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt dated 6 July 2017, in  which  she
         dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision  dated  3  May
         2017 to refuse her international protection claim.

Summary of claim

    2.    The  appellant  claims  that  she  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in Iran because she re-commenced a sexual  relationship
         with her ex-husband ('the first husband') after marrying her second
         husband, and  was  caught  by  her  second  husband  having  sexual
         relations with her first husband.  At the hearing before the First-
         tier Tribunal the appellant also relied for the  first  time,  upon
         her conversion to Christianity.


Appeal proceedings


    3.    In  a  carefully  drafted  decision,  the   First-tier   Tribunal
         disbelieved the appellant's evidence and dismissed the appeal.


    4.   In succinct but  wide-ranging  grounds  of  appeal  the  appellant
         appealed against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   When
         granting permission to appeal in a decision dated 17 October  2017,
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman observed  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal gave detailed reasons for rejecting the credibility of the
         appellant's account of why she left Iran  and  as  to  her  alleged
         conversion to Christianity but nevertheless found that the  grounds
         raised arguable errors of law.


Hearing


    5.   At the hearing before me Mr  Sadiq  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
         appeal and did so under two headings consistent with the two  limbs
         of the appellant's asylum claim:  conversion  to  Christianity  and
         adultery.  As to the conversion limb,  Mr  Sadiq  argued  that  the
         reasons for not accepting Reverend Green's reasoning at  [31]  were
         inadequate and infected by errors of fact.  Mr Sadiq  also  invited
         me to find that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to  draw  adverse
         inferences from the appellant  requesting  a  toilet  break  during
         cross-examination and  in  failing  to  expressly  acknowledge  the
         consistencies within her account.


    6.   Mr Bates relied upon a rule 24 notice dated 24 November 2017.   He
         asked me to find that the factual findings were  entirely  open  to
         the First-tier Tribunal and the recording of the steps taken by the
         judge when the appellant sought a toilet break, was precisely  that
         - a summary of the record  of  proceedings  at  that  juncture  for
         completeness - and did not play a material role in her findings  of
         fact.


    7.   After hearing from both representatives, I reserved  my  decision,
         which I now provide with reasons.


Error of law discussion


    8.   Although Mr Sadiq focused on the matters I have set out  above,  I
         shall consider each  ground  of  appeal  before  me.   The  written
         grounds of appeal are regrettably not  numbered.   I  have  however
         addressed each ground in turn below.

Toilet break

    9.   Mr Sadiq submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  drawing
         adverse findings from the appellant going to the toilet during  the
         course  of  cross-examination.   This   ground   is   misconceived.
         Although the First-tier Tribunal  recorded  under  the  sub-heading
         "Preliminary  matters"  at  [5],  "for  completeness",  that   "the
         appellant asked for a comfort break in the middle of  her  evidence
         when she was being pressed in cross-examination", this did not form
         any part of the reasons provided for  drawing  adverse  inferences.
         There is no reference to this whatsoever  in  the  section  dealing
         with  credibility,  under  the  sub-heading   "Asylum   claim   and
         credibility" from [18] onwards.


    10.  When the decision is read as  a  whole,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge has simply recorded the steps that she  took  to  enable  the
         appellant to have a toilet break, but in circumstances in which the
         appellant would not have obtained any unfair advantage.   This  was
         recorded for completeness and  not  as  an  additional  reason  for
         disbelieving the appellant's account.


    11.  Mr Sadiq submitted that adverse inferences  should  not  be  drawn
         from a  witness  seeking  a  toilet  break  during  the  course  of
         extensive  cross-examination.   In  principle   that   is   not   a
         controversial  proposition.   Mr  Sadiq   accepted   that   it   is
         appropriate for a judge to take certain precautionary measures when
         a toilet break is sought during the  course  of  cross-examination,
         but submitted that the judge  should  not  on  this  occasion  have
         assumed bad faith on the part of the appellant.  Whilst  the  judge
         has recorded  her  concern  about  the  appellant's  demeanour  and
         motivation in requesting a toilet break, when setting out what took
         place at the hearing, when the decision is read as  a  whole  there
         has been no assumption of bad faith and adverse inferences have not
         been drawn from the appellant's break.

Positive case


    12.  The grounds criticise  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  failing  to
         consider the positive aspects and consistencies in the  appellant's
         evidence.  The First-tier Tribunal has taken all relevant  evidence
         into account having properly directed itself to the lower  standard
         of proof at [7] and [18].  There is no cogent basis to support  the
         assertion that the First-tier Tribunal did not  have  in  mind  the
         consistencies in the appellant's evidence.

Plausibility / adultery

    13.  The  grounds  criticise  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  regarding
         aspects of the  appellant's  evidence  to  be  incredible,  without
         considering the lengths that people go to when they consider  their
         life to be in danger.


    14.  The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  be  concerned  about  the
         credibility of the appellant risking being  found  with  her  first
         husband at a restaurant near to her home at [23]  and  at  home  at
         [24].  These events  did  not  involve  a  life  or  death  choice.
         Rather, the First-tier Tribunal has found the appellant's claim  to
         have put herself  at  risk  in  the  circumstances  claimed  to  be
         incredible, particularly given  the  consequences  of  adultery  in
         Iran.    As  Mr  Bates  emphasised  during  the   course   of   his
         submissions, these findings were entirely open  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, given the context of Iran.  The First-tier  Tribunal  was
         entitled to find that given the dire consequences  that  flow  from
         adultery in Iran, she was not satisfied that  the  appellant  would
         take the risks she did in the manner claimed.


    15.  Having made those findings, the First-tier Tribunal  was  entitled
         to doubt the process by which the  appellant  was  able  to  escape
         having been caught in the sexual act of  committing  adultery,  for
         the reasons provided at [25 and 26].

Delay in raising conversion

    16.  The grounds allege that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider
         the appellant's evidence that she  did  not  raise  her  conversion
         earlier because she was unaware that  it  was  relevant  until  she
         obtained legal advice.  This ground wholly  fails  to  address  the
         First-tier Tribunal's detailed  consideration  of  the  appellant's
         explanation for not raising her conversion until  the  day  of  the
         hearing at [30].   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  be
         concerned about the nature and extent of delay.

Reverend Green's evidence

    17.  The submission in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal failed to adequately take into account the  oral  evidence
         provided by Reverend Sam Green fails to acknowledge the summary  of
         his evidence  at  [28]  and  [31].   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was
         entitled to attach little weight to his evidence  for  the  reasons
         provided at [31].  In short,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  based  her
         assessment of the genuineness of the claimed conversion on a  wider
         range  of  information,  unavailable  to  Reverend   Green.    When
         assessing the genuineness of the appellant's conversion, the First-
         tier Tribunal was entitled to consider  all  the  evidence  in  the
         round.  I do not accept that the  First-tier  Tribunal  disbelieved
         the  genuineness  of  conversion,  because  she  disbelieved  other
         aspects.  All evidence was considered in the round,  including  the
         evidence provided by Reverend Green.




    18.  Mr Sadiq submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  fact  in
         finding that Reverend Green knew the appellant for three months  at
         most.  He relied upon a letter dated 15 June 2017 from the Reverend
         submitted on the day  of  the  hearing.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
         referred to this letter in some detail  at  [28].   This  indicated
         that the appellant began attending St  Thomas  Church  in  December
         2016.  Mr Sadiq acknowledged that the letter does not  specifically
         set out when Reverend Green got to know the appellant.  Indeed, the
         letter itself details two examples in around Easter 2017.  I do not
         accept that the appellant has demonstrated by reference to evidence
         that Reverend Green knew her from the first time she  attended  his
         Church.

Decision

    24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 April 2018
