
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04462/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2018                        |On 27th March 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     CO
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A Eaton, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") has made an anonymity order and for the
    avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  The appellant is granted
    anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify her. This direction applies both
    to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
    court.

 2. The appellant is a Nigerian national.  She arrived in the UK in June
    2014 with leave to enter valid until 17th May 2017, as the dependent of
    her husband, a Tier 4 Migrant.  Their daughter was born on 18th
    December 2015, and their son was born on 15th June 2017.  On 18th
    September 2017, the appellant made a claim for asylum with her husband
    and two children as dependents. That claim was refused by the
    respondent for the reasons set out in a decision dated 19th March 2018.
     The appellant's appeal against the decision was heard by FtT Judge
    James on 30th August 2018 and dismissed for the reasons set out in a
    decision promulgated on 23rd October 2018. It is it that decision that
    that is the subject of the appeal before me.

 3. The background to the claim for asylum is simple. The appellant
    claimed, and the respondent accepted, that the appellant is a Nigerian
    national born in Imo State, and of Igbo ethnicity.  Similarly, the
    appellant claimed, and the respondent accepted, that in Nigeria, she
    had been subjected to type one FGM.  The international protection claim
    made by the appellant centred upon the risk that the appellant's
    daughter, who was born in the UK, would now face upon return to
    Nigeria.  The appellant claimed, and the respondent accepted, that the
    appellant had received a letter urging the appellant to return to
    Nigeria in order for her daughter to be circumcised. The appellant
    fears that upon return to Nigeria her daughter will be subjected to
    FGM.  Although the respondent accepted that the appellant has
    demonstrated a genuine subjective fear on return to Nigeria, the
    respondent considered the claim not to be objectively well founded.
    Broadly put, the respondent concluded that there is sufficient
    protection provided by the authorities in Nigeria, and in any event,
    there is an area of Nigeria to which the appellant and her family could
    reasonably relocate.

The decision of FtT Judge James

 4. At paragraph [11] of his decision, the Judge records that the
    representatives agreed that the issues for him to determine was whether
    there was a sufficiency of protection in Nigeria, or whether the
    appellant could safely relocate. At paragraphs [12] to [14] of the
    decision, the Judge refers to the evidence noting in particular, at
    paragraph [14] that he had before him a bundle of documents from the
    appellant comprising of 361 pages. Importantly, that bundle included an
    expert's report from Adaobi Nkeokeloyne, who had been instructed by the
    appellant's solicitors to give an expert opinion regarding a number of
    matters including inter alia, the prevalence of FGM, feasibility of
    internal relocation, and the importance of maintaining tribal links in
    Nigeria.

 5. At paragraph [17] of the decision, the Judge records the submission
    made on behalf of the respondent that the expert report is based upon
    generalisations and information from the appellant. At paragraph [24]
    of the decision, the Judge notes the submissions made on behalf of the
    appellant relating to the matters set out at paragraphs [132] to [139]
    of that report.

 6. The findings and conclusions of the Judge are to be found at paragraphs
    [30] to [42] of the decision.  At paragraphs [31] and [32] of the
    decision, the FtT Judge sets out the evidence before him regarding the
    appellant's extended family in Nigeria.  At paragraph [33], the Judge
    concludes that he is satisfied that there are large areas of Nigeria,
    especially in the central and northern areas, where the appellant has
    no family presence. The Judge was satisfied that the presence of family
    members in the location specified by the appellant would not inevitably
    lead to her being found by her family. The Judge noted that the uncle
    who is pressing for her daughter's return and circumcision, has
    businesses in four States, but there was no evidence of a network
    throughout Nigeria, via which the appellant could be traced.

 7. At paragraphs [34] to [38], the Judge engages with the background
    material. The Judge noted at paragraph [34], the percentage of women
    who have undergone FGM in the Igbo tribe and noted that that is the
    third highest rate of incidence.  The judge also noted that the
    incidence of FGM is highest in the southern part of Nigeria, which also
    correlates to the fact that the Igbo tribe are natively found in the
    southern part of Nigeria, although they can be found across Nigeria.
    The Judge noted that the background material demonstrates that there
    are significant parts of northern Nigeria, where the rate of FGM is
    less than 4%.

 8. The Judge noted, at paragraph [36] that the appellant's account that it
    would not be possible to obtain work or housing without membership of a
    tribal association was not supported by the matters set out at
    paragraphs [178] to [180] of the expert's report.  At paragraph [38],
    the Judge rejected the claim by the appellant that she would be unable
    to withstand societal pressures in Nigeria, and that a failure to
    undergo FGM would adversely affect her daughter's marriage prospects.
    At paragraphs [39] and [40], the Judge concluded as follows:

         "39. The appellant's daughter would not be returning to Nigeria
         without family support. She would be accompanied by her parents and
         in particular by her father whose decision in relation to FGM
         should have significant influence culturally. The appellants
         parents are against FGM as are some of her siblings. I am not
         satisfied that the appellants family would be able to find her or
         her family on return to Nigeria but even if they did I am not
         satisfied that she would be unable to withstand family pressure in
         light of the support of her parents and some of her siblings. I am
         not satisfied that the appellant would have to reveal her presence
         in Nigeria by joining a tribal association. I do not accept that
         employment would be dependent upon joining such an association.
         Both the appellant and husband are experienced education
         professionals who should be able to readily find employment. Both
         the appellant and her husband have long experience of social and
         cultural norms in Nigeria. I do not accept that they would be
         unable to integrate on return to Nigeria.

         40.  While I accept that enforcement of VAPPA is poor to the point
         of non-existent and as a result it does not represent any deterrent
         to the practice of FGM. Notwithstanding I find that the appellant
         and her family can safely relocate in Nigeria to an urban area in a
         state where is the incidence of FGM is low, where there would be
         little or no societal pressure, where they would not have to
         disclose their presence to the family and where the appellant and
         her husband would be able to protect their daughter from FGM.
         Accordingly I am not satisfied that the appellant has a genuine
         well founded fear of her daughter suffering from FGM that is
         objectively well founded."



The Appeal before me

 9. The appellant advances four grounds of appeal. First, in assessing the
    risk of the appellant being found by her family, the Judge failed to
    apply the correct standard of proof. At paragraph [33] of the decision,
    the Judge stated that he was not satisfied "that the presence of family
    members in the locations specified by the appellant would inevitably
    lead to being found by her family.".   Applying the correct standard of
    proof the question was whether it was reasonably likely that the
    appellant would be found by her family.

10. Second, in considering whether the appellant would be found by family,
    the Judge failed to properly consider the matters set out in the
    expert's report, and the evidence of the appellant that she would have
    to give her personal details if she applied for work and will not be
    able to hide where she is from. Third, in considering the question of
    internal relocation, the Judge limited his consideration to whether or
    not relocation would be safe, and whether the appellant would be able
    to integrate without considering whether internal relocation would be
    unduly harsh or unreasonable. The Judge failed to take into account the
    considerable evidence regarding the possibility destitution, focusing
    instead, solely upon the role of tribal associations.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf on 13th
    November 2018.

12. At the hearing before me, Mr Eaton relied upon the appellant's grounds
    of appeal and submits that the Judge has failed to adequately engage
    with the matters set out in the experts report. The expert had
    identified many of the difficulties that the family might face if they
    were to internally relocate. At paragraph [180] of the report, the
    expert had noted that where the appellants family members are committed
    to finding the family, internal relocation may prevent the family being
    found, only for a while.  The expert had expressed the opinion, at
    paragraph [179] of the report, that upon returning it to Nigeria, it is
    highly unlikely that the appellant and her family will thrive living in
    isolation and that it is highly unlikely that the appellant's family
    can endure isolation.  Mr Eaton submits that the issues raised in the
    experts report required careful consideration and the decision of the
    FtT simply fails to engage with the opinions of the expert, regarding
    matters that are relevant to an assessment of whether it would be
    unduly harsh for the family to internally relocate. For example, at
    paragraph [191] of the report, the expert states that the cost
    implications must be taken into consideration and the family appear to
    have no funds and will not be returning to Nigeria with any prearranged
    employment. The chances that the family will secure accommodation in
    any city and sustain it over time, while also catering for the
    potential needs of the two children without a reliable source of
    income, remains in the experts view, slim. The expert had noted, at
    paragraph [198] of the report that Nigeria's rate of unemployment had
    risen and that amongst the Nigerian unemployed, women are most
    affected.  These were all crucial to an assessment whether it is unduly
    harsh for the family to internally relocate, and the Judge did not
    engage with that evidence.

13. The respondent opposes the appeal and Mr Tufan submits that in a
    detailed decision, the Judge considered all the background material
    before him, including the expert evidence, and reached conclusions that
    were open to him. Mr Tufan submits that the decision of the Judge must
    be read as a whole and that the Judge properly directed himself to the
    burden and standard of proof in an asylum claim at paragraph [8] of the
    decision. Mr Tufan submits that the Judge had proper regard to the
    expert report, albeit 'tangentially", and that the Judge was not
    required address each of the issues set out in the experts report at
    length. The Judge adequately dealt with the issues before him, and the
    decision discloses no material error of law.

14. In my judgement, the conclusion of the Judge as to whether the presence
    of family members in the locations specified by the appellant would
    "inevitably" lead to the appellant and her daughter being found by her
    family, bears no relation to the low standard of proof when assessing
    risk in a claim for international protection claim. I accept, as Mr
    Tufan submitted, that the use of that term is unfortunate and might
    well have been unintended, but in the end, the use of the term
    indicates that the Judge erred in law, by applying too high a standard
    of proof in relation to an issue that was at the heart of the appeal.

15. It is also unfortunate, that the Judge does not set out in his decision
    any of the material evidence that was relied upon by the appellant and
    her husband, as set out in their witness statements, particularly
    regarding the circumstances that they would find themselves in, upon
    returning to Nigeria.  Furthermore although there is some loose
    reference to the expert's report in the decision, the Judge does not
    expressly consider the opinions of the expert set out.  I have
    carefully read the report of the expert, and there is some force in the
    submission that is made by Mr Tufan that Nigeria is known to be the
    most populous country in the African continent and the seven most
    populous country in the world.  That is recognised by the expert. At
    paragraphs [159] to [173], the expert considers the feasibility of
    internal relocation and the expert concludes that although internal
    relocation appears to be a safer option in the event that the family is
    returned to Nigeria, it will not in the long run keep their location
    hidden from the extended family. In my judgement, that opinion, and the
    evidence of the appellant and her husband, required careful
    consideration by the Judge, that is simply not apparent from the
    decision. Similarly the evidence of the expert at paragraphs [174] to
    [180] of the report regarding the importance of maintaining tribal
    links, and the evidence regarding the risk of destitution, again
    required careful consideration in light of the evidence of the
    appellant and her husband as set out in their witness statements. They
    are matters that are plainly relevant to proper assessment of whether
    it would be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect the appellant and
    her family to internally relocate.

16. The expert does not rule out internal relocation but highlights some of
    the issues that are likely to be relevant to a proper assessment of
    whether that might be possible.  They are the issues the Judge does not
    adequately engage with. That is not to say that the appeal was bound to
    succeed. In the end, it may well be considered that internal relocation
    would not be unduly harsh but I cannot be satisfied that are careful
    consideration of all the evidence would lead to such a conclusion.
    There is therefore in my judgement, a material error of law in the
    decision of the FtT Judge and it must be set aside.

17. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the First-tier
    Tribunal, or to re-make the decision with regard to the issue of
    internal relocation, myself.  The appellant and her husband have set
    out in some detail, why they claim, in the particular circumstances,
    internal relocation would be unduly harsh.  The FtT Judge does not
    adequately address that evidence and as further findings are likely to
    be necessary upon the evidence of the appellant and her husband, the
    appropriate course is to remit the matter back to the First-tier
    Tribunal for determination.

Notice of Decision

18. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge James is set aside.

19. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
    of the appeal, with no findings preserved.

20. An Anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date     24th January 2019

      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

Whether or not a fee award is appropriate will  be  determined  by  the  FtT
following the re-hearing of the appeal.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
