
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/04932/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th December 2019                    | On 2nd January 2020                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     F M
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Shea (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fowell, promulgated on 12th August 2019, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Priory Court on 30th July 2019.  In the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, aged 30, having  been  born  on
    10th November 1998, and is a female.  She appealed against the decision
    of the Respondent Secretary of State, which is dated 12th May 2019,  on
    the basis that she had a well-founded fear of persecution on account of
    her political  opinion  and  activities,  particularly  the  sur  place
    activities in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's account is that her father was active in
    the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) and was last  heard  of  about
    two years ago before going into hiding.  He had  long  been  active  in
    politics.  She was 15 or 16 when her family home was  vandalised  by  a
    group from the ZANU-PF group.  In 2009, when she was about 21 years  of
    age, her mother and gender siblings were granted asylum  in  Australia.
    She, on the other hand, obtained a student visa to come to  the  UK  in
    2012, and this student visa expired on 7th November 2017.  In September
    of that year, just two months after expiry of  her  student  visa,  she
    heard from her father who warned her against returning to Zimbabwe, and
    this was shortly before he  himself  disappeared.   She  has  now  been
    living in the UK for seven  years.   During  that  time  she  has  been
    involved with opposition groups in the UK.   This  is  in  addition  to
    having been politically active from the  age  of  16  or  17  in  South
    Africa.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge began the determination by setting out the background to  the
    Appellant's appeal and  observing  that,  although  the  Appellant  was
    originally from Zimbabwe, "she has not really lived there since she was
    about 13 when  she  went  off  to  boarding  school  in  South  Africa"
    (paragraph 2).  The judge went on to note that the Appellant's original
    home was in Ruwa, which is about 25 minutes from  Harare,  the  capital
    city of Zimbabwe, and is  not  a  rural  area,  "and  hence  without  a
    significant MDC profile she would not face a real  risk  of  having  to
    demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF" (paragraph  21).   The  judge  also
    observed that  the  Appellant's  "evidence  fell  along  way  short  of
    demonstrating that in her own right she had a significant MDC profile."

 5. The judge had regard to the leading decisions (see  paragraphs  24  and
    27) in coming to his conclusion, and went on to note how the  Appellant
    could not produce a membership  card  at  the  time  of  her  interview
    showing her to be a member  of  the  MDC  (see  paragraph  29),  before
    concluding that the Appellant could not succeed in her appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  have  proper
    regard to the Appellant's claim of having imputed political opinion  on
    account of her sur place activities in the UK.   These  have  not  been
    evaluated and have not been properly addressed.   Secondly,  the  judge
    wrongly concluded that there would be no "very significant obstacles to
    integration of the Appellant in Zimbabwe, because his  focus  had  been
    very much on the Appellant having lived in South Africa (see  paragraph
    33), and so paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) had not been properly  analysed  at
    all.



Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 5th December 2019, Mr  Shea,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant stated that the  judge  had  wrongly  concluded
    that the Appellant was not at risk when stating that,

         "More generally, she clearly has had sufficient family  support  to
         send her to boarding school in South Africa than to live  in  South
         Africa for several years before coming to the UK  to  study  for  a
         further five years.  All this supports the view that she  has  been
         financed to do so and so would have family support available to her
         on return" (paragraph 33).

 8. Mr Shea  submitted  that  this  was  fundamentally  wrong  because  the
    Appellant's boarding school had been in Zimbabwe.  She had not been  to
    boarding school in South Africa.  Therefore  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant had been sent away to a boarding school in  the  neighbouring
    country of South Africa, which was demonstrative of the fact  that  the
    family had the sufficient financial means and wherewithal to  give  and
    to support her, was simply wrong.  They were  not  actually  a  wealthy
    family.




 9. Second, the judge had failed to  consider  the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities as a supporter of the MDC while she had been in the  UK  for
    the last seven years.

10. For her part, Mrs Aboni submitted that even if the judge  had  made  an
    error in relation to which country the  Appellant  had  undertaken  her
    boarding school education, this was not a material error.   Being  able
    to afford to send a child to  boarding  school  was  still  a  sign  of
    wealth, in a country like Zimbabwe, where the  economic  situation  had
    for a long time been a difficult one, and where the state school system
    was the system that was predominantly used by most people.

11. Secondly, as far as the Appellant's claim to have been an active member
    of the MDC was concerned, the judge had stated (at paragraph 21)  that,
    "without a significant MDC profile she would not face a  real  risk  of
    having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF" if she  came  from  Ruwa,
    which was not a rural area, but was just 25 minutes  away  from  Harare
    (paragraph 21).

12. In reply, Mr Shea submitted that more  than  half  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence at the hearing below concerned her sur  place  activities  and
    yet the judge had not dealt with this and therefore this  must  plainly
    be an error of law.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are as
    follows.  This is a case where, as the  judge  found,  the  Appellant's
    witness statement "was relatively  brief,  at  two  pages,  and  simply
    commented on some aspects of the  refusal  letter",  so  that  she  was
    unable to make good her claim that she would be at risk in  the  manner
    that she alleged with respect to her personal  history  (see  paragraph
    9).

14. Furthermore, regardless of whether the Appellant had been  to  boarding
    school in Zimbabwe or in South Africa (and I am prepared to accept here
    that the judge erred in concluding that she had gone to boarding school
    in South Africa when in fact it had been Zimbabwe),  the  judge's  note
    that "when I asked what she was doing in South Africa from 18 to 23 she
    said 'nothing'.  She also said that she left Zimbabwe when she was  17,
    just after she finished boarding school, so she returned  home  briefly
    before going to live in Johannesburg" (paragraph 9).  There is  here  a
    reference to the Appellant having finished boarding school in Zimbabwe.
     It does not really matter insofar as the material circumstances of her
    claim are concerned because in either case, the judge has to find  that
    the Appellant is at risk for the reasons that she alleges, and in  this
    regard the judge has been entirely clear that  the  Appellant  has  not
    been able to demonstrate such risk.

15. Second, insofar as it is said that the Appellant's sur place activities
    have not been properly considered, the  judge  did  observe  that  "her
    political activities involved monthly meetings in London with  ROHR  or
    Vigil, and meeting protests at the embassy." (Paragraph 12).  The judge
    went on to say that, "I asked why she did not have  an  MDC  membership
    card at the time of her interview and she said that she was waiting for
    her new card to come in the post and did not arrive in time" (paragraph
    12).  However, the judge did not find this to be credible.  He  was  of
    the view that,

         "The fact that she was not able to produce a membership card at the
         time of interview, nearly eighteen months after she  first  claimed
         asylum, also strikes me as significant.  The  suggestion  that  she
         was waiting for  a  replacement  card  was  not  one  she  gave  in
         interview - she simply said that she could get  something  to  show
         her membership" (paragraph 29).

16. It is clear here that the judge did not believe that the Appellant  was
    engaged in any  significant  MDC  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Indeed, the judge was clear that,

         "Her evidence fell a long way short of demonstrating  that  in  her
         own right she had a significant  MDC  profile.   In  her  screening
         interview she was asked if she had been involved  in  politics  and
         said 'just briefly' (at Q4.1) and mentioned previous posts  online"
         (paragraph 22).

17. In fact, the extent of the Appellant's claim of  her  involvement  with
    the MDC was that she was an  active  member  and  a  supporter  of  MDC
    through her involvement with ROHR, but the judge  concluded  here  that
    "but membership and participation would not suffice, and it has  to  be
    remembered that the MDC is a  lawful,  democratic  party  in  Zimbabwe,
    enjoying wide support" (paragraph 22).  Clearly, therefore,  the  judge
    did consider the Appellant's claim of being politically active both  in
    Zimbabwe and in the UK and rejected it outright.

18. Finally, in an appeal where both the  Appellant  and  her  sister  gave
    evidence, it was significant that "the main piece of evidence relied on
    in this appeal is a letter from her father, but on examination, neither
    of the two sisters were able to explain what this was  about",  as  the
    judge explained (at paragraph 25).  The letter was one  which,  as  the
    judge found "made little sense on its own terms" and neither of the two
    sisters addressed their minds to the importance of  the  letter  "which
    would be remarkable if they were  genuinely  receiving  a  letter  from
    their father telling them that he was going on the run because  of  the
    danger he faced" (paragraph 25).  Neither  sister  chose  to  reply  to
    their father either.

19. I should just add that although the judge's observation towards the end
    is that "given that what appears to be a substantial degree  of  family
    support in the past and the presence of her father in the  country,  it
    does not seem that anything approaching this degree of difficulty would
    be encountered" (paragraph 36), this is in no  way  entirely  dependent
    upon the suggestion that the Appellant's boarding school education  was
    in South Africa (rather than in Zimbabwe).  The judge was  entitled  to
    conclude  that  the  Appellant  was  a  person  who  was  receiving  "a
    substantial degree of family support" on the entirety of  the  evidence
    before him.  It was not dependent upon  a  mistake  of  fact  that  the
    boarding school had been in South Africa, when in fact it had  been  in
    Zimbabwe.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

This appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th December 2019

