
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04560/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th October 2018                           |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                     OZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bass, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity Direction

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI/2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Angola who was born on 4 September  1984.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on  13  November  2017.
    On that date, she claimed asylum with her daughter as her dependant.

 3. On 16 March 2018 the Secretary of State refused her claims for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 18 May 2018, Judge  Frazer  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 5. On 15 June 2018, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E  M  Simpson)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  appeal
    was listed  before  us  on  9 October  2018  when  the  appellant  was
    represented by Mr Bass and the respondent by Mr Howells.

The Appellant's Claim

 6. The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum Is that her husband was a
    member of UNITA, the opposition party in Angola.  The appellant  claims
    that  in  2009,  when  her  husband  became  involved  with  UNITA,  he
    encountered  problems,  including  violence,  from  supporters  of  the
    ruling, MPLA.

 7. Most recently, at  the  time  of  the  election  in  August  2017,  the
    appellant's husband was involved as a  counter  of  votes  in  Benguela
    province where they lived.  Shortly after the election, the appellant's
    husband  came  home  with  ripped  clothes  and   scratches   after   a
    confrontation broke out.  There was a dispute over the outcome  of  the
    election which, the appellant says, UNITA members had won, but in spite
    of which the MPLA declared themselves winners.  UNITA members were told
    to leave their village.  As a result, the appellant  and  her  daughter
    did so.  However, the appellant's husband and their son remained.

 8. Shortly afterwards, the appellant was contacted by a  businessman  from
    their village who told her that her house had been burned down with her
    husband and son inside.

 9. As a result, the appellant came to the UK claiming persecution  on  the
    basis that she feared the MPLA and its supporters.

The Judge's Decision

10. With the exception of her claim that  her  husband  and  son  had  been
    killed, the judge accepted the appellant's account.  She said  this  at
    paras 32 - 34 of her determination:

         "32. I did not find that the mainstay of  the  Appellant's  account
             was inconsistent or implausible.  She did not know  the  exact
             date of death but was able to say with some certainty that she
             was informed of her partner's and son's deaths on 20th to 22nd
             September.

         33.   Her  solicitors  contacted  UNITA  on  her  behalf  to   seek
             information but to date no response has been received.  I draw
             a neutral inference from this as there can be  no  speculation
             as to why this is.  Other than this I find that  she  has  not
             made any attempts to corroborate her account.

         34.  Having  regard  the  objective  information,  the  Appellant's
             account is broadly consistent with the article from  Aljazeera
             dated 25th August 2017 in that UNITA challenged  the  election
             results.  The article at page 16  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
             reports that there was  unrest  although  it  falls  short  of
             suggesting that there were massacres as  per  the  Appellant's
             account.  There are no other articles which report that  there
             were massacres.  Whilst Mr Manley sought  to  argue  that  the
             reporting may have been massaged by the ruling party, it would
             be surprising if  massacres  of  the  sort  described  by  the
             Appellant had gone unreported altogether.   This  is  directly
             relevant to the core of her account.  She has  not  sought  to
             substantiate her account  in  this  regard  and  I  find  this
             surprising, particularly given that the articles in the  media
             are in conflict with this aspect of her account.  I find  that
             whilst  most  of  her  account  is  generally  plausible   and
             consistent,  this  aspect  of  her   account   is   externally
             inconsistent and unsubstantiated.  On that basis I do not find
             that she has discharged the lower burden of proof in terms  of
             what happened to her partner and son."

11. Having made that finding, the judge nevertheless went on in para 35  to
    conclude that (even if) her husband and son  had  been  killed  by  the
    MPLA, she as a family member was not at risk of persecution on  return.
    The judge said this:

         "35. In any event, even if I were to  find  that  her  account  was
             credible, I consider that she would be able to relocate.   Her
             daughter is living in Lubito with her godmother and  there  is
             no reason why she cannot return  there.   She  may  have  some
             subjective fear  if  her  husband  and  son  had  indeed  been
             murdered by the ruling party but I do not find that  her  fear
             is objectively well-founded.  She was  not  directly  targeted
             herself.  There is no evidence that she would be at risk.  The
             killings happened at the height of the election conflict  some
             eight months ago.  I have considered whether she would  be  at
             risk at the airport because of her partner's involvement but I
             cannot see that she would be.  She may be questioned given her
             lack of documentation and as per MB (supra).  However there is
             no country guidance or objective  information  which  supports
             the proposition that family members of UNITA supporters are at
             risk from the  authorities.   I  do  not  find  that  she  has
             established that there would be a specific reason for  her  to
             be under the radar.  It does not follow, in my  finding,  that
             she would be detained and tortured."

12. The judge's reference to "MB" is to the Upper Tribunal's decision in MB
    (Cabinda risk) (CG) [2014] UKUT 00434 (IAC).  That  case  is  concerned
    primarily with the risk  to  those  from  the  Angolan  area  known  as
    Cabinda.  To that extent, it has no direct relevance to the  appellant.
    However, at [115] the Upper Tribunal  considered  the  position  of  an
    individual on return at the airport (quoted by the judge at para 23  of
    her determination) as follows:

         "There is clear evidence of normal  security  checks  at  airports,
         including Luanda airport on arrival.  We would expect those  checks
         to be thorough. They will  be  directed  towards  establishing  the
         identity of the person entering the  country.  Where  the  identity
         document produced by the returnee is valid and in a form acceptable
         to the authorities, there will be no reason  for  suspicion  to  be
         aroused. There is no credible evidence before us  to  suggest  that
         entry procedures are conducted by the Security Service or that  any
         heightened attention is paid to  those  returning  from  particular
         countries. Thus, whilst we are satisfied that security  checks  are
         conducted at border posts, we are not satisfied those  checks  will
         lead to arrest and detention unless there is a specific reason  for
         attention."

13. The judge concluded that the appellant had not established a real  risk
    of persecution or serious ill-treatment and dismissed her appeal.

The Submissions

14. Mr Bass relied upon  his  detailed  skeleton  argument  upon  which  he
    expanded in his oral submissions.  He made essentially three points.

15. First, he submitted that the judge's adverse finding  in  para  34  was
    irrational.  The judge had accepted the bulk of the appellant's account
    as not being "inconsistent or implausible" and  that  it  was  "broadly
    consistent" with the background evidence.  However, the judge had  been
    wrong to disbelieve the appellant in her claim that her husband and son
    had been killed in their village after she  left  because  her  account
    that that was during a "massacre" was inconsistent with an  article  at
    page 16 of the appellant's bundle.

16. Secondly, he submitted that the judge had been wrong to find  that  the
    appellant could relocate within Angola to a place  where  her  daughter
    (aged 14) was living with her godmother.  He submitted that, given  the
    positive  credibility  finding,  it  was  not  outside  the  realms  of
    possibility that the appellant would be  at  risk  from  an  oppressive
    regime and he placed reliance upon MB at [115] that  she  might  be  at
    risk at the airport because there was a "specific reason for attention"
    based upon her husband's past involvement with UNITA.

17. Thirdly, he submitted that the judge had failed to consider whether the
    appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection on the basis that she
    was a "lone woman" returning with a child to Angola.

18. Mr Howells accepted that the judge had been wrong to consider  internal
    relocation, which had not  been  raised  in  the  respondent's  refusal
    letter, because the appellant's fear (if well-founded) was of the state
    or authorities in Angola and, therefore, she could not be  expected  to
    relocate safely elsewhere in Angola.

19. However, Mr Howells submitted that it was properly open to the judge to
    find that the appellant's account that a "massacre" had occurred in her
    village, leading to the death of her husband and son, was  inconsistent
    with the background evidence.  He submitted that there was  nothing  in
    the background evidence to show that a  "massacre"  had  occurred.   He
    pointed out that, in any event, the document at page 16  was  itself  a
    document from UNITA who might have reason to exaggerate  the  situation
    in Angola.  There were no background  documents  from  an  acknowledged
    international organisation who reported a "massacre".

20. Finally, Mr Howells submitted that it was not clear that the  appellant
    had relied upon humanitarian protection before the First-tier Tribunal.
     He submitted that  it  was  not  referred  to  in  Counsel's  skeleton
    argument nor in the summary  of  his  submissions  at  para  6  of  the
    determination.  The only reference to it was in the submissions of  the
    Presenting Officer (referred to at para 5 of the  determination)  which
    Mr Howells submitted had  been  made  in  anticipation  of  a  possible
    submission from the appellant's Counsel which was, in fact, not made.

21. In his reply, Mr Bass accepted, following an enquiry  from  the  bench,
    that there was no background material before the  judge  to  support  a
    conclusion that a family member of a UNITA supporter or member was,  on
    that account, at risk on return to Angola.

Discussion

22. Dealing with the first point raised by Mr Bass, it is  clear  that  the
    judge largely considered the appellant's account to be truthful on  the
    basis that it was consistent internally and externally with  background
    material and was not implausible.  In reaching an  adverse  finding  in
    respect of the one aspect of the appellant's account, namely  that  her
    husband and son were murdered in their village by MPLA  supporters,  it
    was incumbent upon the judge to give  adequate  and  rational  reasons.
    The judge's only reason, given in para 34, is that her account  that  a
    "massacre" occurred is "inconsistent" with the article at  page  16  of
    the appellant's bundle.  So far as relevant, that report is as follows:

         "In a statement released on  Tuesday,  September  18,  2017,  UNITA
         strongly condemned acts of  unjustified  violence  in  Monte  Belo,
         Benguela province,  and  in  Saurimo,  Lunda  Sul  province,  where
         elections were held on 23rd August.

         According to the source, surveys carried out on the ground by UNITA
         local structures, and  not  only,  reveal  that  people  are  being
         robbed, raped, persecuted and intimidated only by being UNITA or by
         having voted for UNITA.

         'The UNITA facilities in the Monte Belo Commune in  Benguela,  were
         criminally looted, violated and destroyed by fire,  by  individuals
         associated with the  MPLA,  with  the  direct  involvement  of  the
         National  Police.   The  private  property  of  citizens  was   not
         protected by the  state.   Motor  vehicles,  homes  and  commercial
         premises of  citizens  were  looted,  stolen  or  destroyed,  which
         resulted in large material damages', denounced UNITA.

         The report adds that in the Municipality of  Saurimo,  Province  of
         Lunda Sul,  the  police  participated  in  acts  of  vandalism  and
         unjustified violence against citizens who gathered peacefully in an
         official meeting room in  broad  daylight.   The  UNITA  Provincial
         Secretary became also a victim of the tear  gas,  launched  by  the
         National Police.   There  have  been  shots  fired  at  defenseless
         citizens, and they were verbally abused, all of which  have  fueled
         an environment of insecurity and social  instability  that  is  not
         conducive to the electoral joy of democracy in  a  democratic  rule
         law of state."

23. The appellant's evidence is set out in her answers to questions 89  and
    105-106 of her asylum interview.  At question 89, she said this:

         "So I left with my daughter and he stayed, and on the same day MPLA
         announced to the country that they were the winners and on the same
         day  at  night,  MPLA  supporters  started  to   invade   villages,
         massacring the people who were inside the houses by stabbing  them,
         chopping the body's (sic) in parts and setting fire to houses  with
         people locked inside the house.  That is what happened  to  my  son
         and partner."

24. Then, at question 105, she says:

         "...one of the businessmen who worked in the village he  called  me
         and told me what had taken place and he told me on the  phone  that
         if I had the chance to run away as a terrible  massacre  had  taken
         place with a lot of bloodshed, and many people were killed."

25. Then, at question 106, she states:

         "he said that my house was burnt down and my son and  husband  were
         inside the house..."

26. The appellant's evidence, therefore, as to what she  believes  happened
    to her husband and son, was not as a result of her witnessing what  had
    taken place but  rather  was  based  upon  a  report  to  her,  on  the
    telephone,  from  a  businessman  from  the  village.   As  Mr  Howells
    acknowledged in his submissions, the  word  "massacre"  may  well  mean
    different things to different people.  Whilst the article at page 16 of
    the appellant's bundle  does  not  refer  to  extensive  or  widespread
    killing, which might be one (and perhaps the usual) sense in which  the
    word "massacre" could be deployed, it could  have  been  meant,  in  an
    equally plausible, less heinous sense.   The report  does  refer  to  a
    range of attacks, including in Benguela, involving  robbery,  rape  and
    intimidation including destruction of  property  "by  fire".   Although
    that specifically refers to the UNITA  facilities,  it  might  well  be
    thought to be more consistent with the modus operandi  claimed  by  the
    appellant to have led to the death of her husband and son.

27. We also note, and the judge made no reference to the Human Rights Watch
    document "Angola, events of 2017" at pages 23 - 33 of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  There is reference (at page 31) under  the  heading  "Election
    violence"  to  "violent  incidents"  ahead  of  the  general   election
    including,  a  commission  set  up  by  the  governor  of  Benguela  to
    investigate the reports of political violence  in  the  province.   The
    report refers to an attack  involving  the  death  of  a  senior  UNITA
    official on 31 July together with injuries to  six  people.   There  is
    also a report that, at that time, "several people were injured,  houses
    and shops were destroyed, and local residents hid in the bush for  fear
    of fighting".

28. In  our  judgment,  the  judge  manifestly  overstated  the  background
    material as being "inconsistent" with  the  appellant's  account.   Far
    from being patently "inconsistent", it was to some  extent  supportive.
    We say only "to some extent" supportive because  it  did  not  directly
    relate to the incident in which the appellant claims  her  husband  and
    son were killed.  It  does  however  support  a  picture  of  political
    violence, including deaths and damage to property (some of which was by
    fire) at the time of the election.

29. In our judgment, the judge erred in law in para 34 of her determination
    because her reasons for disbelieving the appellant on this single issue
    in her account could  not  rationally  be  tenured  to  the  background
    evidence  (in  particular  at  page  16  of  the   bundle)   as   being
    "inconsistent" with that account.

30. That said, however, we do not consider that that error was material  to
    the judge's conclusion that the appellant had not established she would
    be at real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment on return.

31. During the course of the  submissions,  we  raised  with  Mr  Bass  the
    judge's finding in para 35 of her determination.  There, even accepting
    the appellant's account that her husband and son had been murdered, the
    judge  found  that  there  was  no  objective  well-founded   fear   of
    persecution on return.  That was on the basis that  the  appellant  had
    not been personally targeted because of her political  background,  the
    violence had occurred at the time of the election which was (then) some
    nine months ago, and there was no evidence in country guidance  or  the
    background material that family members of  UNITA  supporters  were  at
    risk  from  the  authorities.   Mr  Bass  candidly  accepted   in   his
    submissions that there was no objective evidence to support  a  finding
    that family members of UNITA supporters were  themselves  at  risk  for
    that reason alone.

32. There is no suggestion in the evidence that she is a personal target of
    UNITA and we agree there was no material before the  judge,  or  indeed
    before us, to support a finding that the appellant  would  be  at  risk
    simply because of her husband's involvement with UNITA as she  claimed.



33. Mr Bass, however, sought to argue that although  MB  acknowledged  that
    there would be no risk to a returning individual at the  airport  there
    was  "a  specific  reason  for  attention"  based  upon  her  husband's
    background.  We do not accept that argument.  First, it  is  tantamount
    to a submission that there is a risk to the appellant because she is  a
    family member of a UNITA supporter.  Just as that is not  supported  by
    any background material, so also there is  no  background  material  to
    suggest that at the airport the appellant's husband's  background  will
    be  known  to  the  authorities  (and  therefore  bring  her   to   the
    authorities' attention) or that they would have  any  interest  in  her
    even if her husband's background was known.

34. Consequently, although we  have  concluded  that  the  judge  erred  in
    reaching her adverse finding in para  34  of  the  determination,  that
    error was not material since the judge made  a  clear  and  sustainable
    finding in para 35 that, even if the appellant's account  was  accepted
    in whole, she had failed to establish a real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious ill-treatment on return.

35. Consequently, the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    asylum grounds stands.

36. We accept, as Mr Howells conceded before us, that  internal  relocation
    would not be an option for the appellant if she were at  real  risk  of
    persecution from  the  MPLA  (the  ruling  party)  or  its  supporters.
    However, since the judge's finding that the appellant was not  at  risk
    on return stands, anything  she  said  about  internal  relocation  was
    necessarily immaterial to her decision.

37. We turn now to the issue of humanitarian protection.  As put to  us  by
    Mr Bass, this was on the basis that  there  was  a  real  risk  to  the
    appellant as a returning "lone woman" with a young child.

38. It is clear, on reading the  determination,  that  the  judge  did  not
    specifically consider this issue.  However, it is  equally  clear  that
    the appellant did not rely upon it as a basis  for  succeeding  in  her
    appeal at the hearing.  It was not relied upon by her (then) Counsel in
    his skeleton argument and  it  was  not  raised  by  him  in  his  oral
    submissions.  It was referred to  by  the  Presenting  Officer  in  her
    submissions but those  submissions  preceded  the  submissions  of  the
    appellant's Counsel and, as Mr Howells suggested, seems to have been to
    pre-empt a submission which, in the result, was not actually made.

39. We do not consider that the judge can be criticised for failing to deal
    with an issue - here an entirely  distinct  basis  of  claim  from  her
    asylum claim - which was not relied upon by Counsel at the hearing.  It
    was not an error of law for the judge to fail to deal with a  basis  of
    claim which was not relied upon.

40. In any event, that basis of claim would, in  our  judgment,  have  been
    unsuccessful.  It was not a claim that  had  a  realistic  prospect  of
    success and was not, therefore,  Robinson  obvious.   In  his  decision
    letter, the Secretary of State dealt with the risk to the appellant  on
    return as a lone or single woman at para 44, setting out a "response to
    an information request" dated 23 February 2017 in the following terms:

         "Discrimination against women in Angola

         As regards discrimination against women,  the  Social  Institutions
         and Gender Index website, accessed on 23 February 2017, stated:

         'The Family Code establishes equality between men and women  within
         the family:  both spouses have the same rights and are  subject  to
         the same duties.  These principles extend to  matters  of  parental
         authority.  The Family Code prescribes that both parents have equal
         responsibility to support their children, and  if  children  remain
         with  the  mother  following  divorce,  the  father  must  pay  for
         maintenance for  the  children.   However,  the  Rural  Development
         Institute found in a study on women's land rights in  Angola  that,
         although property tends to be divided equally post-divorce  without
         court interference, in cases where it is  not  or  when  women  are
         abandoned by their husbands, there was little evidence  that  women
         pursued their rights to property through legal channels,  including
         by using rights set out within the Family Code.

         With respect to inheritance rights, the Family  Code  provides  for
         the inheritance rights of  daughters.   However,  as  a  matter  of
         practice under customary law, daughters may  not  inherit  land  or
         inherit a smaller amount than  sons.   The  inheritance  rights  of
         widows and divorced women are  particularly  precarious.   Although
         divorced women or widowers may inherit land, this is commonly  only
         in trust for their children... According to the African Development
         Bank, the loss or displacement of men associated  with  decades  of
         conflict has led to an  increase  in  female-headed  households  in
         Angola.  The 2006 - 2007 Angola Malaria Indicator Survey found that
         25% of households were headed by a woman...

         The United States State Department 'Country Reports on Human Rights
         Practices for 2015', published on 13 April 2016, stated:

         'Under the constitution and law, women enjoy the  same  rights  and
         legal status as men,  but  societal  discrimination  against  women
         remained a problem, particularly in rural areas...  There  were  no
         effective mechanisms to  enforce  child  support  laws,  and  women
         generally bore  the  major  responsibility  for  raising  children.
         There  were  no  known  cases  of  official   or   private   sector
         discrimination in employment or  occupation,  credit,  pay,  owning
         and/or managing a business, or housing.  Gender discrimination  was
         more prevalent in  terms  of  household  responsibilities  than  in
         access to goods or services.

         The law provides for equal pay for  equal  work...  although  women
         generally held low-level positions."

41. We also note that a small  bundle  before  the  FtT,  provided  by  the
    Presenting Officer and not by the appellant,  has  a  number  of  short
    documents dealing with the position of women in Angola.   We  were  not
    specifically referred to this at the hearing but it does  not,  in  our
    judgment, add any weight to a claim by the appellant distinct from  the
    matters raised in para 44 of the respondent's decision.

42. We note that the appellant's case  is  that  her  14-year-old  daughter
    lives with her godmother.  There is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
    appellant could not return to live with them or to conclude that  there
    was a real risk of serious harm to her as a  result  of  being  a  lone
    woman returning with another child.  It may well be that  the  weakness
    in the background evidence was why Counsel for the  appellant  did  not
    rely on this basis of claim before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

43. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law.
    The decision stands.

44. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             19 October 2018



