
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04071/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2016                   |On 1 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Smith, counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Symes, promulgated on  1  September  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on 27 September 2016.



Anonymity

 2. A direction has been made previously, and this is maintained.

Background

 3. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom during 1997, aged around 8
    (having left Somalia aged 3) accompanied by his mother and sisters.  He
    was initially granted exceptional leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    and, thereafter, indefinite leave to remain  on  20  May  2005.  During
    2004, the respondent was sentenced to 10 months' detention and training
    following a conviction for affray. The following year he was  convicted
    of disorderly behaviour and robbery and placed under supervision.

 4. The respondent received a four-year sentence following a conviction for
    attempted robbery during 2005 and he was  subsequently  served  with  a
    notice of intention to make a deportation order  in  2007.  His  appeal
    against that decision was allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds on  21  May
    2008.

 5. On 22 December 2008, the respondent was sentenced  to  a  total  of  10
    years' imprisonment for aggravated burglary and possessing a prohibited
    weapon. The sentencing judge said as follows; "You,  with  two  others,
    pushed yourself into a private address, where children were asleep,  at
    11 o'clock at night. You were carrying a gun. It later transpired there
    was ammunition available in a magazine which was on your  person.  You,
    or your colleagues, threatened to kill the occupants and it  must  have
    been utterly terrifying in its  violence  and  its  unexpectedness  for
    everyone that was in that  property."  After  noting  the  respondent's
    previous convictions and that the instant offence  was  committed  just
    three months after he was released from the young offender  institution
    in relation to the  attempted  robbery  matter,  the  sentencing  judge
    concluded that the respondent was "someone who poses, and will continue
    to pose for the considerable future, a significant risk of serious harm
    from the commission of further offences of this nature."

 6. The appellant's prison sentence was varied to 14 years by the Court  of
    Appeal on 5 June 2009.

 7. The  Secretary  of  State  sent  the  respondent  notification  of  his
    liability to deportation on 3 August 2012. On  26  September  2013  the
    deportation order was signed. The appeal against that decision did  not
    proceed as the respondent raised asylum  for  the  first  time  at  the
    hearing. Thereafter he was interviewed in respect  of  this  claim.  In
    essence, the respondent claimed that he was from a minority clan,  that
    his wife was pregnant, that he would be at risk in  Somalia  for  being
    westernised and that he could be forcibly recruited to Al Shabaab.  The
    appellant's protection and human  rights  claims  were  refused  on  18
    December 2015 and are the subject of this appeal.

 8. The  reasons  for  the  refusal  of  the  respondent's  claims  can  be
    summarised as follows. The Secretary of State certified the  protection
    claim under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 9. The respondent's claim to be a member of the Elaye  minority  clan  was
    considered to be unsubstantiated and the Secretary  of  State  was  not
    prepared to advance the benefit of doubt in his favour over this issue.
    The country guidance authorities on Somalia were considered, however it
    was not accepted that the respondent would be at risk of persecution or
    ill-treatment for the reasons he had given.

10. The Secretary of State considered the respondent's  credibility  to  be
    damaged owing to his delay in seeking asylum until after being notified
    of a deportation order. The respondent was excluded  from  a  grant  of
    Humanitarian Protection owing to  being  convicted  of  a  particularly
    serious crime. The exceptions to deportation did not apply because  the
    respondent was sentenced to at least 4 years' imprisonment and  it  was
    not accepted that there were very compelling circumstances such that he
    should not be deported.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

11. Following  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge
    concluded that the respondent could avoid ill-treatment in  Somalia  by
    internally relocating and that it would not be unduly harsh  to  expect
    him to do so. The judge found that it  would  be  "unduly  harsh  to  a
    compelling degree" for the respondent's partner and child to  accompany
    him to Somalia or to remain in the United Kingdom without him.

12.  The  judge  made  a  global  finding  that  the  combination  of   the
    respondent's absolute assimilation into life in the United Kingdom, the
    lack of family or clan connections in  Somalia,  the  presence  of  his
    entire family in this country and that his British  citizen  son  would
    lose a father  figure  reached  the  high  threshold  of  "particularly
    compelling circumstances."

The grounds of appeal

13. The grounds  of  appeal  argue,  firstly,  that  the  judge  materially
    misdirected himself regarding his findings as to the existence of  very
    compelling circumstances; that the judge failed to consider  the  issue
    of unduly harsh with reference to the respondent's criminal history and
    section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  in
    that it was said that he adopted a family centric analysis.  There  was
    said to be nothing in the respondent's case which  differed  materially
    from LC (China) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1310.

14. The second ground related to the respondent's private life, in that  it
    was argued that the judge artificially separated certain  factors  from
    his assessment of very significant obstacles to integration and he  had
    failed to indicate anything very compelling.

15. Thirdly, there was said to be a lack of analysis of the recent evidence
    of a medium risk of offending;  that  the  court  imposed  an  extended
    licence period and the appellant's further offending while on licence.

16. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  all  grounds  were
    arguable.

17. No Rule 24 response was received on behalf of the  respondent,  however
    Ms Smith provided a skeleton argument immediately prior to the error of
    law hearing which indicated that the Secretary of  State's  appeal  was
    opposed on all grounds.

The hearing

18. Mr Tufan relied on all grounds. He  added  that  the  judge  failed  to
    decide the section 72 issue; which he  conceded  was  immaterial  given
    that the protection claim had been dismissed and there  was  no  cross-
    appeal; however, he submitted it gave an indication of a lack  of  care
    by the judge.

19. Mr Tufan emphasised that the judge found at [70]  that  the  respondent
    would be able to communicate in Somalia using English and at [71]  that
    he could receive funding to  avoid  destitution  in  Somalia  from  his
    mother and a sister who were taking a holiday in Dubai at the  time  of
    his appeal hearing. He argued that the judge's reference to Appendix FM
    EX.2 was curious and was of no relevance in this case. He  acknowledged
    that at [79] the judge referred to the very compelling test, at [80] he
    cited SS Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 550, at [81] there  was  reference  to
    the public interest in deterrence  but  thereafter  he  went  seriously
    wrong.  The  respondent  was   required   to   show   very   compelling
    circumstance, however the judge looked at unduly harshness  under  399a
    of the Rules and thus considered lower threshold. Mr Tufan referred  to
    the recent judgment in AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 and commented
    that both of the claimants in  that  case  were  sentenced  to  periods
    significantly less than the respondent and their British  children  did
    not prevent their deportation. He argued that the judge held that there
    were very significant obstacles to integration but had  not  considered
    the higher test.

20. Mr Tufan referred to the decision and reasons in  Bossade  (ss117A-D  -
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC) and  remarked  that
    the foreign national offender  in  that  case  arrived  in  the  United
    kingdom at the age of 4, could not speak Lingala but it  was  concluded
    that there were no  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration.  He
    argued that even if the judge was right to find that the respondent had
    integrated in the United Kingdom, he came nowhere near very significant
    obstacles.

21. Notwithstanding the above-mentioned submission, Mr Tufan submitted that
    the judge did not consider the respondent's offending in terms  of  his
    integration and at [94] he had entirely  disregarded  the  guidance  in
    Farquharson (removal - proof of  conduct)  [2013]  UKUT  00146(IAC)  in
    relation to the offences for which the respondent was suspected but not
    convicted. At this point, it has to be said that the Secretary of State
    relied  on  the  categorisation  of  the  respondent  as  a  high  harm
    individual under the auspices of Operation Nexus. According to a police
    witness statement,  the  respondent  had  been  warned,  cautioned  and
    convicted of a number of offences between the  years  2000  and  (after
    many years with no offending) 2014; he had been charged  with  but  not
    convicted of attempted robbery and possession of class A drugs, he  had
    been a victim of a stabbing, been acquitted of driving offences  and  a
    number of offences remained on file.

22.  Mr  Tufan  argued  that  at  [97]  the  judge  failed  to  take   into
    consideration the seriousness of the respondent's recent offence  which
    involved him swapping car seats with his wife in an  attempt  to  avoid
    her acquiring a drink-driving  conviction.  He  acknowledged  that  the
    judge cited LC China [2014] EWCA Civ 1310, but submitted that the judge
    had merely paid lip service and did  not  apply  the  ratio.  Mr  Tufan
    further criticised the judge's departure  from  the  professional  view
    that the respondent posed a medium risk of offending and had considered
    his rehabilitation to be exceptional.

23. Ms Smith relied on her skeleton argument. She invited me  not  to  deal
    with additional points made by Mr Tufan which did not form part of  the
    grant of permission. Addressing the first of the  grounds,  she  argued
    that the judge demonstrated that he was aware of the  legal  principles
    at [79] and recognised that the sentence was long. The  judge  reminded
    himself of the strong  public  interest  throughout  his  decision  and
    further reminded himself at [102].

24. The  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  was  in  reality  a  perversity
    challenge to the judge's finding that the impact  of  the  respondent's
    deportation would have an unduly harsh impact on his wife and child. Ms
    Smith relied on JZ (Zambia) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  116,  arguing  that  the
    elimination of family life is  a  relevant  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account. The judge was aware that simple separation would not be enough
    but he put this in context, in that in Somalia  owing  to  the  country
    conditions, the respondent's family will not be able  to  visit  either
    Somalia or a neighbouring country.

25.  While  at  [86-87]  the  judge  acknowledged  that  the   respondent's
    circumstances were found not to cross  the  Article  3  threshold,  the
    circumstances in Somalia would be extremely difficult and  there  would
    be no opportunity for any physical contact between the  respondent  and
    his child for the foreseeable future.

26. Given the high threshold for  perversity,  Ms  Smith  argued  that  the
    Secretary of State must establish that the length of the separation  of
    the respondent from his child was an  irrelevant  factor.  Furthermore,
    the judge did not err in saying the respondent would be  excluded  from
    the United Kingdom for 10 years. Nor did he err  in  stating  that  the
    respondent's status was not precarious at the  time  he  met  his  wife
    given that the second deportation order had  been  withdrawn  following
    his asylum claim. This issue was irrelevant because the real issue  was
    the permanent severance  of  the  respondent's  relationship  with  his
    child. Furthermore, in summing up the judge listed multiple factors, of
    which his partner was only one part.

27. With regard to the second ground,  Ms  Smith  objected  to  Mr  Tufan's
    expansion of the grounds to include reference to Farquharson.  At  [97]
    the judge had recognised the respondent's  "serious  misjudgement"  and
    that the offence was a further blemish, however as it was  a  different
    type of offence which did not lead to  his  recall,  the  Secretary  of
    State's objections were just  a  difference  of  opinion  and  did  not
    identify  an error of law. At [98] the judge found that the  respondent
    turned his life around in prison and  there  was  nothing  unlawful  or
    erroneous in this.

28. Ms Smith relied on aspects of the judgment in Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    813 in relation to integration. The  issue  mentioned  in  the  grounds
    regarding the respondent's (half) brother  who  lives  in  Somalia  was
    dealt with by the judge at [67]. The judge provided  extensive  reasons
    for departing from the probation officer's risk assessment  at  [94-96]
    of the decision. This was a rare case and the  judge  was  entitled  to
    find there to be compelling circumstances.

29. In reply, Mr Tufan argued that the judge did  not  apply  what  he  was
    entrusted to do. He acknowledged that the challenge was in  fact  based
    on perversity. There was a very high threshold for unduly harsh and the
    judge had not applied it as directed by guiding case law.  Further,  he
    argued that the test was even  higher  than  this  and  the  judge  had
    focused on the wrong test to start with.

30. With regard to the judge's finding regarding the  long-term  separation
    of the appellant from  his  child,  Mr  Tufan  turned  to  [14]  of  AJ
    (Zimbabwe). He argued that this was not  an  exceptional  circumstance.
    Furthermore, he said that it is open for the respondent  to  apply  any
    time for revocation of the deportation order.  He  submitted  that  the
    respondent could keep in contact with his family via  modern  means  of
    communication. Mr Tufan accepted that little turned on whether  or  not
    his situation was precarious at the time he met  his  wife.  He  argued
    that the judge minimised the respondent's recent offending for which he
    received a 6 month suspended sentence. With regard to the  respondent's
    links to Somalia, he referred me to [23]  of  the  decision  where  the
    judge quoted the mother's evidence as to a half-brother  who  lived  in
    Somalia in relation to whom she had sent funds to release  him  from  a
    ransom. There was clearly some support available to the respondent.  Mr
    Tufan maintained that the judge failed to give sufficient  reasons  for
    going behind the risk assessment when there was a  further  offence  in
    2014.

31. Ms Smith then wished to raise a number of other matters,  briefly.  She
    submitted a witness statement of the respondent's solicitor in relation
    to the respondent's immigration  status  when  he  met  his  wife;  she
    emphasised that the respondent had not been drink driving and the judge
    made references at [101-102] of the decision to the  "very  compelling"
    test. Ms Smith asked that were I to find a material error of law,  that
    the judge's factual findings be preserved and  that  as  there  was  no
    reason to remit or any new evidence, she invited the Upper Tribunal  to
    remake the decision in the appeal.

32. At the end of the error of  law  hearing,  I  indicated  that  I  would
    reserve my decision and would remake the decision, if an error  of  law
    was found, with findings preserved. Mr  Tufan  indicated  that  he  was
    happy with that approach.

Decision on error of law

33. On 28 July 2014 the Immigration Act 2014 ("the  2014  Act")  came  into
    force. It inserted a new Part 5A into the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). Sections 117C and 117D  of  the  2002
    Act provides:

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of seven years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
             offence, and

             (c)  who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender.

    On 28 July 2014 the Immigration Rules were also amended to read.

         Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

             (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

              (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
              relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
              the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to  be  deported;
                      or

              (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
              a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen  or
              settled in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                  remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.



         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
             of his life; and

             (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported.

34. As indicated above, the respondent was sentenced  to  in  excess  of  4
    years'  imprisonment.  Therefore,  regardless  of  whether  the   judge
    referred to the Immigration Rules or section 117C of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, he needed to identify very  compelling
    factors over and above the exceptions to deportation available to those
    foreign national offenders with lesser sentences. Indeed, this  is  the
    basis of the Secretary of State's first  ground  of  appeal,  which  is
    expanded upon at [9-14] of the grounds.

35. The  judge  correctly  assessed  the  respondent's  claim  against  the
    exceptions and he concluded  that  Exceptions  1  and  2  applied.  His
    reasons for those findings contain appropriate self-directions and  are
    rich in detail. In view of the fact that the respondent left Somalia at
    a very young age, the background information in  relation  to  Somalia,
    the respondent's rehabilitation and the best  interests  of  his  minor
    son, these were findings the judge was entitled to make.

36. The respondent's criticisms of the judge's findings in relation to  the
    Exceptions amount  to  little  more  than  disagreement.  While  it  is
    certainly the case that another judge may not  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion as the judge did in this case, it cannot  be  said  that  no
    reasonable judge could have so decided.

37. At [100] the judge set out his considerations as to whether there  were
    very compelling circumstances in this case. He stated as follows;

         "I consider that the combination of absolute assimilation into life
         here, combined with the fact that effectively all the relatives  of
         whom the (respondent) has any memory live close to  him  here,  and
         that he has a British citizen son who would lose  a  father  figure
         were the (respondent) to leave  the  country  and  a  wife  who  is
         devoted to him, reaches that high threshold."

38. At [102] the judge  accepted,  following  LC  (China)  that  the  "bare
    separation of child  and  father  for  a  long  time  does  not  itself
    constitute exceptional  circumstances."  Yet,  owing  to  "the  unusual
    situation in Somalia," the judge found that any separation between  the
    respondent and his son was likely be permanent.

39. Ms Smith confirmed that it was the likely permanent end to face-to-face
    contact between the respondent and his son, owing to the  impossibility
    of the child travelling to Somalia and the difficulty of the respondent
    travelling to a neighbouring country for  contact  with  his  wife  and
    child, which were the  very  compelling  circumstances  in  this  case.
    Indeed, at [86] the judge found;

         "I  cannot  find  that  he  would  be  in  any  position  to   make
         arrangements to travel to meet  them  in  any  third  country,  his
         situation in Mogadishu would be too precarious  and  uncertain  for
         such a conclusion to be made. So the appeal must be assessed on the
         basis that the (respondent) may very well have no physical  contact
         with  his  infant  son  in  the  future.  So,  given  his  mother's
         circumstances, his son would be raised without a  male  role  model
         for a very significant period."

40. The Secretary of State's challenge to the judge's conclusion that there
    were  very  compelling  circumstances  is,  in  itself,  a   perversity
    challenge, (R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 applied). None of the  judge's
    factual findings were challenged. Furthermore, it  could  not  be  said
    that there was an absence of reasons provided or a lack of appreciation
    in relation to the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign
    offenders. I have considered whether the judge's conclusions as to  the
    separation of the respondent from his child can be  distinguished  from
    that of any other parent facing separation from their  child  owing  to
    their serious offending. That is whether it was open to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the fact that separation  might  well  be  permanent  was
    sufficient to render the circumstances truly compelling.

41. Ms Smith relied upon the judgment in Kamara, however  the  claimant  in
    that case was sentenced to imprisonment of less than 4 years and had no
    "social, cultural or familial links" in  his  country  of  origin.  The
    evidence before the judge in the respondent's case, is that  his  elder
    half-brother (they share the same mother) resides in Somalia  [23]  and
    the respondent speaks the language of his clan [25], albeit poorly.  In
    addition, the  integration  of  the  claimant  in  Kamara  was  further
    adversely affected by the situation with Ebola in  Sierra  Leone.  This
    judgment does not, therefore, particularly assist the respondent.

42. I now turn to JZ (Zambia), who was sentenced  to  more  than  4  years'
    detention but succeeded before the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  on
    the basis of his private life. That decision being upheld by the  Court
    of Appeal. There are a number of areas which distinguish this case from
    that of the respondent and which lead me to  conclude  that  this  case
    also does not assist him. The claimant in JZ was both born outside  and
    had never been to his country of nationality; neither  of  his  parents
    were of Zambian descent;  he  had  no  ties  or  connections  including
    relatives in Zambia, he was unfamiliar  with  the  culture  and  social
    aspects of Zambia; he was unable to speak any language used in  Zambia;
    he was of mixed race; both of his parents had a serious illness in that
    they were HIV positive and he had not re-offended. None of these issues
    apply to the respondent.

43. The very compelling circumstances argued  on  the  respondent's  behalf
    included that his son would lose a father figure.   In  LC  (China),  a
    similar argument was made, however the Court of Appeal concluded;

         "It follows that neither the fact  that  the  appellant's  children
         enjoy British nationality nor the fact that they may  be  separated
         from their father for a long time will be sufficient to  constitute
         exceptional circumstances of  a  kind  which  outweigh  the  public
         interest in his deportation ..." (my emphasis).

44. In NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Jackson LJ observed

         "Nevertheless,  it  is  a  consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that
         offenders may be separated from  their  children  for  many  years,
         contrary to the best interests of those children. The  desirability
         of children being with both parents  is  a  commonplace  of  family
         life. That is not usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance to
         outweigh the high public interest in  deporting  foreign  criminals
         ..." (my emphasis)

45. I have also been guided by the judgment  in  AJ  (Zimbabwe)  where  the
    Court reviewed a long line of authorities with regard to the meaning of
    exceptional or very compelling circumstances. At [17], Elias LJ said as
    follows;

         "In order to establish a very compelling  justification  overriding
         the high  public  interest  in  deportation,  there  must  be  some
         additional feature or features affecting the nature or  quality  of
         the relationship which take the case out of the ordinary."

46. With regard to the facts of one of the cases before  the  Court  in  AJ
    (Zimbabwe), the court held that the separation of the parent  from  the
    child was "an everyday situation" and elsewhere it was said,

         "No doubt there will be some emotional damage to the children,  but
         that is not unusual whenever a parent is deported and the child  is
         unable to live with that parent outside the UK. There  was  nothing
         special or unusual in the circumstances here ..."

47.  I find that the judge did not identify any  unusual  circumstances  in
    relation to either the respondent's likely  long-term  separation  from
    his child or his  own  reintegration  in  Somalia  which  elevated  his
    circumstances to the very compelling threshold.  All  the  factors  put
    forward on the respondent's behalf, which were accepted by  the  judge,
    went no further than establishing  that  he  met  the  requirements  of
    Exceptions 1 and 2. That the respondent is a national of  Somalia  does
    not suffice to take the case out of the  ordinary.  I  therefore  find,
    with considerable reluctance, that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    respondent's circumstances were very compelling was not one  which  was
    open to him on the facts.

Remaking

48. I now proceed to remake the  decision,  leaving  the  judge's  findings
    intact. The respondent and his wife have a son together, born in  2015.
    The child is a British citizen. The best interests of this child are  a
    primary consideration and carry great weight. It is  obviously  in  the
    best interests of this child to be cared for by both of his parents  as
    he is currently. Nonetheless,  those  interest  are  capable  of  being
    outweighed by the public  interest  in  the  respondent's  deportation.
    Owing  to  the  length  of  sentence,  the  public  interest   in   the
    respondent's deportation remains very great.

49. It is not claimed that any member  of  this  nuclear  family  have  any
    physical or mental health conditions or needs. On the  facts  found  by
    the judge, the respondent faced up to a  10-year  separation  from  his
    child, possibly longer. He found that  modern  means  of  communication
    available to the family could not ameliorate the destruction  of  their
    life  together.  Ms  Smith  particularly  relied  upon  the  length  of
    separation, however the authorities which I have referred to above also
    concerned the separation of parents from their children for many years.

50. At this point, I remind myself about was said in AJ Zimbabwe,  in  that
    the respondent needs to provide evidence of special or unusual features
    to take his case out of the ordinary.

51. The fact that the respondent's wife would be devastated  and  that  the
    child would lack a male role  model  owing  to  the  lack  of  physical
    contact are, I find, typical consequences following from deportation in
    any case. The judge remarked that the respondent was  now  living  with
    his wife, she is employed and has relatives, both hers and those of the
    respondent to turn to in his absence. Furthermore, while  communication
    by telephone and video calls  cannot  replicate  physical  contact,  it
    would enable the respondent to maintain a relationship  with  his  son.
    Unfortunately, there is no  compelling  circumstances  evinced  by  the
    facts of this case, let alone very compelling circumstances.

52. With regard to the respondent's circumstances on returning to  Somalia,
    the judge concluded that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration and those findings are not disturbed.  I  have  taken
    into consideration that the country involved is  Somalia,  however  the
    judge also found at [90] that the respondent  would  be  able  to  find
    work; that he could survive via remittances; that  English  was  widely
    spoken in Mogadishu [70] but also that he would lack the family or clan
    connections central to life beyond mere subsistence. Again,  I  do  not
    find the respondent's likely circumstances in Somalia to amount to very
    compelling circumstances.

53. Considering the above factors and all the other findings  made  by  the
    judge cumulatively and having particular regard to section  117C(2),  I
    conclude that there are no very compelling circumstances over and above
    those described in sections 117C(4) and (5).

54. I therefore dismiss this appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made.

I substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
