
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04624/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2019                      |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              Mr zhenar mohamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Frazer of the First-tier Tribunal sent on 7 June 2018
    dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 23
    March 2018 refusing his protection claim.  The permission  was  limited
    to two grounds.  The appellant's first ground alleged  that  the  judge
    failed to follow a binding decision of  a  superior  court,  namely  AA
    (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944, which revalidated the position taken
    in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) that Kirkuk  (the
    appellant's  home  area)  was  a  contested  area.   Allied   to   this
    submission, the  first  ground  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider that, as the appellant's home area was Kirkuk,  he  or  family
    members on his behalf would be severely hampered in  obtaining  a  CSID
    due to the ongoing violence.  It was  also  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the risk to the appellant  from  Shia  militia  when
    travelling from Baghdad to Kirkuk, in light  of  the  country  guidance
    decision in BA (Return to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC).

2.    The  appellant's  second  ground  on  which  permission  was   granted
    maintained that the judge failed to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of
    the Rules in  respect  of  whether  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Iraq.

3.   Permission was not granted in respect of  the  challenge  made  to  the
    judge's adverse credibility findings, and Ms  Alban  did  not  seek  to
    raise them anew.  In my judgment she was wise not to do so because they
    were devoid of arguable merit.

4.   The appellant's first ground takes aim at the judge's reasoning as  set
    out in paragraphs 35 and 36:

         "35. The Appellant would be returned to Baghdad as he is  not  from
             Iraqi  Kurdistan.   The  most  recent  country   guidance   is
             contained in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG UKUT 00544 (IAC).   In
             that guidance  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  a  state  of
             internal armed conflict, such as to engage  Article  15(c)  of
             the Qualification Directive, existed in certain parts of Iraq.
              In terms of the feasibility of  return,  the  Tribunal  found
             that if a former resident of Iraq was not in possession  of  a
             passport (current or expired) or a laissez-passer  they  would
             not be returnable to Baghdad.  However,  following  HF  (Iraq)
             and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
             EWCA Civ 1276 an international  protection  claim  made  by  a
             former resident could not succeed by reference to any  alleged
             risk of harm arising from an absence of Iraqi documentation.

         36.  Regardless of the feasibility of  the  Appellant's  return  it
             will be necessary to establish whether or not he could  obtain
             a CSID in order to have access  to  facilities  and  services.
             Since the Appellant claims not to have an  Iraqi  passport  he
             will need to be able to persuade  officials  that  he  is  the
             person named on the relevant page  of  the  book  holding  his
             information in the Civil Status Affairs Office  for  his  home
             governorate."

5.   In amplifying the written grounds Ms Alban highlighted  that  the  CPIN
    on which the judge relied was dated  March  2017  which  pre-dated  the
    Court of  Appeal  decision  in  AA  (Iraq)  and  that  the  judge  also
    overlooked objective materials in the  appellant's  bundle  identifying
    the tensions in Kirkuk as a result of the Iraqi government's  rejection
    of the Kurdish referendum.  In the  Amin  case  in  the  Administrative
    Court, she submitted, the only issue was  whether  the  respondent  had
    made a rational decision.

6.   I am unable to accept the arguments advanced in support  of  the  first
    ground.

7.   Whilst it is true that the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  AA  (Iraq)
    incorporates modified country guidance, the modifications were confined
    to the issue of the availability of CSID documentation.  The court  did
    not consider whether the Tribunal country guidance in AA  (Iraq)  still
    comported with the background country evidence.  They relied simply  on
    the fact that it was existing  country  guidance  unaffected  by  legal
    error.  Accordingly, in decided to depart from AA (Iraq) [2015] country
    guidance, the judge was not failing to follow binding court authority.

8.   As regards the basis  on  which  the  judge  departed  from  AA  (Iraq)
    [2015], I consider that it was consistent with the guidance given in SG
    (Iraq) and other reported cases that cogent reasons must be  given  for
    such departure.  However, in line with  Tribunal  Practice  Directions,
    the judge considered whether there was fresh evidence to justify such a
    departure.  The evidence relied on was a  CPIN  which  itself  drew  on
    multiple sources of COI to found its  conclusion  that  Kirkuk  was  no
    longer afflicted by high levels of violence  such  as  to  make  return
    there a general risk contrary to Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  That CPIN made clear that ISIS was no longer in control and
    that there were only sporadic incidents of violence.  As the  Court  of
    Appeal has very recently noted in KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA  Civ  172,
    departure from existing country guidance on the basis of a CPIN  report
    does not as such involve legal error.

9.   In relation to Ms Alban's argument that the judge's  assessment  failed
    to take into account background evidence showing that Kirkuk was  still
    unsafe, I have looked through the  bundle  of  evidence  on  which  she
    relied to support this argument.  At best it  indicates  (i)  that  the
    Iraqi government's policy of  Arabisation  and  its  rejection  of  the
    Kurdish referendum result has resulted in Kirkuk lacking stability; and
    (ii) that remnants of ISIS militia were still able  to  mount  attacks.
    Such evidence is a far cry, however, from demonstrating that the levels
    of indiscriminate violent in Kirkuk had remained at anything like those
    applicable when ISIS  occupied  the  region.   Further,  this  evidence
    demonstrated very clearly that the Iraqi government was back in control
    of Kirkuk.

10.  Given my conclusions  regarding  the  judge's  departure  from  country
    guidance, the appellant's challenge to the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    issue of whether he would be able to obtain a CSID document falls away.

11.  I consider that the appellant's challenge to  the  judge's  conclusions
    regarding paragraph 276ADE also fall away for similar  reasons.   Given
    that Kirkuk was adjudged safe and that the appellant had  an  aunt  and
    cousin there (if  not  also  other  family),  the  judge  was  entirely
    justified in finding that there would not be very significant obstacles
    to his re-integration there.

12.  I see no merit in the further  submission  that  the  judge  fell  into
    legal error by failing to consider risk to the appellant  arising  from
    having to travel from Baghdad to Kirkuk without ID.  I accept that  the
    judge did not address this issue, but on the judge's  findings  it  was
    reasonable to expect that the appellant would obtain  ID  documentation
    obtained beforehand with the help of his aunt and cousin.  Furthermore,
    background evidence did not establish that since ISIS  had  fled  Iraq,
    travel from Baghdad to Kirkuk would place persons at  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm.

13.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date: 12 March 2019

         [pic]

Dr H H Storey

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


