
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04062/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th January 2018.                      |On 21st February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                 Chantal [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Boyle, a solicitor with Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on [ ] 1969, and is a citizen of the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo.  She claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on
    30th November 2016, and she claimed asylum on the same  day.   On  13th
    April 2017, the respondent refused to grant the appellant's  claim  for
    asylum for reasons set out in a letter of the same date.  The appellant
    appealed and her appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal  at  North
    Shields on 25th May 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox.

2.   The appellant's claim was that she had been involved as a supporter  of
    the Democratic and Social Progress UDPS in the Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo since 2015 and that on 21st September 2016, she was  detained  by
    security services and questioned after leaving her home.  She claims to
    have been detained for three days and managed to escape with  the  help
    of the guard.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 30th November 2016,
    and has also undertaken political activities in the United  Kingdom  on
    behalf of the UDPS.

3.   The judge accepted that the appellant had been  engaged  in  low  level
    political activity in her home country, but was not  a  member  of  the
    UDPS.  He appears, at paragraph 27, to accept that she has  taken  part
    in demonstrations in the United  Kingdom.   Between  paragraph  32  and
    paragraph 38 of the determination, he makes a series of  findings,  but
    it is not clear from those findings whether or not he accepted that the
    appellant had previously been arrested and detained in  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo.  The judge dismissed the appeal, believing  that  on
    return the appellant would not face persecutory harm.

4.   The appellant challenged the  determination,  arguing  that  the  judge
    failed to find that the appellant was at risk in the DRC as a political
    activist,  given  that  it  was  accepted  at  paragraph  27   of   the
    determination that she had attended demonstrations, secondly in failing
    to consider that even a low level supporter of the UDPS,  such  as  the
    appellant was accepted to be, who had been detained and released a  few
    days later, held a political profile with reference to the test set out
    in MM (UDPS members - Risk on return) Democratic Republic of  Congo  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00023 and lastly to grant a  request  an  adjournment  for
    the purpose of obtaining corroborative evidence her UDPS activities.

5.   In addressing me  Mr  Boyle  highlighted  a  further  defect  with  the
    determination and that was the failure of the judge to indicate clearly
    whether or not he accepted  that  the  appellant  had  previously  been
    arrested and detained in her home country.  If, as he had accepted, she
    was a low level activist, but not a member for the UDPS in  the  United
    Kingdom but was known to the authorities in the Congo because  she  had
    previously been arrested and detained  for  three  days,  then  on  her
    return to the Congo she may very well be at risk of  persecutory  harm.
    Mr Harrison accepted that the determination was confused and  that  the
    judge's thinking appears to have been confused, because it is not clear
    precisely what facts the judge actually found.

6.   I have concluded that the determination  is  unsafe  and  must  be  set
    aside.  There are  clear  findings  of  fact  that  need  to  be  made,
    particularly where somebody claims to have been arrested  within  their
    home country and to also to have undertaken  sur  place  activities  in
    this country.

7.   Given the inevitable delays that will occur if I were to  adjourn  this
    matter in the Upper Tribunal to be heard at a later stage by me and  in
    the interests of justice, I remit this appeal to be heard in the First-
    tier Tribunal  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  S  T  Fox.   A  French
    interpreter will be required and three hours should be allowed for  the
    hearing of the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                                   14  February
2018


