
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04221/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 29 November 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     FAA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1.  On  1  May  2018  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  James,  sitting  at
        Birmingham, heard the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's
        refusal of the appellant's application for asylum. The appellant is
        a national of Sudan on 1 January 1986.
     2. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [19], making a  number  of
        positive findings in the appellant's favour. At [25 - 26] the Judge
        finds as follows:


        25.  I am satisfied that there is a real risk  that  on  return  to
             Khartoum the Appellant  would  be  detected  as  a  person  of
             previous interest to the Sudanese authorities and coupled with
             her return as a failed asylum seeker it would likely result in
             her further detention and torture or other mistreatment.


        26.  In conclusion I find  that  the  Appellant  cannot  be  safely
             returned to Khartoum and for the above reasons  I  allow  this
             appeal.


     3. Notwithstanding these findings, in  the  section  of  the  decision
        headed Notice of Decision, the Judge writes 'The Appellant's appeal
        is dismissed'.
     4.  The  appellants  representative  wrote  the  First-Tier   Tribunal
        pointing out the  conflict  in  the  decision  asking  whether  the
        decision could be amended under the slip rule. A Duty  Judge  found
        the decision could not  be  amended  under  rule  31  of  the  2014
        Procedure Rules. The Duty Judge reminds the appellant of  the  time
        limits for lodging an appeal and invites her to annex a copy of the
        directions to any letter seeking an application to extend time.
     5. Such application was made, and permission granted by Upper Tribunal
        Judge Martin sitting as a judge the First-Tier Tribunal on 13  July
        2018.
     6. The matter came before me on the papers as Duty Judge as  a  result
        of which a letter was sent to the representatives of the  appellant
        and respondent in the following terms:


           "The grant of permission recognises that  the  First-tier  Judge
           meant to allow the appeal but due  to  an  error  dismissed  the
           appeal in the Notice of Decision  section.  The  Judge  granting
           permission is unable to seek to have the  same  corrected  under
           the "slip rule". The Upper Tribunal proposes  to  find  a  legal
           error on the basis of the procedural  error,  set  the  decision
           aside, and remake the decision, allowing the appeal on the basis
           of the findings made by the Judge. The parties  are  invited  to
           write to the Upper Tribunal no later than 4 PM on  14  September
           2018, confirming whether they are in agreement with the proposal
           or, if not, then why not."


     7. On 5 September 2018 the appellant's solicitors sent an email to the
        Upper Tribunal acknowledging receipt of  the  above  direction  and
        confirming agreement with the proposal.
     8. On 20 September 2018 a Rule  24  response  was  received  from  the
        Secretary of State stating, "The respondent  does  not  oppose  the
        appellant's application for permission to appeal  and  invites  the
        Tribunal to determine the appeal with  a  fresh  oral  (continuous)
        hearing to consider whether the appellant is at risk on  return  to
        Sudan in light of the FTT's findings  of  fact."  The  respondent's
        position does not properly address the terms of the direction which
        sought confirmation of whether the parties are  in  agreement  with
        the proposal to set the  decision  aside,  which  does  not  appear
        contentious, and for the Upper Tribunal to allow the appeal on  the
        basis of the findings made by the Judge although, if a  party  does
        not agree with this proposal to provide reasons why this should  be
        so. The Rule 24 response does not  claim  that  on  the  basis  the
        findings made the appellant is not able to succeed. The respondents
        reply is also out of time.
     9. It is not made out there  is  any  need  to  consider  whether  the
        appellant is at risk on return in light of the findings  made  when
        the clear indication by the Judge is that the appellant would  have
        succeeded but for the error referred to above.
    10. I find it appropriate and in the interests of justice and  fairness
        in all the  circumstances  to  find  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in
        dismissing an appeal when the body  of  the  determination  clearly
        indicates the Judge intended to allow  it.  On  the  basis  of  the
        findings of fact made by the Judge I substitute a decision to allow
        the appeal, representing the true intention  of  the  Judge  and  a
        finding reasonably open to the  Judge  and  this  Tribunal  on  the
        evidence and findings made.


Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.

   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated: 23 November 2018












