
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: PA/04725/2019     |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 January 2021               |On 12 February 2021              |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                          oluwatosin olusola alonge
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sultan, instructed by Regal Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Nigerian national who was born on 29  October  1990.
    He appeals, with permission granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara,
    against a decision which was issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Welsh
    on 13 March  2020,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

Background

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student in December 2008.
     He extended his student  visa  on  a  number  of  occasions  and  also
    returned to Nigeria twice, re-entering the UK as a student  thereafter.
    His leave expired on 30 April 2016.  The appellant was notified that he
    was liable to removal as an overstayer on 7 October 2016.  On the  25th
    of that month, he made an  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a British citizen, SR.  They married whilst that application
    was pending, on 1 November 2016.

 3. In the meantime, on 19 October 2016 the appellant had been arrested  by
    North Kent Police on suspicion of fraud by false representation.  Then,
    on 3 November 2017, the appellant was convicted of false representation
    and two counts of concealing criminal property.  On 22  December  2017,
    he was sentenced by HHJ Davies QC to three years' imprisonment.

 4. On 22 January 2018, the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant and asked him to state  any  reasons  (beyond  those  in  his
    pending application) why he should not be  deported.   Representations,
    including a  protection  claim,  were  made  on  26  March  2018.   The
    applicant was duly interviewed  in  connection  with  that  claim.   An
    exchange of correspondence about the application of section 72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") followed,
    after which the respondent decided  to  refuse  the  asylum  and  human
    rights claims which the applicant had made.  Her decision was served on
    9 April 2019.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard by the judge, sitting at Taylor House, on 7 January 2020.  In her
    reserved decision, the judge concluded, in summary, as follows.

 6. Turning firstly to the certificate under section 72 of  the  2002  Act,
    the judge concluded that the appellant had  successfully  rebutted  the
    presumption that he was a danger  to  the  community:  [23]-[30].   She
    noted at [31] that the protection claim had  not  really  been  pursued
    before her but she did not consider the appellant  to  be  at  risk  in
    Nigeria, whether from Boko Haram or as a result of his marriage to  SR,
    who is British but of Sierra Leonean origin:  [31]-[33]  and  [34]-[44]
    respectively.

 7. The judge then addressed Article 8 ECHR with reference, firstly, to the
    statutory exceptions to deportation in s117C(4) and  (5)  of  the  2002
    Act.  In considering the tripartite test in exception 1, she  concluded
    that the appellant had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
    his life; that he was socially  and  culturally  integrated;  and  that
    there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  his  re-integration  to
    Nigeria: [45]-[56].  In relation to exception 2,  the  judge  concluded
    that it would not be unduly harsh for SR to relocate  to  Nigeria  with
    the appellant and that it would not be unduly harsh for her  to  remain
    in the UK without him: [57]-[63].

 8. The judge did not accept that there were very compelling  circumstances
    which outweighed the public interest in  the  appellant's  deportation:
    [64]-[68]. The appeal was dismissed accordingly.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. There are said to be  three  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  judge's
    decision: that the judge made irrational findings; that she misdirected
    herself in law; and that she failed to consider Article 8 ECHR.

10. In developing these points in his skeleton  argument  and  his  lengthy
    oral submissions, I understood Mr Sultan to contend as follows:

    Ground One

      i) The judge had made positive findings under s72 (regarding danger to
         the community) and had erred  in  concluding  thereafter  that  the
         appeal fell to be dismissed.

     ii) The judge had merely assumed - without any evidential foundation  -
         that the appellant had profited from his offending.

    iii) The judge had reached  self-contradictory  findings  in  concluding
         that the appellant would have no family support in Nigeria and then
         that  there  would  not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   re-
         integration.

     iv) The judge had failed to consider matters  which  militated  in  the
         appellant's favour, including his positive conduct in prison.

    Ground Two

      i) The judge had failed to consider SR's particular  circumstances  in
         deciding whether it would be unduly harsh for her  to  relocate  to
         Nigeria.

    Ground Three

      i) The judge had failed to consider Article 8 ECHR.

11. I did not need  to  call  on  Mr  Jarvis  to  respond  to  Mr  Sultan's
    submissions.  I was able to indicate at the hearing that I  would  find
    there to be no legal error in the judge's decision, and that  it  would
    stand.

Analysis

12. The judge's decision is logically structured and carefully reasoned.  I
    find that her decision contains  no  legal  error,  for  the  following
    reasons.

13. Mr Sultan maintained that the judge had made contradictory findings but
    there is no such contradiction.  As I understand the first point in the
    grounds, it was contended that the judge's finding that  the  appellant
    did not represent a danger to the community of the United  Kingdom  was
    determinative of the appeal in the appellant's  favour,  and  that  the
    judge erred in concluding otherwise.  But that was a  finding  made  in
    relation to s72 of the 2002 Act  and  the  judge  understood  that  her
    consideration of whether the appellant's deportation  was  contrary  to
    Article 8 ECHR was to be undertaken within the statutory  framework  in
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act, as explained in NA (Pakistan)  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662; [2017] 1 WLR 207 and a host of  other  authorities.   The
    fact that a foreign  criminal  does  not  represent  a  danger  of  the
    community of the United Kingdom has never,  outside  the  EEA  context,
    been determinative of such an appeal.

14. Another contradiction which was said to exist by Mr Sultan was  between
    the judge's finding that the appellant would have no family support  in
    Nigeria and the later finding that there would not be very  significant
    obstacles to his re-integration.  There is no contradiction here.   The
    judge cited SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813; [2016] 4 WLR 152 at [53]
    of her decision.  Whilst she understood and accepted that the appellant
    would have some difficulty in returning to Nigeria, she did not  accept
    that the difficulty would reach the threshold considered  by  Sales  LJ
    (as he then was) in Kamara.  In reaching that conclusion, the judge was
    clearly cognisant of the fact that the appellant had been in the UK for
    many years and that he would have  difficulty  in  re-integrating  into
    Nigeria.  She simply concluded,  as  she  was  entitled  to,  that  the
    difficulties would not be very significant.

15. Mr Sultan also sought  to  contend  that  the  judge  had  contradicted
    herself in finding, at  [46],  that  the  appellant  was  socially  and
    culturally integrated into the United Kingdom and then,  at  [54]-[55],
    that there were no very significant obstacles to his re-integration  to
    Nigeria.  The point was somewhat difficult to follow, with  respect  to
    Mr Sultan, but there  is  obviously  no  merit  in  it.   Even  if  the
    appellant is integrated into this country, he might not encounter  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration  into  the  country  of  his
    nationality.  The judge gave perfectly logical and sustainable  reasons
    for reaching that conclusion and, as I have noted  above,  she  did  so
    with the correct threshold firmly in mind.

16. The point which I have summarised at [10](ii) above did not feature  in
    Mr Sultan's oral submissions and can be disposed of shortly.  The judge
    did not merely assume that the appellant had made financial  gain  from
    his offences.  She took that conclusion from what had been said by  the
    sentencing judge and she obviously did not fall  into  legal  error  by
    doing so.

17. The judge did not fail to  consider  matters  which  militated  in  the
    appellant's favour.  She was plainly aware that he  has  continued  his
    education after prison [48]; that he  has  been  working  as  an  event
    manager [49]; that he is active with his local church  [50];  and  that
    the index offence was his only offence [51].  There  is  no  reason  to
    think that the judge lost sight of these  facts  in  any  part  of  the
    detailed analysis she conducted.

18. Mr Sultan sought to dedicate some time in his oral submissions  to  the
    circumstances of SR and the judge's consideration of this relationship.
     He sought to read extensively from what had been said by Lord Carnwath
    in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]  UKSC  53;  [2018]  1  WLR  5273  and  by
    Underhill LJ in HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020  EWCA  Civ  1176  but  there  is
    nothing in the judge's decision which suggests that  she  misunderstood
    the test of undue harshness.

19. Nor is there any reason to think that the judge left  relevant  matters
    out of account in concluding that the appellant's deportation would not
    be unduly harsh on SR.  She was demonstrably aware of the fact that  SR
    is British; that her family live in the UK; and that  she  has  a  job,
    nursing, which she enjoys: [58].  The  judge   considered  the  medical
    evidence which had been placed  before  her  and  the  availability  of
    relevant medication in Nigeria: [59]-[60].  Earlier  in  her  decision,
    the judge had referred to the basis of the  appellant's  asylum  claim,
    based as it was on  the  claimed  risk  arising  from  the  appellant's
    refusal to enter into an arranged marriage in favour  of  marrying  SR.
    The judge noted, in that section of her decision, that SR was of Sierra
    Leonean heritage and that her mother remains in Sierra Leone.  There is
    no basis for supposing that the judge lost sight of that fact when  she
    concluded, taking all matters into account, that it would not be unduly
    harsh for SR to relocate to Nigeria.

20. Although I pressed Mr Sultan to identify what he said was wrong in  law
    with the judge's assessment of undue harshness, he failed  to  identify
    anything which could properly be labelled as such.  He reiterated  that
    SR is a nurse who is settled in this  country  and  that  she  and  the
    appellant have nothing in Nigeria.   He  submitted  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for them to relocate, or for her to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom without him.  As I explained to him at the hearing, however,  I
    am unable  to  consider  those  submissions  for  myself  until  it  is
    established that the decision of the FtT was vitiated by  legal  error.
    Nothing in Mr Sultan's written or oral submissions began  to  establish
    an error on the bases set out  in  grounds  one  and  two.   The  judge
    clearly took all relevant matters into account.   She  clearly  applied
    the tests set out in s117C and considered in the authorities.  And  she
    clearly reached sustainable conclusions on the statutory exceptions  to
    deportation.

21. The judge considered whether there were very  compelling  circumstances
    such that the public interest  in  the  appellant's  deportation  as  a
    foreign criminal was outweighed by his particular circumstances.  As  I
    understood him, Mr Sultan submitted in ground three that  this  was  to
    adopt a legally  erroneous  approach  because  the  judge  should  have
    considered Article 8 ECHR outside the framework provided by Part 5A  of
    the 2002 Act.  It is the submission, and not the judge's approach which
    is wrong in law.  It has been clear since at least NA  (Pakistan)  that
    the statutory structure is a  complete  code  in  the  sense  that  the
    entirety of the proportionality assessment required by Article  8  ECHR
    can and must be conducted within it: NA (Pakistan) refers at [35]-[36],
    the ongoing correctness and application of which was underlined  in  HA
    (Iraq), at [27].  This was evidently the approach adopted by the  judge
    and it was correct in law.  As with  the  submissions  Mr  Sultan  made
    under grounds one and two, his argument under this ground  amounted  to
    nothing more than an attempt to re-argue the case on  its  merits.   He
    failed by some margin to establish - or even  to  identify  -  a  legal
    error on the part of the judge.

22. I should make reference to one further matter.  There was a request  at
    [20] of the skeleton argument to admit evidence which  was  not  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Sultan made no reference to  this  request
    in his oral submissions.  Had he done so,  I  would  have  refused  the
    application.  The submission made at  [20]  of  the  skeleton  is  made
    pursuant to the wrong provision in the UT Rules.  Mr Sultan cited  rule
    15(2)(a)(ii) of those Rules, whereas the  relevant  rule  is  obviously
    rule 15(2A).  Be that as it may, the additional evidence did  not  bear
    on the question with which I was concerned, of whether the judge  erred
    materially in law in her decision.  In  those  circumstances,  I  would
    have declined to admit the material if I had been pressed to do so.

23. In  the  circumstances,  therefore,  the  appeal  against  the  judge's
    decision is dismissed.





Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
dismissed and that decision shall stand.

The anonymity direction made by  the  FtT  is  discharged.   The  protection
aspect of the appellant's claim is accepted to have fallen  away  and  there
is no need for anonymity.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             25 January 2021

