
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04513/2016
                                                               PA/04565/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18th August 2017                       |On 21st August 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     BSA
                                     DKA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Rutherford, instructed by Migrant Law Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr. Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") has made an anonymity order and  for
       the avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  Both BSA and  DKA
       are granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of
       these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them.   This
       direction applies both to the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decisions  of  FtT  Judge  Boyes
       promulgated on 2nd March 2017, in which  she  dismissed  appeals  by
       each of the appellants, against decisions of  the  respondent  dated
       25th April 2016 to refuse their claims for asylum.


    3. The appellants are nationals of Afghanistan.  They are both  of  the
       Sikh faith.  Their claims for international protection were  founded
       upon them having been targeted by the Taliban, on account  of  their
       Sikh faith.


    4. The appellants contend that the FtT Judge made mistakes  as  to  the
       assessment of the evidence before her, and incorrectly  applied  the
       Country Guidance set out in TG and others (Afghan Sikhs  persecuted)
       Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595. The appellants also  contend  that
       the  FtT  Judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of  what   amounts   to
       persecution, and failed to appreciate that a failure  of  protection
       from  threats  and  extortion  due  to  religion,  could  amount  to
       persecution. Finally, it is said the FtT Judge failed to have regard
       to the medical report of  Dr  Laws  who  has  diagnosed  the  second
       appellant as suffering from  PTSD  and  Dissociative  Amnesia,  when
       assessing her evidence.


    5.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Nightingale on 23rd March  2017.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to
       consider whether  or  not  the  determination  by  FtT  Judge  Boyes
       involved the making of a material error of law.


    6. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated 12th April 2017.   The
       respondent's provisional view was that the Judge of the FtT may have
       failed to properly apply the country guidance  set  out  in  TG  and
       Others.  It  was  a  provisional  view  because  at  the  time,  the
       respondent's file containing the  record  of  proceedings  were  not
       before the write of the Rule 24 response.


    7.  Before me, Mr Richards on behalf of the  respondent  conceded  that
       the decision of the FtT Judge discloses a material error of law, for
       the reasons that were  identified  by  FtT  Judge  Nightingale  when
       permission to appeal was granted.  Having read the two decisions  of
       FtT Judge Boyes, in my judgment he was right to do so.


    8. The decisions need to be re-made and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having taken into account paragraph 7.2 of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 which states;


          '7.2     The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that;


              (a) the effect of the  error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'


    9.  In my view, the requirements of paragraph  7.2(a)  and  (b)  apply.
       The Judge has failed to set  out,  and  carefully  consider  in  her
       decision, the evidence before her and to properly apply the  country
       guidance to the evidence.  The nature and  extent  of  any  judicial
       fact-finding necessary with regard to the  international  protection
       claims will be extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of
       the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.






 Notice of Decision


   10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   11. The matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
       afresh.










Signed                                  Date     18th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


As I have set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remitted
the matter for re-hearing I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date     18th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




