

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/04864/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Civil Justice Centre, Manchester |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 5th June 2018                          |On 22nd June 2018                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     SS
                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K J Wood, Immigration Advisory Service
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as SS. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. UTJ Bruce granted the  appellant  permission  to  appeal,  on  limited
      grounds,  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  Hudson,  who
      dismissed his appeal against the decision of the respondent to  refuse
      his international  protection  claim,  for  reasons  set  out  in  his
      decision promulgated on 14th July 2017.


   2.  The grounds upon which permission was granted assert that  the  judge
      made findings adverse to the appellant which were unsupported  by  the
      evidence; that he speculated in reaching  findings  that  went  beyond
      matters of which the judge was entitled to take  judicial  notice  and
      that such findings were material to the decision of the judge.

   3. The core of the appellants claim for international protection was that
      he had worked for American interests in Afghanistan in 2014, had  been
      captured by the Taliban and escaped; he was at real  risk  of  serious
      harm if returned to Afghanistan. He also claimed he  was  at  risk  of
      being killed by his step brother who wished to kill him because  of  a
      relationship he had with his step- brother's wife. That  latter  claim
      was disbelieved by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  permission  to
      appeal that finding was not sought.

   4. The grounds refer to findings by the judge as follows:

   i) American forces and private individuals would have been very  security
      conscious at this time, and in particular  on  Camp  phoenix  and  FOB
      Shank;
  ii) The Americans would not accept a Taskira that  could  be  obtained  so
      easily through fraud;
 iii) A security organisation working in Afghanistan over the last 10  years
      would not be so lax in security as to make such fundamental errors  on
      their identity documents;
  iv) The American company/military would have had no interest in  employing
      an illiterate taxi driver.


   5. In oral submissions, Mr Wood  amplified  these  submissions.  He  drew
      attention to the appellant's  witness  statement  which  set  out  the
      process he went through to obtain the job; that there was no  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal that the  Americans  would  not  employ
      individuals who were illiterate; that there were scales of  illiteracy
      and this  did  not  mean  that  documents  and  stamps  could  not  be
      identified or that the job he was employed  to  undertake  required  a
      certain level of literacy; many individuals worked for  the  Americans
      and it was not unreasonable to assume that it  was  not  apparent  for
      whom exactly he was working. The finding  that  it  was  inconceivable
      that the appellant would not know exactly who he was working  for  was
      not a finding grounded in the situation in  Afghanistan.  It  was  not
      clear that the Americans did know that  the  Taskira  was  lacking  in
      truth and that the purpose of the Taskira  was  to  show  he  was  the
      appropriate age, as happens in the UK when documents were produced  to
      give a false age during the two World Wars. In any event the  passport
      had been found to be genuine and that was founded upon the Taskira.


   6. The core of the First-tier Tribunal decision was, Mr Duffy  submitted,
      founded upon the overall account of  the  appellant  being  internally
      implausible. The judge notes that appellant is evasive, and  does  not
      accept he is illiterate because he says in his own  evidence  that  he
      completed an application form. The judge refers to weak  excuses  when
      he could not recall something or didn't want to answer - snake bite,

   7. There is no suggestion that expert evidence was  not  considered.  The
      judge notes the appellant was evasive and tried not  to  give  detail.
      His evidence that he was illiterate was contradicted by  the  evidence
      that he completed an application form. The judge refers to elements of
      the  appellant's  evidence  which,  legitimately,  seem  unlikely  and
      cannot, as  submitted  be  classed  as  unacceptable  speculation  for
      example employing an illiterate taxi driver in a  role  that  required
      the  checking  of  documents.  Overall  the  decision  turns  on   the
      credibility  of  the  applicant's  claim.  Although   there   may   be
      disagreements with some of the detail, overall the judge gave adequate
      and sustainable reasons for rejecting the appellant's  claim  and  has
      not speculated unduly.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the appeal stands.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

[pic]

                                    Date 20th June 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
