
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04424/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th November 2018                         |On 27th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                            Mr mzee rashid salum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 6th August 1986 is a citizen  of  Tanzania.   The
    Appellant was present and  unrepresented.   There  was  an  interpreter
    present for the  Appellant.   The  Respondent  was  represented  by  Mr
    Howells a Senior Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues Under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made an application for asylum shortly after arriving
    in the UK in September 2017 on a business visitor visa.  The Respondent
    had refused the Appellant's application for asylum.  The Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boyes at Newport on 10th May 2018.  The judge had  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   Application  for  permission  to
    appeal was made on 29th May 2018 and that application had been  refused
    by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald on  12th  June  2018.
    An application was repeated to the Upper Tribunal and that was  granted
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty on 24th July 2018.  It was  said
    that an error of fact had been made by the judge in  stating  that  the
    Appellant had failed to provide reasons for why he was claiming  asylum
    on three separate occasions.  It was further said that it was  arguable
    the judge had misinterpreted the Appellant's explanation in evidence as
    for  that  failure.   Permission  to  appeal  was  therefore   granted.
    Directions had been issued for the Upper  Tribunal  firstly  to  decide
    whether or not an error of law had been made by the judge in this  case
    and the matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. The Appellant was unrepresented.   I  explained  to  him,  through  the
    interpreter the procedure.  I indicated that I would use the Grounds of
    Appeal submitted on two  separate  occasions  as  being  the  arguments
    raised on his behalf as to why an error of law had  been  made  by  the
    judge.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Howells submitted there had been three occasions where the Appellant
    had been provided an opportunity to  make  reference  to  his  fear  of
    persecution because of his  involvement  in  politics,  namely  a  port
    interview and two screening forms.  It was submitted that  the  judge's
    reference to the Appellant attributing the absence  of  information  to
    the interpreter's lying was overstating the matter  and  the  judge  in
    fact had recorded the  Appellant's  account  at  paragraph  12  of  the
    decision.  In respect of the CUF card it was submitted that it was open
    to the judge to find as he did in respect of the Appellant's photograph
    and further to make the findings that he did at paragraphs 28 to 30  in
    respect of that card.  It was said that there was no material error  of
    law made in this case.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    raised and the documentary evidence.  I now provide that decision  with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The basis of the Appellant's claim for protection was as  a  result  of
    his political activities in Tanzania.  He claimed to have been a member
    of the Civic United Front (CUF) from 2002.  He said that  in  2010  the
    authorities had discovered  that  fact  and  had  raided  two  meetings
    attended by him.  In 2015 he had been assaulted by the authorities at a
    further meeting he had attended.

 7. The grounds focus on two features of the  judge's  decision.   Firstly,
    his alleged erroneous belief that  on  three  occasions  prior  to  the
    substantive interview he had made no reference to any political fear or
    involvement  in  his  home  country.   Secondly  that  the  judge   had
    essentially placed himself in  the  role  of  a  document  expert  when
    looking at an identity card.

 8. At paragraph 18 the judge had noted that there were three opportunities
    for the Appellant to provide the Home Office with the  reasons  why  he
    was claiming asylum prior to his substantive interview.  It is said  in
    the grounds of permission that this was erroneous.  In fact  the  judge
    was correct.  At the hearing the Home  Office  had  handed  in  a  port
    interview  dated  16th  September  2017.   Additional  to  that   brief
    interview there was a screening interview dated 18th September 2017 (B1
    to B10 Respondent's bundle) and a  further  screening  interview  dated
    28th September 2017 (B11 to B20 Respondent's bundle).  The  substantive
    interview  took  place  on  13th  March  2018.   The  judge   correctly
    identified that in those three initial interviews (16th September, 18th
    September and 28th September 2017) the Appellant made no  reference  to
    any political problems in his home country.

 9. Indeed, it went a little further than simply  silence  on  the  matter.
    The Appellant had specifically been given the  opportunity  to  mention
    albeit briefly his  reasons  for  claiming  asylum.   He  had  provided
    reasons that did not engage the Geneva Convention and  pointed  to  him
    being an economic migrant.  He had specifically denied any  involvement
    in politics (5.5 screening interview 18th September 2017).   The  judge
    was entitled to make an adverse credibility finding in respect of  that
    failure on three separate occasions to mention what he now claimed  was
    the core of his problem.

10. The judge had considered the Appellant's explanation for an absence  of
    reference to political  problems.   He  had  recorded  the  Appellant's
    response at paragraph 12 as follows, "The Appellant  further  explained
    that he cannot be criticised for not mentioning the political issues in
    his screening interview as it  was  the  interpreter's  fault  and  his
    former solicitors".

11. At paragraph 20 the judge had noted that he  rejected  the  Appellant's
    version of events as being completely untrue and without any evidential
    basis.  He noted that there was nothing to support the suggestion  that
    all three independent interpreters had lied and lied in the same manner
    and about the same things.  Whilst  the  use  of  the  word  "lie"  was
    perhaps theoretically not the only explanation for the interpreters not
    allegedly interpreting what the Appellant said, the force of the  point
    made by the judge is clear and properly made.   There  was  further  no
    evidence presented by the Appellant or his representatives  to  support
    the assertion that former solicitors were also culpable.

12. In respect of the photographs the judge  was  not  principally  placing
    himself as a documents expert.  The Appellant had claimed that he had a
    CUF party card in 2002 with his photo upon it when he was aged about 16
    years.  He claimed to have lost that card, asked his family to obtain a
    replacement card and had produced  that  alleged  replacement  card  in
    evidence.  That card was dated 2002, contained signatures,  stamps  and
    information contemporaneous to 2002.  However, the photograph upon  the
    card was found by the judge to be identical to the  photograph  on  his
    visa application made in 2017.  The judge found the photograph  on  the
    visa application of 2017 and the  photograph  on  the  substitute  card
    dated 2002 to look identical.  He was entitled to  make  that  finding.
    However, the more significant features of  this  evidence  was  as  the
    judge explained at paragraph 22.   That  was  that  the  Appellant  was
    essentially accepting as part of his evidence that  he  had  asked  his
    family, and they had complied, in producing  a  membership  card  dated
    2002 in 2017 so that the Appellant could produce that card in  evidence
    to the Home Office.  It was also noteworthy that if this card had  been
    produced by his family with assistance  from  the  CUF  or  with  their
    knowledge, there was no evidence of that fact nor letter from  the  CUF
    confirming that feature or any claimed political problems the Appellant
    had faced by being a member of their organisation.

13. The judge was entitled to take a dim view of  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account for all the reasons provided in the  decision.   He
    gave adequate reasons for his findings and there was no material  error
    of law in this case.

Notice of Decision

14. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
