
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
PA/04775/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                |   Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 31 July 2017                       |   On 8 August 2017             |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     S N
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTON MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A Hashmi (counsel) instructed by Losanna & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
tier.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Hands  promulgated  on  05/01/2017,  which  dismissed   the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

3. The Appellant was born on 30/10/1982 and is a national of Sri  Lanka.  On
28/04/2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hands ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.


5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  09/05/2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Rintoul gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable, in the light of UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ
      85, at [23] in particular (a decision not available to FtTJ  Easterman
      when refusing permission) that FtTJ Hands erred in the  assessment  of
      the risk to the appellant on account of his involvement with the TGTE,
      a proscribed organisation. While there is  less  merit  in  the  other
      grounds, I do not consider  it  appropriate  to  limit  the  grant  of
      permission.

      Permission is granted on all grounds.

The Hearing

6. (a) Ms Hashmi, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal.  She  told
me that the respondent's own country information and  guidance  relating  to
Sri Lanka had been renewed in June 2017. She then took  me  through  various
parts of the renewed  guidance.  She  told  me  that  the  respondent's  own
country guidance document indicated that the appellant fell  within  a  risk
category identified in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka
CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). Ms Hashmi told me that at the  date  of  hearing
there was a similar policy document prepared  by  the  respondent,  dated  9
December 2016. She told me that the respondent failed to draw  that  country
information and guidance material to the attention of the Judge.  Ms  Hashmi
referred me to UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 85.

(b) Ms Hashmi took me to [27] and [28] of the decision  and,  again  relying
on UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  85,  told  me  that  the  Judge's
findings there are unsafe, because TGTE is a  proscribed  organisation.  She
told me that the Judge's evaluation of risk was flawed.  She  then  returned
to the respondent's own country  information  and  guidance  document  dated
June 2017 and read extracts from the Home Office website.

(c) Ms Hashmi turned to the second ground of appeal. She referred me to  the
appellant's bundle and told  me  that  the  bundle  contained  a  wealth  of
medical evidence. She told me that, between [22] and [24] of  the  decision,
the  Judge  had  incorrectly  found  that  the  appellant's  mental   health
difficulties were caused by the  respondent's  refusal  of  the  appellant's
protection claim. She told me that that finding is unsafe in  the  light  of
the report from Dr Dhumad,  which  indicates  that  the  appellant's  mental
health had deteriorated in 2010. She told me that between [22] and [24]  the
Judge failed to engage with paragraphs 451 to 456 of GJ (Sri Lanka).

(d) Ms Hashmi moved the third ground of appeal.  She  took  me  through  the
subparagraphs of [21] of the decision and made  criticisms  of  the  Judge's
assessment of the appellant's credibility. She  told  me  that  the  Judge's
findings are contrary to the evidence that was placed before her,  and  that
the Judge's credibility findings are not safe.

(e) Ms Hashmi turned to the fourth ground of appeal and  told  me  that  the
Judge had incorrectly applied  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
(Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004, and attached too much weight  to  the
appellant's delay in claiming asylum. She took me to [30]  where  the  Judge
records that there is a low standard of proof, and told me that the  quality
and quantity of evidence before the Judge discharged the burden of proof.

(f) Ms Hashmi urged me to set the decision aside  and  then  to  remit  this
case to the First-tier to be determined of new.

7. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz relied on the rule 24  response  dated  24
May 2017. He told me that after looking through the Home Office file he  was
unable to find a copy of the country  information  guidance  dated  December
2016. I had already indicated that there was not a copy of that guidance  on
the case file.  He  accepted  that  the  country  information  and  guidance
document dated December 2016 had not been drawn to  the  Judge's  attention.
However, he told me UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ  85,  post-dates
the date of hearing and so had no application at the date  of  decision.  He
told me that the grounds of appeal were  little  more  than  a  disagreement
with the facts as the Judge found them to be.  He  urged  me  to  allow  the
decision to stand and to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

8. The first ground of appeal relies on the case of UB (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
[2017] EWCA Civ 85. In UB (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2017] EWCA Civ 85 the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of
his  asylum  claim  based  on  his  membership  of  proscribed  groups   and
participation in  political  demonstrations  was  allowed.   The  First-Tier
Tribunal and Upper Tribunal had not been referred to the  2014  Home  Office
policy guidance entitled  "Tamil  Separatism"  which  was  material  to  the
decision and might realistically have affected the outcome.   The  appellant
had claimed membership of  TGTE  which  material  in  that  policy  guidance
indicated to be an organisation proscribed by the Sri Lankan government.

9. The decision in UB (Sri Lanka) was handed down on 22nd of February  2017.
The hearing in this case  took  place  on  27  December  2016.  The  Judge's
decision was promulgated on 5 January 2017.
10.  At [27] of the decision the Judge finds that membership of TGTE is  not
of great interest to the Sri Lankan authorities. At  [28]  of  the  decision
the Judge finds that TGTE features on a list of organisations which the  Sri
Lankan government view to be terrorist organisations. It  is,  at  least  in
part, on the reasoning at [29] that the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's
activities in the UK will not draw him to the adverse attention of  the  Sri
Lankan authorities.
11. Following the case of UB (Sri Lanka), it seems to me that the Judge  was
prevented from  making  a  full  assessment  of  the  risk  created  by  the
appellant's sur place activities because the respondent did  not  refer  the
Judge to  the  respondent's  own  country  information  and  guidance  dated
December  2016.  The  Judge's  fact-finding  was  hampered  because  neither
parties' representative referred to that country information and guidance.

12. The Judge's fact-finding is at [21] of the decision.  There,  the  Judge
made findings of fact drawn from the evidence  placed  before  her.  Despite
what is said in the second, third and fourth grounds  of  appeal,  there  is
nothing wrong with the Judge's fact-finding exercise. The Judge gives  clear
reasons for drawing her  conclusions.  The  Judge  carefully  analyses  each
strand  of  evidence  and  provides  adequate  reasons   for   drawing   the
conclusions that she does. Those conclusions are well within  the  range  of
reasonable conclusions available to the Judge. The second, third and  fourth
grounds of appeal amount to nothing more than a disagreement with the  facts
as the Judge found them to be.

13. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her

14. The fourth ground of appeal is an argument that  the  Judge  incorrectly
applied section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
etc) Act 2004. At [21] the  Judge  sets  out  a  comprehensive  fact-finding
exercise. Between [22] and [24] of the  decision  the  Judge  considers  the
psychiatric evidence. At [25] the  Judge  takes  a  holistic  view  of  each
strand of evidence  before  concluding  that  the  appellant  is  neither  a
credible nor a reliable witness. It is only then that, at  [26],  the  Judge
turned her attention to section 8 of the 2004 act. She  reminds  herself  of
the limits of the application of section 8 of the 2004 act,  before  finding
that delay is a factor which undermines the appellant's  credibility.  There
is nothing wrong with the  Judge's  assessment  of  credibility.  The  Judge
considers section 8 of the 2004 Act correctly. The fourth ground  of  appeal
has no substance.

15.  Although there is no flaw in the Judge's fact-finding,  the  difficulty
that is created is that, because parties' agents agree that  the  Judge  did
not have the benefit of the respondent's country information  and  guidance,
and because I am told that that the country information and  guidance  could
have made a difference to the decision, there  is  a  flaw  in  the  Judge's
assessment of risk. An error in the assessment of risk is a  material  error
of law. I therefore set the decision aside.

16. Although I set the decision aside, I preserve the  Judge's  findings  of
fact (contained between [21] and [26] of the  decision).  Even  though  this
appeal succeeds on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's  up-to-date  country
information and guidance is critical to the  risk  assessment,  that  up-to-
date country information and guidance is not made available to me  today  by
either representative.

17. What is required in re-making of  this  decision  is  a  fully  informed
assessment of risk. There is nothing wrong with  the  Judge's  fact-finding.
The Judge's  findings  of  fact  between  [21]  and  [26]  of  the  decision
therefore stand. It is the consideration of the risk created  by  sur  place
activity which requires reconsideration.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
both parties require the opportunity to lodge and make  submissions  on  the
up to date country information and guidance so that the assessment  of  risk
can be completed

20. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  North  Shields
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Hands.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

22. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated  on  5  January  2017.  The
Judge's findings  of  fact  between  [21]  and  [26]  of  the  decision  are
preserved. The appellant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  so
that an assessment of risk on return can be completed.

Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 8 August 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
