
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/04728/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2019                     |On 9 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    A A A
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton, of Counsel, instructed by Charles
                    Douglas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  on  31
         October 2018. For convenience, the parties are referred to as  they
         were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appellant is a Kuwaiti national born in September 1977. He last
         entered the UK as a visitor in April 2015 and on  22  October  2015
         claimed  asylum.  He  claims  that  he  had  been  the  victim   of
         politically  motivated   prosecutions   in   Kuwait,   Jordan   and
         Switzerland as a result of his involvement in  exposing  corruption
         amongst politicians  and  the  judiciary  in  Kuwait  and  that  if
         returned there he would be imprisoned, subjected to breaches of his
         article 3 rights and be deprived of his citizenship with the result
         that he could be removed to Jordan where he faces charges which, he
         claims, are politically motivated. He is  also  the  subject  of  a
         Swiss extradition order  in  respect  of  a  crime  involving  sham
         litigation over  videotapes  that  purported  to  show  the  former
         Kuwaiti Prime Minister, former Speaker and senior  members  of  the
         Kuwaiti  judiciary  involved  in  bribery,  the   manipulation   of
         sovereign wealth and Iranian money laundering.

      3. The respondent's case was that the appellant fell  to  be  excluded
         from the protection of the Refugee Convention under  article  1F(b)
         on account of his crime in Switzerland because his crimes were  not
         politically motivated, and that he had shown a pattern of offending
         by other  crimes  even  though  they  did  not  engage  1F(b).  The
         respondent was not satisfied that there was sufficient evidence  to
         show an article 3 risk upon return to Kuwait or that  he  would  be
         deprived on his citizenship or forcibly removed to Jordan.

      4. The appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  at
         Harmondsworth and  was  heard  over  a  period  of  three  days  in
         September  2018.  It  was  allowed  by  way  of   a   determination
         promulgated on  5  October  2018.  The  respondent  challenged  the
         determination on 9 grounds and permission to appeal was granted  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever on 31 October 2018.

         The Hearing

      5. The matter came before me on 11 March 2019. The appellant attended,
         and I heard submissions from Mr Clarke and Ms Laughton.

      6. Mr Clarke relied on his grounds and his skeleton argument.  He  set
         out the background to the case and the respondent's response to  it
         as summarized in his skeleton argument (at 3-4 and 26-27) and  then
         took me through each of his grounds.

      7. Ground 1 argued that the judge's approach to the standard of  proof
         and the test to be applied was flawed. Rather than looking  at  the
         wording of the Convention,  he  had  looked  at  the  certification
         through the lens of the balance  of  probabilities  and  considered
         whether the respondent  had  established  that  the  appellant  had
         committed crimes,  not  whether  there  were  serious  reasons  for
         considering  that  a  crime  had  been  committed.  He  failed   to
         appreciate that there was no requirement under article 1(F) for  an
         appellant to have been prosecuted or convicted and  it  was  wholly
         erroneous to take those matters into account. He also  misconstrued
         the respondent's case as put at paragraph 130 of the determination;
         that was not what the respondent had asked the Tribunal to  do.  Mr
         Clarke also submitted that the judge had failed to  first  consider
         the issue of the certificate before going on to consider the asylum
         issue  and  his  use  of  the  phrase  "reasonably   likely"   when
         considering the  certification  confirmed  that  error.  Mr  Clarke
         pointed out that extradition proceedings were outstanding.

      8. Ground 2 argues that irrelevant matters were  taken  into  account.
         The judge found that it was not irrelevant  to  consider  the  fact
         that the appellant had asked  to  go  to  Switzerland  without  his
         appeal being treated as abandoned. However, as the  abandonment  of
         the appeal  upon  departure  was  a  statutory  provision  and  not
         dependent upon the respondent's discretion, that was an  irrelevant
         matter for consideration. Also irrelevant was the argument that the
         appellant's  willingness  to  face  the  charges   in   Switzerland
         undermined the case against him. Mr Clarke argued  that  the  judge
         had made findings  on  the  impending  prosecution  in  Switzerland
         without having all the evidence before him.

      9. Ground 3 argues that there was a failure to adequately  reason  and
         engage with the seriousness issue  (at  143-153).  The  solicitors'
         notes of submissions made at the hearing were not verbatim notes as
         they missed out matters made in submissions by  the  respondent  as
         could be seen by what the judge had recorded in his  determination.
         The judge relied heavily on the opinion of  the  appellant's  Swiss
         lawyer as regards sentencing as opposed to the  contradictory  view
         taken by the prosecutor and no reasons were given by the judge  for
         why he preferred to rely on the former rather than the latter view.
         Nor did the judge engage with the test of seriousness as set out in
         AH (Algeria) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  395  and  which  he  cited  in  his
         determination  (at  144).  Mr  Clarke  submitted   that   all   the
         circumstances had to be considered before a decision  was  made  on
         the deprivation of protection; it was not a prescriptive matter. At
         paragraph 152 the judge once  again  referred  to  the  balance  of
         probabilities test. He failed to grapple with the reasoning of  the
         Court of Appeal in relation  to  the  crime  itself.  Fraud  was  a
         serious crime and the publication of what the respondent maintained
         were sham videos had serious consequences for the impugned parties.
         This was not a  victimless  crime.  This  matter  was  specifically
         argued in paragraph 6 of Mr  Clarke's  skeleton  argument  and  was
         recorded  at  p.8  of  the  note  of  hearing   prepared   by   the
         representatives. The crime  was  such  that  it  was  justified  to
         withhold the grant of protection and if established that it  was  a
         serious crime, it did not matter whether it was established that it
         had actually been committed. The sentencing issue was not relevant.

     10. Ground 4 dealt with whether the crime was  political  or  not.  The
         test was set out in T v IO [1996] UKHL 8. The impugned parties  had
         had no political links since 2011 and the  appellant's  involvement
         did not commence until 2013. The judge should have considered  that
         nexus and engaged with  the  argument  made.  The  appellant's  own
         evidence was that he had never been involved in  politics  and  had
         been motivated by financial gain. If  it  was  the  test  that  the
         purpose of the crime was to overthrow or change a government,  then
         it was not made out as those  named  in  the  litigation  were  not
         involved in government or politics. The  judge  set  out  the  very
         detailed arguments made on this matter but  then  simply  found  at
         paragraph 161 that it had not been established that any crimes  had
         been committed in Switzerland. There was  no  engagement  with  the
         legal test and he had misunderstood the nexus point. One of the two
         impugned emirs may go on to succeed the Crown Prince but only  then
         would they be in politics. There  was  no  sufficiently  close  and
         direct link as things stood  between  the  crime  and  the  alleged
         political purpose.

     11. Ground 5 related to the findings made by  the  judge  on  the  KRIC
         litigation. He went behind the appeal  at  the  Federal  Court  and
         impugned the court and the arbitrator solely on the  basis  of  the
         evidence from a lawyer and without any evidence  on  corruption  in
         Swiss courts.   This  view  of  the  Swiss  courts  undermined  the
         Judge's findings which were also contradictory and perverse.

     12. Ground 6 related to the Trekell arbitration and whether it was open
         to the arbitrator to make the findings he made. Mr Clarke submitted
         that it had not been open to the arbitrator  to  make  the  finding
         that the videos were genuine. The evidence  before  the  arbitrator
         addressed only one aspect of the Tanveer  Ahmed  test.  The  expert
         reports did not even suggest that the voices heard  were  those  of
         the impugned people. Nor was it known whether the transcripts  were
         the same as those before the experts and  it  was  unclear  whether
         anyone was even seen speaking in the videos. It  was  difficult  to
         see how, in those circumstances, the judge could  have  found  that
         the arbitrator was entitled to  find  that  the  video  tapes  were
         genuine. Mr Clarke pointed out that he had argued that the  reports
         were not complete and that there was no audit  trail;  the  reports
         did not deal with the impugned people. It was not  enough  for  the
         judge to state that the respondent  had  not  maintained  that  the
         reports were false when all these other  objections  had  not  been
         addressed. One could not infer from a report something that it  did
         not contain. Furthermore, there was no suggestion that  the  police
         had even seen the tapes. They only saw the CY4OR reports but  those
         had the numerous failings which had been identified in submissions.
         A further problem was that the judge  found  the  appellant  to  be
         right in his contention that the  reports  had  been  validated  by
         French intelligence, a point relied on  by  the  expert.  That  was
         however a factual error. The expert had relied solely upon what the
         appellant said and taken it at face value that the videos had  been
         validated. He had gone beyond his jurisdiction in  giving  evidence
         on the Fintas prosecution, finding  the  videos  were  genuine  and
         political. In assessing the expert  evidence,  the  judge  gave  no
         reasons why this did not invalidate  the  conclusions  reached.  In
         fact, the judge made no finding on whether the videos were  genuine
         or not and this was a core issue. Such a finding was necessary  and
         key  to  the  intent  of  the  parties  and  to  credibility.   The
         genuineness of the tapes impacted upon the prosecution  in  Kuwait,
         the arbitration, the pending prosecution and the appellant's  claim
         that they were genuine.

     13. Ground 7 concerned the article 3 findings.  The  judge  dealt  both
         with the article 3 risk on return  and  to  the  matter  of  prison
         conditions. He relied on the expert evidence but the criticisms  of
         that  evidence  had  been  made.  Essentially,   the   expert   had
         misdirected himself in relation to evidence  regarding  matters  of
         French intelligence and he had failed  to  cite  his  sources.  The
         judge found it was unnecessary for the  expert  to  do  so  but  in
         making that finding he did not address the other problems that  had
         been identified. There were also issues with the figures cited  and
         conflicting evidence regarding overcrowding. The  judge  failed  to
         engage with jurisprudence on this issue and gave no reasons for the
         conclusions that article 3 would be breached.

     14. Ground 8 related to the findings on the deprivation of citizenship.
         No  members  of  the  Fintas  group  had  been  deprived  of  their
         nationality and there was no basis to indicate that  the  appellant
         would be. The  judge  relied  heavily  on  the  expert  report  but
         problems with that had been identified. It  was  not  open  to  the
         judge  to  find  that  the  appellant  would  be  stripped  of  his
         nationality.

     15. In respect of ground 9, Mr Clarke pointed out that no argument  was
         made for the appellant that there would be an article 6  breach  on
         return yet the judge found that there would be.

     16. Finally, Mr Clarke urged that  I  be  mindful  of  the  extradition
         proceedings and the impact that the judge's findings  in  impugning
         the Swiss court proceedings might have on those proceedings.

     17. I then heard submissions from Ms Laughton for  the  appellant.  She
         reminded me that the appeal had been heard over three days and that
         the appellant and several witnesses had given evidence. She pointed
         out that the  determination  was  very  lengthy  and  that  complex
         matters had been addressed. She submitted that findings  could  not
         be made in a vacuum and so all the issues  were  considered  before
         the conclusions were reached.

     18. Ms Laughton submitted that the judge had not made  a  finding  that
         the Swiss prosecution was corrupt. He took account of the fact that
         the complainants were the same  people  who  had  been  behind  the
         Kuwaiti proceedings and of the fact that  the  respondent  had  not
         produced  any  evidence  that  a  crime  had  been   committed   in
         Switzerland and concluded on that basis that the Swiss  prosecution
         was not well founded (at 448(vi)). It was wrong to suggest that  he
         found that the prosecution was corrupt or that he had impugned  the
         courts.

     19. Ms Laughton submitted that a grant  of  refugee  status  would  not
         prevent the appellant's extradition and pointed  out  that  he  had
         always been keen to stand trial to clear his name. The advantage of
         having a travel documents, however,  meant  that  he  could  travel
         voluntarily to Switzerland with a lesser chance of  being  remanded
         in custody than if he were extradited. She submitted that it  would
         also always be open to the  respondent  to  revisit  the  issue  of
         exclusion at a later date if the appellant were to be convicted  in
         Switzerland as his status could be revoked under article 14 of  the
         Qualification Directive. At the moment, however, the respondent did
         not  even  know  what  the  evidence  against  the   appellant   in
         Switzerland was.

     20. The appellant's case, as put, was that the charges  in  Switzerland
         were instigated by those who had persecuted and prosecuted  him  in
         Kuwait because of his involvement with the Sheikh and in a  bid  to
         silence and punish him.

     21. Although the judge had to consider the  issue  of  the  certificate
         first, he had to  consider  the  events  in  Kuwait  on  which  the
         appellant relied, before he could do so. The matter was  considered
         holistically and the determination was well structured starting off
         with the preliminary facts, the standard and burden of  proof,  the
         matter of exclusion, a detailed overview of the credibility of  the
         appellant and the witnesses, the issues raised by the respondent in
         the  decision  letter,  the  assessment  of  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant and witnesses and  the  concluding  findings.  The  judge
         overwhelmingly found in the appellant's  favour.  This  was  not  a
         borderline case. In those circumstances, the respondent's arguments
         had to fall away. The judge was not required to make a  finding  on
         whether or not  the  tapes  were  genuine.  He  accepted  that  the
         appellant had not become involved  for  personal  profit.  He  also
         accepted  that  the  Swiss  prosecution  was  instigated   by   the
         appellant's political enemies and was  entitled  to  find  that  he
         would not receive a  fair  trial  and  would  be  deprived  of  his
         citizenship. It was not incumbent upon the judge to make a  finding
         on every issue, to provide reasons for every matter or  to  address
         every argument made.

     22.  Ms  Laughton  relied  on  several  authorities  to   support   her
         submissions: R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, Haleemudeen [2014]  EWCA
         Civ 558, JR (Jamaica) [2014] EWCA Civ 477  and  AH  (Sudan)  [2007]
         UKHL 49. She relied on MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49 for the issue of
         self direction and  on  her  skeleton  argument  for  arguments  on
         exclusion.  She  made  four  submissions  before  turning  to   the
         respondent's  grounds.  She  submitted  that  the  respondent   was
         attempting to re-argue a case that he had lost and pointed out that
         on granting permission the First-tier Tribunal Judge had only found
         merit in one ground. She pointed to the care and detail with  which
         the determination had been prepared and submitted that it  was  not
         reasonable to assume that having properly self directed, the  judge
         would then go on and forget how the evidence  should  be  assessed.
         Secondly, she submitted  that  adequate  reasons  had  been  given.
         Third, she submitted that some of the points now made had not  been
         made at the hearing. Fourth, she submitted that as the  appellant's
         credibility had not been challenged the errors of  law  alleged  by
         the respondent had to fall away.

     23. Ms Laughton then addressed me on each of the respondent's  grounds.
         On the point of mis-direction, she maintained that the correct test
         on the issue of exclusion was as set out in Al  Sirri  [2012]  UKSC
         54, and as cited in paragraph 100 of the  determination.  She  said
         that following that test, it was difficult to see how the reference
         to the balance of  probabilities  meant  that  he  had  misdirected
         himself. She argued that the judge had followed the guidance in  AH
         (Algeria) [2013] UKUT 00382; he was aware of  the  wording  of  the
         Refugee Convention which had to be interpreted on  the  balance  of
         probabilities. It was not correct that the  criminal  standard  had
         been applied, as argued by the respondent (in paragraph  5  of  the
         grounds). Although the grant of permission suggested that the judge
         might have misapplied the test, those words only showed  where  the
         burden lay and did not go to the standard of proof.  The  reference
         to "established" had to be read in the context of the case law  and
         the judge's previous self direction and should  be  interpreted  as
         meaning  "established  to  the  required  standard".  If   it   was
         considered ambiguous then that was taking one word out of the  rest
         of the determination and looking at it in isolation. That  was  not
         what was recommended in AH (Sudan).

     24. With regard to the issue of  the  Swiss  prosecution,  Ms  Laughton
         pointed out that the Tribunal did not  have  any  of  the  evidence
         concerned. The respondent had relied only on the arrest warrant and
         the extradition  proceedings.  There  had  been  no  trial  and  no
         conviction and these were matters the judge had to  consider.   The
         appellant had denied all charges and given the absence of  evidence
         to the contrary, the judge was entitled to rely  on  that  lack  of
         evidence. She also submitted that the judge was  entitled  to  have
         regard to the Fintas  Group  convictions  and  the  proceedings  in
         Jordan when assessing whether the  alleged  crimes  in  Switzerland
         were political. The respondent was wrong to  argue  that  only  the
         motivation for the Swiss crimes should have been  considered.  They
         were all relevant matters and had to be considered holistically but
         even if the judge had erred in so doing,  it  would  have  made  no
         difference to the outcome as the judge accepted the evidence of the
         appellant and the witnesses.

     25. Ms Laughton argued that the appellant's request for  permission  to
         go to Switzerland was initially made whilst his asylum  application
         was pending and  then  again  during  the  course  of  the  appeals
         process. She submitted that it would not have  been  necessary  for
         the respondent to have treated the  asylum  claim  as  having  been
         abandoned by the appellant's departure but the respondent failed to
         reply to the request. In any event, this was not a point relied  on
         by the respondent at the hearing and he was  not  now  entitled  to
         criticize the judge for failing to  have  regard  to  a  submission
         which had not been made.

     26. Further, Ms Laughton  argued  that  the  respondent  had  not  made
         submissions about the different views to  sentencing  held  by  the
         appellant's lawyer and the prosecutor as set out  in  the  lawyer's
         report. In any event, the prosecutor's view, taken at  its  highest
         was that some appellants would be referred to a higher  court.  The
         appellant was not mentioned by name as one of those and there  were
         eight appellants in the case. The lawyer had reached her  view  not
         just on the basis of the appellant being a first time offender  but
         also on the relevant facts of  the  case  and  the  nature  of  the
         offence. The term of  imprisonment  was  relevant  to  the  judge's
         consideration; to argue that it was not would  be  contrary  to  AH
         (Algeria) 1.

     27. Ms Laughton submitted that the judge was very  conscious  that  the
         alleged  crime  had  to  reach  a  level  of  seriousness  and  she
         maintained that a  sham  arbitration  which  would  not  result  in
         imprisonment could not reach that level. If  the  judge  had  found
         that the crimes were not serious, then any other  errors  were  not
         relevant. The correct test was set out and it  was  not  reasonable
         that he would have then promptly forgotten it.

     28. The appellant  had  acted  with  political  interests  in  mind  by
         exposing corruption and the warrant itself  referred  to  political
         figures. With respect to the KRIC arbitration, the judge heard  the
         evidence of the lawyer and his concerns about the arbitration;  the
         bribery of an expert and the conduct of the  arbitrator.  He  found
         the evidence to be credible. Moreover, if it was  the  respondent's
         case that the arbitration was a sham then he could not  also  argue
         that proceedings in Switzerland could not be corrupt.

     29. Ms Laughton also addressed the charges in Jordan and submitted that
         the problem there was that these had been based on the torture of a
         co-defendant and were therefore unreliable.

     30. The judge had been well aware  of  the  respondent's  arguments  as
         these were set out in full in the determination and were addressed.
         The judge had the arbitration letter and the expert reports and  no
         issue was taken with them in the decision letter. If  the  evidence
         was not challenged by the parties, it would  be  very  rare  for  a
         judge to find that it was not up to scratch. It was  not  the  case
         that the reports relied solely on the videos. They also  took  into
         account information from various sources as clear from the evidence
         at Tab 16 of Bundle 10.

     31. On the issue of the expert evidence, the judge  was  aware  of  the
         criticisms made and the complaint that he had taken on role of  the
         Tribunal.  Nevertheless,  the  judge  found  that  this   did   not
         invalidate the rest of the report or  the  evidence  of  the  other
         expert. Despite the limitations of the report, he found the witness
         to be impressive. His findings  could  not,  therefore,  reach  the
         perversity threshold.

     32. On the matter of whether the tapes were genuine,  the  judge  could
         not make a finding. The most he could do was to find whether or not
         the appellant believed them to be genuine.

     33. The appellant feared that on return  to  Kuwait  he  would  be  ill
         treated whilst he was being processed and  then  again  during  any
         period of custody. In assessing the  risk  to  the  appellant,  the
         expert explained that he was in the  unusual  situation  of  having
         already been convicted and sentenced and that  was  why  there  was
         limited evidence on the risk of ill  treatment.  He  had,  however,
         given evidence on how he obtained his figures. It was only in cross
         examination that he was asked for evidence of his sources and so he
         had no  opportunity  to  produce  them.  In  any  event,  this  was
         unrealistic given that he had relied on  over  3000  documents.  It
         should have  been  sufficient  that  he  provided  details  of  his
         methodology. His findings on ill treatment were consistent with the
         background evidence as set out in the skeleton argument.  When  the
         available space in prisons was calculated, it could be seen  to  be
         well below  the  minimum  requirements.  Other  reasons  were  also
         provided. The respondent  had  essentially  expressed  disagreement
         with the findings and was looking for reasons  for  reasons.  There
         had been no material errors of law.

     34. Mr Clarke responded. He submitted that it was wrong to say that the
         grounds did not challenge  credibility  as  they  plainly  did  and
         credibility had to be considered  holistically.  It  was  also  not
         correct that the respondent had provided limited  evidence  as  the
         respondent's case  was  based  on  the  evidence  provided  by  the
         appellant, the expert reports and witness  statements  as  well  as
         material served by the respondent.  Omissions in the evidence  from
         the appellant had been pointed out. The video tapes were historical
         and those persons said to be implicated  in  them  were  no  longer
         involved in politics. There was no nexus and the  T  test  had  not
         been met. The KRIC litigation was peripheral and in  any  event  if
         there was more evidence available, it had been for the appellant to
         provide it and not for the respondent to seek it. There was a  lack
         of evidence as to whether the persons accused were those  heard  on
         the tapes. No findings had been made on that matter. Any removal to
         Jordan would involve an agreement between the governments of the UK
         and Jordan as to the standard of treatment.  Whilst Ms Laughton had
         calculated the minimum space requirements, the judge had  not  done
         so. If an error of law  were  to  be  found,  the  case  should  be
         retained by the Upper Tribunal as  it  was  complicated,  could  be
         dealt  with  faster  than  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and   the
         extradition proceedings had already been delayed.

     35. Ms Laughton submitted that if the  determination  were  to  be  set
         aside  then  the  matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. She suggested that a case management review hearing might
         be advisable and that a decision  on  the  future  conduct  of  the
         appeal could be made at that stage.

     36. That completed the hearing. I reserved my determination which I now
         give with reasons.

         Discussion and Conclusions

     37. I have considered all the evidence before me and have had regard to
         the submissions made before reaching a decision. I  am  mindful  of
         the potentially serious consequences of my decision and I have made
         it with care. I have also endeavoured to make  it  as  promptly  as
         possible given the substantial amount of evidence relied on.

     38. I would state at the outset that this  has  been  a  difficult  and
         complex case. It is plain that it  took  Judge  Hodgkinson  several
         days to hear the appeal and the length of  the  determination  (133
         pages) is indicative  of  the  substantial  evidence  adduced,  the
         complicated issues raised and the care with which the decision  was
         made. Notwithstanding the criticisms levelled at  the  decision,  I
         have concluded that it was properly made and that whilst there  are
         some minor areas where the judge might have used a tighter turn  of
         phrase (such as in matters pertaining to ground  1),  overall,  the
         determination is sound and there are no errors of law  which  would
         require the decision to be set aside. I now  give  reasons  for  my
         conclusion.

     39. I note that in granting permission to appeal, Judge Lever indicated
         that only one ground put forward by  the  respondent  had  arguable
         merit and that was the first matter which pertained  to  the  legal
         tests and standards applicable in the consideration of whether  the
         appellant should be excluded form the  protection  of  the  Refugee
         Convention.  I deal with that point first.

     40. It is the respondent's case that the judge  materially  misdirected
         himself in that, at paragraph 110, having  correctly  set  out  the
         test under article 1F(b) as considered in Al-Sirri [2012] UKSC  54,
         he then failed to apply it in  the  subsequent  paragraphs.  It  is
         argued that the  judge  imported  domestic  standards  instead  and
         erroneously found that it was for the respondent to  show,  on  the
         balance of probabilities, that the test had been made out (at  119,
         130 and 153). Additionally, he found at paragraphs 161 and 162 that
         it had not been established that  the  appellant  had  committed  a
         crime in Switzerland and that he had taken into account politically
         motivated charges brought  against  the  appellant  in  Kuwait  and
         Jordan  when  assessing  the  appellant's  rebuttal  of  the   s.55
         certificate. It  is  argued  that  the  Tribunal  was  required  to
         consider the certificate first and that  the  asylum  claim  should
         only have been considered if the certificate was not upheld.

     41. The judge set out the burden and standard of proof with respect  to
         article 1F and paragraph 339C, CA and D at  paragraphs  104-111  of
         the determination.   He cited the Qualifications Regulations  2006,
         the Immigration  Rules,  the  Refugee  Convention,  s.  55  of  the
         Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 and the authorities of
         JS v SSHD (Sri Lanka) [2010] UKSC 15 and  Al-Sirri  v  SSHD  [2012]
         UKSC 54. It is accepted by the respondent that there are no  errors
         with respect to any of those paragraphs. Having  then  acknowledged
         that the respondent has to show that "there are serious reasons for
         considering that...he has committed a serious  non-political  crime
         outside the country of refuge prior to admission...", the judge  is
         accused of forgetting what he has set out  at  length  and  finding
         instead that the respondent had failed to show, on the  balance  of
         probabilities, that such a crime had been committed.

     42. In the judge's defence, Ms Laughton relied on the authorities of AH
         (Sudan) v SSHD [2007] UKHL 49 and MA (Somalia) v SSHD  [2010]  UKSC
         49 and the guidance on self direction  given  therein  as  set  out
         below:

             "This is an  expert  Tribunal  charged  with  administering  a
             complex area  of  law  in  challenging  circumstances....[T]he
             ordinary courts should approach  appeals  from  them  with  an
             appropriate  degree  of  caution;  it  is  probable  that   in
             understanding and applying the law in their specialised  field
             the Tribunal will have got it right....They and they alone are
             judges of the  facts...Their  decisions  should  be  respected
             unless it is quite clear that they have misdirected themselves
             in  law.  Appellate  courts  should  not  rush  to  find  such
             misdirections  simply  because  they  might  have  reached   a
             different conclusion on  the  facts  or  expressed  themselves
             differently"(at paragraph 30 of AH and cited at 43 of MA).

             "In the light of the clear and impeccable  self-direction  set
             out only a few paragraphs earlier ..., and  having  regard  to
             the need for restraint to which we have  referred,  the  court
             should surely have been very slow to reach the conclusion that
             it did...It is often easy enough to  find  some  ambiguity  or
             obscurity in a judgment or determination,  particularly  in  a
             field as difficult and complex as immigration, where the facts
             may be difficult to unravel and the law  difficult  to  apply.
             If...a tribunal  articulates  a  self-direction  and  does  so
             correctly, the reviewing court should be slow to find that  it
             has failed to apply  the  direction  in  accordance  with  its
             terms. All the more so where the  effect  of  the  failure  to
             apply the direction is that the tribunal will be found to have
             done precisely the opposite of what it said it  was  going  to
             do"(at 46)

     43. In JS (Sri Lanka), the Supreme  Court  confirmed  that  the  phrase
         "there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering"  in  the   Refugee
         Convention and the Qualification Directive, set  a  standard  above
         mere suspicion. That was confirmed in Al-Sirri  where  the  Supreme
         Court held that (i) serious reasons  is  stronger  than  reasonable
         grounds, (ii) the evidence from which  those  reasons  are  derived
         must be clear and credible or strong, (iii) considering is stronger
         than suspecting, (iv)the decision maker need not  be  satisfied  to
         the criminal standard and (v) that although it  is  unnecessary  to
         import domestic standards  of  proof  into  the  question,  if  the
         decision maker was satisfied that it was more likely that not  that
         the appellant had  not  committed  the  alleged  crimes,  then  the
         serious reasons test had not been  met  (at  75).  The  court  then
         stated: "The reality is  there  are  unlikely  to  be  sufficiently
         serious reasons for considering the applicant to be  guilty  unless
         the decision maker can be satisfied on the balance of probabilities
         that he is".  In AH (Algeria) [2013] UKUT 00382 (IAC), the Al-Sirri
         standard of proof was interpreted as indicating a standard of "more
         probable than not", i.e. the balance of probabilities, so that  the
         issue was whether it was more probable than not that  an  appellant
         had personally participated in a crime (at  82).  In  AH  (Algeria)
         [2015] EWCA Civ 1003, "serious reasons for considering"  was  found
         to impose "a  demanding  hurdle  for  the  application  of  article
         1F(b)..." (at 26).

     44. The judge correctly and at length set out the correct approach, the
         correct standard and burden of proof and the correct legal test  to
         be applied. To accept the respondent's submission  that  the  judge
         misdirected himself, would mean making a finding that having  fully
         and properly directed himself  over  several  paragraphs,  he  then
         promptly forgot what he had said and what he had used case  law  to
         support. Bearing in mind the guidance provided by the Supreme Court
         (above), and the fact that Judge Hodgkinson is an experienced judge
         of many years' standing, who plainly devoted a great deal  of  time
         and effort in preparing a thorough and comprehensive determination,
         it is difficult for this Tribunal to find that he would  have  made
         such a basic error. The reference to the balance  of  probabilities
         as the standard the respondent had to meet is  in  accordance  with
         the guidance given by the Supreme Court in Al-Sirri and  the  Upper
         Tribunal in AH (Algeria). There is nothing in the determination  to
         support the contention that the  criminal  standard  of  proof  was
         applied.

     45. Whilst it is accepted that the judge refers to the  respondent  not
         having established that a serious crime had been committed,  rather
         than having serious reasons for considering that a crime  had  been
         committed, I do not consider this is anything more than a matter of
         format.  Given the care  with  which  the  determination  has  been
         prepared, it is inconceivable that the judge would  have  forgotten
         his lengthy self direction and misdirected himself. Further, as  Ms
         Laughton argued in her submissions, the judge's  reference  to  the
         respondent not having established certain matters, may  well  point
         to where the burden lies and  be  meant  to  refer  to  not  having
         established them to the required standard or proof.  It is also not
         helpful to take a  phrase  out  of  context  and  criticize  it  in
         isolation. To show how easily a phrase which attracts criticism can
         occur, I would point to the respondent's own grounds (at 39)  where
         there is use of the same phrase - "whether the appellant  committed
         a crime" - the judge is criticized for using.

     46. On the issue  of  whether  the  judge  wrongly  considered  matters
         pertaining to the asylum  claim  when  he  should  only  have  been
         considering the appellant's rebuttal to  the  s.55  certificate,  I
         accept Ms  Laughton's  submissions  that  he  had  to  analyse  the
         respondent's evidence in order to form a view  of  whether  it  was
         clear, credible and strong. It is difficult to  see  how  he  could
         have made any findings on the issue of exclusion without looking at
         matters which touched upon the  asylum  claim.  Whilst  it  is  not
         disputed that a conviction is not necessary to demonstrate "serious
         reasons for considering", the lack of a conviction, the absence  of
         any evidence,  the  appellant's  vehement  denial  of  the  charges
         brought against him in Switzerland, his willingness  to  face  them
         and  clear  his  name,  and  his  unchallenged  evidence  that  the
         prosecution was initiated at the request of those who held personal
         enmity against him for political and  economic  reasons,  were  all
         matters the judge was entitled  to  take  into  account.  Exclusion
         could not have been considered in a vacuum.  The  judge  considered
         the issue of whether there was evidence to support  the  contention
         that the appellant had committed a sufficiently  serious  crime  in
         Switzerland, using the correct standard of proof,  at  123-142.  It
         follows that I find that there were no errors with respect  to  the
         first ground.

     47. Ground 2 overlaps to some extent with  ground  1  in  arguing  that
         irrelevant  matters  were  taken  into  account  when   the   judge
         considered whether crimes  had  been  committed.  Specifically,  Mr
         Clarke argued that the request to  travel  to  Switzerland  without
         abandoning  his  appeal  was  irrelevant.  He  submitted  that  the
         abandonment of the appeal was a matter of statute and not one which
         the respondent had any authority over. Ms Laughton points out  that
         the first request made by the appellant was well before a  decision
         was made on his claim  and  when  the  respondent  would  have  had
         discretion. That chronology is confirmed by the judge  (at  74  and
         131). Whilst not considered as a primary factor, the appellant's co-
         operation with the Swiss proceedings, as opposed  to  avoidance  of
         them, was a matter the judge was entitled to have regard to. It  is
         also of note that this was not an objection raised at  the  hearing
         before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  either  in  the  form   of   the
         respondent's skeleton argument or oral submissions.

     48. Ground 3 concerns the issue of whether the crime  was  sufficiently
         serious to meet the article 1F(b) test, whether irrelevant  matters
         had been relied on in making this assessment and  whether  adequate
         reasons were provided for the judge's findings. The  appellant  has
         been accused of taking part in a  sham  arbitration.  This  is  the
         offence  which  the  respondent  relies  on  to  exclude  him  from
         protection.

     49. In making findings as to whether the offence was serious enough  to
         meet the threshold, the judge had referred to the statement of  the
         appellant's lawyer  in  Switzerland  (C)  and  the  view  expressed
         therein that the appellant was unlikely to serve a prison  sentence
         even if convicted (at 37 of the statement). He was aware that C was
         the  appellant's  lawyer.  Ms  Laughton  argued  that  whilst   the
         respondent had referred to the statement at the hearing, there  had
         been  no  disagreement  with  the  contents  of   that   particular
         paragraph. It is the case that C's view disagreed with the view  of
         the prosecutor, also set out in the statement (at 32 and  36).  The
         prosecutor said that he intended to  send  the  defendants  to  the
         criminal court and that he would ask for some of the accused (there
         are eight of them) to  be  handed  down  a  custodial  sentence  if
         convicted.  The appellant was not mentioned as one of those. It was
         Ms Laughton's submission that this conflict of views had  not  been
         put to the judge as a reason for rejecting C's view  and  so  could
         not now be used as a reason for criticizing the judge.

     50. I accept Mr Clarke's submission that the transcript provided by the
         appellant's solicitors is not a verbatim record of the arguments he
         made to the court. I note that certain matters  identified  in  his
         submissions to me demonstrate  that  not  everything  he  said  was
         recorded and indeed, it would be a difficult task for that to  have
         been done. However, it does appear that this particular conflict of
         opinions was not a matter the respondent had  relied  on  with  the
         judge specifically finding that there had been no challenge to  her
         statement  (at  152).  In  any  event,  the  prosecutor   did   not
         specifically include the appellant as one of those  in  respect  of
         whom he would seek a custodial sentence. Nor is  it  the  case,  as
         argued, that C only relied on the fact that  the  appellant  was  a
         first time offender to opine  that  there  would  be  no  custodial
         sentence. She also relied on other factors including the good  will
         shown and the appellant's willingness to co-operate. Given the lack
         of specifics in the prosecutor's view, it was open to the judge  to
         prefer the opinion given by C.

     51. On the matter of a  lack  of  adequate  reasoning,  the  respondent
         argues that the judge failed to apply the reasoning in AH (Algeria)
         [2012] EWCA Civ 395. The judge did, in fact, cite and quote  AH  at
         paragraph 144 and 145. Although that authority found  that  it  was
         not helpful to determine the level of seriousness  by  the  precise
         sentence imposed, the Court of Appeal accepted that it was still  a
         material factor and indeed placed weight on the fact  that  AH  had
         only received a two year sentence (at 40).

     52. At paragraphs 145-146 and 152, the judge reminded himself that  the
         crime must be of similar equivalence to "a crime against  peace,  a
         war crime, or a crime against humanity" or "acts  contrary  to  the
         purposes and principles  of  the  United  Nations".  He  took  full
         account of Mr Clarke's skeleton argument (at 149), even  correcting
         a error therein (at 150). At 152-153 he then summarized his reasons
         for finding that  the  threshold  had  not  been  reached  for  the
         allegation of a sham arbitration. His reasoning is adequate. In  so
         finding, I have regard to the guidance in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA  Civ
         982 (at 13-16), Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA  Civ  558  (at  32-35),  JR
         (Jamaica) [2014] Civ 477 (at 9-10) and AH (Sudan) 2007 UKHL 49  (at
         19 and 30). Not every argument has to be  addressed  and  one  must
         avoid a situation where reasons for reasons are sought. It is  also
         important to note that there has been no direct  challenge  to  the
         evidence of the appellant and his witnesses who were  found  to  be
         impressive, credible and consistent.

     53. In his fourth ground, the respondent  argues  that  the  judge  was
         wrong to find that the offence was not a political crime  and  that
         he applied the wrong legal test. I  have  already  dealt  with  the
         matter of the judge's  self  directions  and  in  so  far  as  this
         pertains to the test on a further matter, it is  evident  that  the
         judge properly directed himself at paragraph 155 and correctly sets
         out the test in T [1996] UKHL 8. Mr Clarke argued that there  could
         have been no object of overthrowing or subverting or  changing  the
         government of a state of inducing it to change its  policy  because
         the two main protagonists had resigned  from  office  and  were  no
         longer political figures thereby disproving the  close  and  direct
         link between the crime and the alleged political purpose. The judge
         rejected that argument and so do I.  It is not  disputed  that  the
         complainants in the Swiss proceedings are the same as  the  alleged
         persecutors in Kuwait and indeed  they  are  named  in  the  arrest
         warrant which itself makes it plain that the alleged offence had  a
         political motive. There was also  no  misunderstanding  as  to  the
         succession process in Kuwait. The judge was entitled to  find  that
         both Sheikh Nasser and Sheikh Ahmed  were  the  top  contenders  to
         succeed  the  Emir  and  become  the  next  Crown  Prince,  thereby
         demonstrating the on going political nature of  the  conflict.  The
         evidence before the judge was that notwithstanding the  resignation
         of Sheikh Nasser from the position of Prime Minister  in  2011,  he
         still controlled the government both due to  his  position  in  the
         ruling family and because his deputy took  over  his  position  (at
         34). Until his death in 2015, Jassem Al Kharafi, who  had  resigned
         as Speaker, also remained extremely important being a member of one
         of the  richest  families  in  the  world  and  having  controlling
         interests in companies across the Middle East  (ibid).  The  Fintas
         prosecution resulted in the conviction in absentia of the appellant
         to ten years imprisonment for  deliberately  circulating  false  or
         malicious news abroad to weaken the prestige of the state (at  68).
         The respondent argued that the appellant was motivated by  personal
         profit but that submission was rejected by the judge; that  finding
         is unchallenged.

     54. In ground 5, the respondent maintains that the judge's reasons  for
         accepting the evidence  of  the  KRIC  lawyer,  T,  were  perverse.
         Needless to say, the threshold for perversity  is  extremely  high.
         Here, the judge set out T's evidence, both  written  and  oral,  at
         length in paragraphs 247-272,  took  account  of  the  respondent's
         arguments and concerns (at 273) and then concluded that he found  T
         to be wholly credible and persuasive (at  274).  That  finding  was
         open to him on the  evidence  set  out  and  does  not  denote  any
         elements of perversity. Whilst the respondent maintains that such a
         finding goes behind the decision of the Swiss court and that  there
         was  no  evidence  of  any  corruption  or  impropriety  in   Swiss
         arbitration  procedures,  this  does  not   sit   well   with   the
         respondent's main argument against the appellant which is that  the
         arbitration proceedings in respect of the videotapes  was  a  sham.
         The respondent cannot have it  both  ways.  In  any  event,  as  Ms
         Laughton submits in her  skeleton  argument,  this  is  immaterial.
         Whether the Swiss arbitration proceedings were  correctly  decided,
         has no relevance to the question of whether  the  appellant  is  at
         risk or persecution in Kuwait, or at risk of transfer to Jordan, or
         at a real risk of torture upon transfer in circumstances  where  it
         is accepted that one of the appellant's co-defendants in Jordan was
         tortured.

     55. Ground 6 challenges the  judge's  finding  that,  contrary  to  the
         respondent's  position  that  the  Trekell  arbitration  (a   paper
         hearing) was a sham, the arbitrator was entitled to find  that  the
         videotapes were genuine and that the appellant believed them to  be
         genuine. The grounds essentially repeat submissions that were  made
         and rejected  by  the  judge.  The  expert  reports  had  not  been
         criticized  in  the  decision  letter  and  concerns   over   their
         reliability were first raised in the respondent's skeleton argument
         and subsequently in submissions at the hearing  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal. The judge set out these concerns at  paragraph  377,
         379, 387-397, 399-400 noting the respondent's  case  was  that  the
         Trekell arbitration was a sham. He properly identified the issue as
         one where he had to determine not if the  tapes  were  genuine  but
         whether the arbitrator had could have reached the decision  he  did
         on the evidence available to him (at 378). At paragraphs 402-427 he
         gave  detailed  reasons  for  finding  that  it  was  open  to  the
         arbitrator to rely on the unchallenged expert  reports  before  him
         without picking them apart and  to  find  as  he  did.  He  did  so
         specifically noting the respondent's submissions and  the  specific
         argument that the expert reports were limited in  their  scope  and
         analysis (at 407). He concluded that even if the  reports  had  the
         shortcomings argued by Mr Clarke, it would be too much of a leap to
         then find that  the  arbitrator  acted  fraudulently  or  that  the
         arbitration was a sham. He  also  found  that  the  arbitrator  was
         entitled  to  take  note  of  the  police   report,   despite   the
         shortcomings identified by Mr Clarke in that document  (at  408-9).
         It was not for the judge  to  re-make  the  decision  made  by  the
         arbitrator by reassessing all the evidence and taking into  account
         the arguments now made about the lack of  an  audio  trail  in  the
         reports. He had to make a finding on  whether  the  arbitrator  was
         entitled to find as he did on the evidence he had  which  had  been
         unchallenged at the time. There is no  perversity  in  the  judge's
         conclusion that the arbitrator reached a decision open  to  him  on
         the material he had.

     56. Criticism was also made of the judge's findings on  the  report  of
         the appellant's expert (identified at 134 of the determination) and
         to whom I  shall  refer  to  E1.  I  refer  to  the  second  expert
         (identified at paragraph 314) as E2. as well as his written report,
         E1 also gave oral testimony at the hearing.  E2  declined  to  give
         oral evidence for fear of repercussions. The  respondent  complains
         that E1 went beyond his remit in making a  finding  that  that  the
         tapes were not fabricated and that in so doing he had stepped  into
         the shoes of the Tribunal. The judge, in fact, concurred with  that
         criticism (at 419). However, he found that the  fact  that  E1  had
         overstepped the mark with respect to the authenticity of the tapes,
         did not invalidate the remainder of his findings and  analysis  nor
         the conclusions of E2.  Quite properly, this was, however, a matter
         the judge took into account  when  assessing  the  report  and  the
         evidence and the reliability of E1 as  a  witness.  I  see  nothing
         erroneous in that approach.  E1  was  found  to  be  an  impressive
         witness with extensive expertise (at 343).

     57. Ground 7 challenges the judge's findings on article 3 and  attempts
         to pick holes in the statistics cited in E1's report pertaining  to
         police brutality in Kuwait. E1 was cross  examined  extensively  on
         his  figures  and  he  gave  detailed  evidence  as   regards   his
         methodology and his sources. The judge was entitled  to  find  that
         the statistics were properly referenced and sourced, that it  would
         be unrealistic for the expert to produce all his  underlying  data,
         that he was experienced and authoritative and that the evidence was
         accurate and properly researched.  In  so  far  as  the  respondent
         points to K not being ill treated in detention, the judge  properly
         found that he was distinguishable from other defendants as he was a
         member of the royal family. Furthermore, the judge's conclusions on
         the risk of ill  treatment  were  entirely  consistent  with  other
         country evidence, including the  US  State  Department  report,  UN
         observations on Kuwait,  an  Amnesty  International  report  and  a
         report from the Gulf  Centre  for  Human  Rights.  Overcrowding  in
         prisons was only one factor considered by the judge  (at  432).  In
         any event there  being  no  errors  with  respect  to  the  judge's
         conclusions  on  asylum,  any  issues  raised  on  article  3   are
         immaterial.

     58. Ground 8 relates to the judge's findings on the risk of deprivation
         of citizenship (at 351-362). It is not the case, as the  respondent
         has argued, that the judge's findings were  inadequately  reasoned.
         The judge relied upon the  expert  evidence  and  other  background
         material.  He concluded that there  was  a  propensity  to  deprive
         citizens of their nationality on political grounds and that it  was
         unlikely that the decision would be taken before the individual was
         actually returned as otherwise he would be non-removable. There was
         no argument made  to  the  judge  that  because  the  other  Fintas
         defendants  had  not  been  deprived  of  their  citizenship,   the
         appellant would not be so deprived.

     59. Finally it is argued that the judge should  not  have  allowed  the
         appeal under  article  6  without  inviting  submissions.  This  is
         immaterial to the outcome as the appeal was allowed both under  the
         Refugee Convention and article 3 but it is worth pointing out  that
         this was one of the limbs of the case as put by  the  appellant  at
         the outset and set out by the  judge  as  an  issue  (at  paragraph
         5(4)). It being a limb of the appellant's case, the judge  did  not
         err in addressing it. There was no need to invite submissions on an
         issue which had already been identified by the appellant as part of
         his case.

     60. I was urged by Mr Clarke to keep in mind that  there  were  ongoing
         extradition proceedings against the appellant. Those can of  course
         now continue to resolution. As Ms Laughton submitted,  a  grant  of
         refugee status does not prevent extradition and nor does it prevent
         the respondent at a  later  date,  if  the  appellant  were  to  be
         convicted, to raise the possibility of revoking his status.

     61. I do not find that the judge's decision impinges in any way on  the
         case the Swiss proceedings shall deal with. The judge made it  very
         clear that he was not seeking to make any findings on  that  matter
         and that, indeed, in the absence of any  evidence  of  the  alleged
         crime, he was unable in any event to express a view on the  outcome
         of that case. His findings were made on  the  evidence  before  him
         and, I reiterate, that he  did  not  have  access  to  any  of  the
         material pertaining to the Swiss proceedings.

     62. In conclusion, therefore, I find  that  the  judge's  determination
         does not contain any errors of law which would require it to be set
         aside for re-making.

         Decision

     63. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  the  appellant's
         appeal on all grounds is upheld.

         Anonymity

     64. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 29 March 2019


