
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
pa/04496/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2019                      | On 13 March 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    M.A.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh of Counsel instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M
    A Khan promulgated on 22 June 2018  dismissing  the  appeal  against  a
    decision dated 22 March 2018 to refuse asylum in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.  His date of  birth  has  been  the
    subject of dispute:  I make some observations on this issue below.


3.   The Appellant claims to have left Iran on 23 November 2015.   There  is
    on file evidence that he was fingerprinted in  Lesbos  on  28  November
    2015: see Respondent's bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  E8.
    The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  6  January  2016  and
    claimed asylum on 7 January 2016.  A screening interview was  conducted
    on 24 February 2016 and an SEF and witness statement returned  dated  8
    June 2016.  A substantive asylum interview  was  conducted  on  4  July
    2016.


4.   The Appellant's application was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 22 March 2018.


5.   The Appellant advanced his application for asylum on  the  basis  of  a
    claimed risk of persecution on religious  grounds.   He  has  given  an
    account of having become interested in Christianity through a Christian
    friend in Iran.  This led him  to  ask  questions  of  the  teacher  of
    religious classes at his school, such questions challenging aspects  of
    Islam.  After the first such occasion the Appellant was forced to  sign
    a declaration by the teacher and the headteacher at his school that  he
    would not in the future challenge or question Islam;  he  says  he  was
    also slapped by his religious teacher.  Notwithstanding this experience
    and the signing of the declaration, it is the Appellant's case that  on
    a second occasion he raised the same or similar questions in respect of
    Islam.  On this occasion  it  resulted  in  him  being  beaten  by  the
    religious teacher in front of the other  students  in  the  class.   In
    consequence  of  this  event  the  Appellant's  family   members   made
    arrangements for him to leave the country.


6.   Since he has been in the United Kingdom the Appellant says that he  has
    continued to explore his interest in Christianity and  this  culminated
    in his baptism on 18 February  2018.   He  says  he  has  continued  to
    observe his Christian faith since that time.


7.   In refusing the Appellant's application the Respondent essentially  did
    not accept his narrative account of events in Iran.  In respect of  the
    Appellant's claimed continuing interest in Christianity whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom, the Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had  a
    genuine interest in Christianity (RFRL at paragraph 46).


8.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


9.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in the  'Decision  and
    Reasons' of Judge Khan promulgated on 22 June 2018.


10.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was refused in the first  instance  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on 10 July 2018.   However,  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on 2 November 2018.


11.  The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  dated  31  December  2018  response
    resisting the appeal.  However, before me Mr Kotas  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State did not seek to rely upon the Rule 24 response - and
    indeed in due course essentially acknowledged that there was  substance
    to certain aspects of the challenge brought by  the  Appellant  to  the
    decision of Judge Khan.


12.  With some hesitation I am just  persuaded  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is in material error of law and requires to be  set
    aside.


13.  I do not accept that there is any substance in the challenge raised  in
    the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  consideration
    of section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004. I note the following.

         (i) The Appellant produced a birth certificate in  support  of  his
         claimed identity and date of birth.  This was subjected to analysis
         by the Respondent, and a document examination report  was  produced
         (Respondent's bundle at F1). In material part it states:

             "The document has been chemically  washed  with  all  original
             handwritten  details  removed  and  new  details  added.   The
             removed details are not visible with the  naked  eye  but  the
             original inks become clear when the  document  is  illuminated
             with ultraviolet light.  Only one set of inks is expected in a
             genuine unaltered document and it is my opinion that  the  new
             set of details have  been  unlawfully  added.   This  document
             cannot be relied upon as evidence of the holder's  nationality
             or identity."


         (ii) The Respondent commented upon this in the  RFRL  at  paragraph
         48, and at paragraph 49 relied upon  this  circumstance  to  invoke
         section 8 of the 2004 Act.


         (iii) I acknowledge that the citation of section 8 at paragraph  49
         is in error in that it refers to  a  sub-section  that  relates  to
         passports - section 8(3).  Mr  Walsh,  however,  acknowledged  that
         section 8 is not  limited  to  issues  in  relation  to  passports.
         Indeed, the following is to be observed in respect of section 8(2):



             "This section applies to any behaviour by  the  claimant  that
             the deciding authority thinks:


                  (a)  is designed or likely to conceal information;


                  (b)  is designed or likely to mislead; or


                  (c)  is designed  or  likely  to  obstruct  or  delay  the
                  handling or resolution of the claim or  the  taking  of  a
                  decision in relation to the claimant."

         Section 8(3) is expressly declared to be "Without prejudice to  the
         generality of subsection (2)", and  necessarily  is  therefore  not
         intended  to  provide  a   prescriptive   or   complete   list   of
         circumstances in which section 8 might be engaged.


         (iv) In such circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  was
         entitled to take into account that "The appellant has not explained
         the replacement of the information on  the  birth  certificate"  as
         engaging section 8 of the 2004 Act (paragraph 39).


         (v) It is pleaded in the grounds of challenge in this  regard  that
         the judge has not explained what  was  meant  in  the  Decision  by
         "replacement of the information  on  the  birth  certificate".   It
         seems to me that in the context of the  case  nothing  further  was
         required by way of explanation: it was plain and obvious.


14.  In all the circumstance I consider this particular  line  of  challenge
    to have been misconceived. Indeed Mr Walsh acknowledged as much and did
    not seek to pursue the point before me.


15.  Nor do I accept that there is any substance in the point - not  pleaded
    in the grounds of appeal but identified by Judge Coker in the grant  of
    permission to appeal - to the effect that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    made no finding on whether or not the Appellant had been baptised.   In
    this context it seems to me that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not
    in any way dispute the fact of the  Appellant  having  gone  through  a
    baptism ceremony, but rather concluded with adequate  clarity  that  it
    was not accepted that the Appellant was genuine in this regard - "I  do
    not accept that he has genuinely converted to Christianity." (paragraph
    40). This reflects the issue in the appeal raised in the RFRL that  the
    Appellant's  interest  in  Christianity  was  not  genuine.   In   such
    circumstances it was not necessary to make any express finding  on  the
    fact of baptism, and to this extent any such  overt  omission  was  not
    material to the Judge's overall conclusion.


16.  The grounds of appeal raise an issue further to the  Judge's  following
    observation:

         "The appellant stated that he had been interested in the  Christian
         religion from the time of his conversations with [A].   He  entered
         the UK in January  2016  and  yet  there  is  no  evidence  of  him
         attending any Christian place of worship until 6  August  2017.   I
         find that these are not actions of someone  who  has  been  seeking
         religious answers to burning questions and yet does not immediately
         set about satisfying himself about religious  issues  to  which  he
         could not find answers to in Iran." (paragraph 36).


17.  In context it is clear that the reference to 6 August 2017  is  to  the
    date specified in a supporting letter dated  24  April  2018  from  the
    pastor of the church at which the Appellant was  baptised  (Appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at page 12).  The letter  states,
    amongst other things, that the Appellant had attended the church from 6
    August 2017.  There is no  other  documentary  evidence  suggesting  or
    demonstrating attendance at any church in the UK at any  earlier  time.
    However,  the  Appellant's  own  testimony  was  adequately  clear   in
    asserting that he had attended churches in the UK prior  to  his  first
    attendance at the church from which the  letter  originates:  e.g.  see
    asylum interview record  at  questions  105-  107.   At  interview  the
    Appellant referred to having attended two churches within the two weeks
    prior to the date of interview.   This  would  put  his  attendance  at
    church in the UK at least as early as mid-June 2016.


18.  It might be said that when  the  judge  referred  to  there  being  "no
    evidence" of the Appellant attending any  Christian  place  of  worship
    until 6 August 2017 he simply meant 'no supporting evidence'.  If  that
    be the case, it still leaves the difficulty that there is no evaluation
    of the Appellant's own testimony in this  regard,  which  is  seemingly
    unaddressed.


19.  If it were the case  that  the  Judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's credibility were otherwise clear and  sustainable  I  might
    have been prepared to infer that it was adequately clear that the Judge
    in substance concluded that the Appellant had not  shown  that  he  had
    conducted himself after arrival in the UK in a manner  consistent  with
    his  claimed  interest  in  Christianity,  and  that  accordingly   his
    attendance at a church in August  2017  should  be  seen  from  such  a
    perspective, prompting warranted scepticism.


20.  However, I am unable to reach such  a  conclusion  in  respect  of  the
    Judge's evaluation of credibility.


21.  The judge considered  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  his
    account of his friendship with a Christian boy in Iran, notwithstanding
    his family's own Islamic faith:

         "The appellant states that his mother is a religious lady  and  she
         would not let him go to his Christian friend's  house.   I  do  not
         accept his evidence that his  mother  would  have  allowed  him  to
         attend his friend's cousin's wedding in a Church. In  paragraph  10
         of his statement he states that [A]'s family and his family have  a
         'close relationship' despite the differences in their religions.  I
         find that this is in addition to his evidence in order to  overcome
         earlier statements" (paragraph 35).




22.  In this context it is to be noted that during the course of his  asylum
    interview the Appellant was questioned about the circumstances in which
    his family permitted him to socialise with, and visit the  home  of,  a
    Christian friend -  and  indeed  to  attend  a  Christian  ceremony  of
    marriage with his friend.  The Appellant offered some reasons  in  this
    regard.  For present purposes I do not  express  any  view  as  to  the
    overall consistency of those reasons,  or  the  presentation  of  those
    reasons.  Nonetheless  it  is  clear  that  the  Appellant  offered  an
    explanation relating to such matters:  having  shared  aspects  of  his
    faith with his friend it was thereafter reasonable for  his  friend  to
    share aspects of his faith with the Appellant (question 65); there  was
    a suggestion of relative indifference on the part  of  the  Appellant's
    parents in this regard because notwithstanding the difference of  faith
    his friend's family were "very good people",  "nice  people"  (question
    73).


23.  Further to the above I accept that  there  is  some  substance  to  the
    Judge's observation that the reference to the Appellant's family having
    a 'close relationship' to his friend's  family  is  not  overt  in  the
    interview,  and  as  such  constitutes  an  additional  detail  in  the
    evidence.  However,  given  that  the  Appellant  had  already  offered
    reasons for his family permitting him to  socialise  with  a  Christian
    friend and attend Christian ceremonies, there was not on the face of it
    any 'earlier statement' that required to be 'overcome' - cf the Judge's
    comment "I find that this is an addition to his evidence  in  order  to
    overcome earlier statements".


24.  Accordingly, in my judgement it is unclear  what  the  Judge  meant  by
    'overcoming earlier  statements',  and  it  follows  that  the  Judge's
    apparent attribution of a motive for deception is at best  unexplained,
    and most likely unfounded in this regard.  I conclude that the  Judge's
    evaluation of this aspect of the Appellant's account - and the  adverse
    finding on credibility in this regard - was without clear foundation.


25.  I am also persuaded that there is a  further  instance  of  an  adverse
    view of credibility being reached without sound premise.  This  relates
    to the Appellant's account of obtaining a copy of his birth certificate
    through his uncle, notwithstanding that the Appellant claimed to  be  a
    wanted  person.   The  Judge  considered  this  at  paragraph  38   and
    essentially found that the Appellant's explanation of how his uncle had
    been able to obtain  the  document  through  the  authorities  was  not
    credible. It seems to me that this was to reach  a  conclusion  without
    any regard to the background country evidence - which  makes  it  clear
    that corruption in Iran is such that it is possible to obtain documents
    irrespective of circumstances. (For the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  my
    analysis in this context is not to disregard the primary difficulty  in
    respect of the birth certificate in that it was found by the Respondent
    to be a forged document; my concern herein is  only  with  the  Judge's
    analysis that the Appellant's narrative account of how his uncle  could
    obtain such a document was unsustainable - and  the  consequent  impact
    upon the assessment of the Appellant's  credibility.   In  isolation  I
    would not have considered the Judge's comments in this regard to amount
    to a material error.)


26.  The Judge's adverse view of the Appellant's credibility in  respect  of
    these two  matters  -  the  unsustainable  attribution  of  motive  for
    deception in respect adding detail to his explanation  of  his  parents
    permitting him to be friendly with a Christian  boy,  and  the  finding
    against  the  weight  of  country  information  in   respect   of   the
    plausibility   of   obtaining   documents    from    the    authorities
    notwithstanding an adverse interest  -  cannot  be  isolated  from  the
    overall 'in the round' credibility assessment.  In combination with the
    failure to  make  any  specific  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  oral
    testimony as to his attendance at churches prior to August 2017,  I  am
    ultimately persuaded that there are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    Judge's reasoning such that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    must be set aside.


27.  The parties before me were in agreement that in light  of  any  finding
    of error of law the decision in the appeal would require to  be  remade
    before the First-tier Tribunal by a different judge with all issues  at
    large. I agree with this position.


28.  Notwithstanding that the decision in the appeal  will  hereafter  be  a
    matter for a different judge, it seems to me  that  it  is  appropriate
    that I make some further comments in respect of the  age  dispute  that
    has arisen herein - and indeed in respect of the age  assessments  that
    have been conducted - in case  either  party  wishes  to  consider  its
    position further in respect of these matters, and/or to  file  any  new
    evidence ahead of the next appeal hearing. For  reasons  that  are  not
    clear, it  is  a  feature  of  the  decision  of  Judge  Khan  that  no
    consideration appears  to  have  been  given  to  this  issue,  and  in
    particular no consideration appears to have been given to the extensive
    documentation at Annex I of the Respondent's bundle in respect  of  the
    age assessments.   The  documents  make  for  interesting  reading  and
    contain within them significant matters which I suggest should  not  be
    overlooked in  any  new  evaluation  of  the  Appellant's  account  and
    credibility.


29.  I have already noted above the issue  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    birth  certificate.  Further  to  this  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in
    considering the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum  the  Respondent
    conducted  checks  on  the  Appellant's  immigration  history.  It  was
    identified that he had previously been included in an  application  for
    entry clearance made to the British Embassy in Iran, at which point his
    date of birth had been given as 22 February 1997.  In response to  this
    being raised the Appellant produced a statement  purportedly  from  his
    father seeking to explain the circumstances in which the date of  birth
    of 22 February 1997 was given in the visa application (Annex F4 of  the
    Respondent's  bundle).   The  statement  from  the  Appellant's  father
    maintains that the Appellant's real date of birth is 23 February  2003,
    and suggests that a false date of birth of 1997 was used in support  of
    a visa application to improve the prospects of obtaining that visa.  It
    is entirely unclear why it was thought that adding six years to the age
    of the Appellant at that time would increase the prospect of  obtaining
    a visa. Moreover, it might be inferred  that  in  order  to  advance  a
    supposedly false date of birth in support of the visa  application,  it
    would have  been  necessary  to  obtain  a  travel  document  from  the
    authorities of Iran showing the same supposedly false date of birth  in
    order to be submitted with the visa application. It may  be  thought  -
    and perhaps will need to be determined on rehearing - that the  obvious
    inference is that the Appellant's real date  of  birth  is  as  it  was
    declared in the earlier visa application, supported by  a  duly  issued
    Iran passport.


30.  The date of birth in the visa application is a  matter  commented  upon
    in the age assessment documents.


31.  Perusal of the age assessment documents reveal that the  Appellant  was
    initially age assessed in 2016 and accorded the date  of  birth  of  22
    January 2000.  On a subsequent assessment he was accorded the  date  of
    birth of 23 February 2003.  On a third  assessment,  in  light  of  the
    evidence from the Secretary of State as to the earlier application  for
    a visa wherein his year of birth was given as 1997, he was assessed  as
    having been born on 22 February 2000.


32.  This latter assessment - reverting to the birth year  attributed  after
    the initial assessment - whilst clearly informed by the evidence of the
    earlier  visa  application  is  not  itself   reconcilable   with   the
    information contained in the earlier visa application.


33.  Further to this, the age assessments also reveal matters which  may  be
    of relevance in evaluating both the Appellant's  age  and  his  overall
    credibility.  For example, references are made to inconsistency in  the
    Appellant's claims as to  when  he  had  stated  shaving,  and  it  was
    observed that he had shaved his chest hair. See or example at I16:

         "As has been discussed within this assessment, [M] advised that  he
         had only started shaving very  recently.   However,  this  directly
         contradicts the information  he  provided  within  the  second  age
         assessment in which he advised that he had only just started  then.
         [M] was challenged on this account and  we  advised  him  that  his
         shaving shadow did not support his statements however  he  remained
         adamant that this was the case.


         During the third interview and the interview when [M] was given the
         outcome of this assessment the assessors noted that [M] had  shaved
         his chest, which has now grown out and that the hair  on  his  arms
         was quite thick and did not appear to be in line  with  or  support
         his claimed age."




34.  The extent to which the hirsuteness of the Appellant  informs  any  age
    assessment  and  -  perhaps  more   particularly   -   the   apparently
    contradictory accounts in respect of when he started  shaving  and  the
    seeming attempts to disguise his chest hair, may be  matters  to  which
    the Tribunal will wish to give some further scrutiny in the context  of
    both considering whether the Appellant has taken steps to  obscure  his
    true age, and his credibility overall.




35.  Further it is to be noted that the Appellant's true age is  potentially
    relevant to an evaluation of the narrative account of events in Iran  -
    in particular that he  was  in  2015  essentially,  he  says,  a  young
    schoolboy asking innocent questions about faith, rather  than  somebody
    who, at that time, might already have reached adulthood.


36.  Yet further it is to be noted  that  there  are  passages  in  the  age
    assessments that might also be relevant to evaluating  the  Appellant's
    narrative account independently of their relevance to his age. See  for
    example at I15, where the assessors explore aspects of the  Appellant's
    history with regard to the circumstances surrounding his brother 'Mj':


         "The circumstances surrounding [Mj].  Until this  VISA  application
         was presented to [M], there was no suggestion from  him  that  [Mj]
         was anywhere else but Iran, in fact he gave quite clear details  of
         his whereabouts.  Since then, [Mj] is now reported to be in the UK,
         however, no-one is aware  of  his  whereabouts  (but  there  is  an
         address on the VISA, which [M] voices he knows no details of).   In
         addition, [M] spoke about the family last having contact  with  him
         15 years ago, but if [M] is his claimed age, then he will not  have
         been alive when this happened and therefore, could not have gone to
         the gym with him like he suggested in his first assessment".


37.  It seems to me that these matters arising from the  age  assessments  -
    which do not appear to have caught  the  attention  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hitherto - will, alongside all other  issues  in  the  appeal,
    require some further careful scrutiny  by  the  parties  and  the  next
    Judge. I do not seek to say anything further, and nothing that  I  have
    said in setting out these matters above should be seen as  in  any  way
    prescriptive of how such matters should ultimately be dealt with by the
    next decision-maker.


Notice of Decision


38.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set  aside  for  error
    of law.


39.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan
    with all issues at large.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 11 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

