
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: pa/04807/2018
                                                               pa/06405/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 January 2019                            |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     w m
                                     d f
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Pollard, instructed by Adam Khattak Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellants.  A failure to comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Background

 2. The appellants are citizens of Iraq who were born on [~] 1976  and  [~]
    1999 respectively.  They come from  a  place  in  Iraq,  not  far  from
    Baghdad to the north, known as Saluhaddin (or Salah Al Din).  They came
    to the United Kingdom in May  2013  as  the  dependants  of  the  first
    appellant's husband.  He was studying for a PhD in the UK.   The  first
    appellant also has four other children, the youngest of whom  was  born
    in the UK.

 3. In October 2017, the first appellant claimed asylum.  She claimed  that
    she would be at risk on return to Iraq because her father  had  been  a
    Brigadier General in the regime of Saddam Hussain.  She claimed that in
    July 2017, a letter had been left at her brother's address  in  Baghdad
    threatening to kill him and the first appellant.

 4. On 9 March 2018, the Secretary of State refused the  first  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.
     The second appellant's claims, which it is accepted are dependent upon
    the claims of the first appellant, were also refused on that date.

 The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellants appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Fowell
    dismissed both appellants' appeals on all grounds.

 6. As regards the first appellant's  asylum  appeal,  the  judge  made  an
    adverse credibility finding and rejected her account and that  she  was
    at risk on return to Iraq from militia.

 7. As regards the first appellant's  humanitarian  protection  claim,  the
    judge found that it would be safe for her to return to her home area of
    Saluhaddin where she would not be exposed to a risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence contrary to Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  In  any
    event, Judge Fowell found that the  first  appellant  could  internally
    relocate to Baghdad.  He concluded that she would have no difficulty in
    obtaining a CSID and, applying the country guidance annexed to the case
    of AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944, it would not be  unduly  harsh
    or unreasonable for her to live in Baghdad where she would have  family
    support available.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    single ground that the judge had been wrong in law  to  find  that  the
    first appellant could return to her home  area  of  Saluhaddin  safely.
    That was  contrary  to  the  country  guidance  decision  of  AA  which
    recognised that area as being a "contested area".  Further, that  error
    was material to his decision as the judge had found that the appellants
    could return to Saluhaddin from Baghdad by road in order  to  obtain  a
    CSID.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but, on 1 November 2018, the Upper Tribunal (DUTJ Taylor)  granted  the
    appellants permission to  appeal.   The  judge  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the sole ground pleaded in the grounds of appeal and also  on
    an additional basis, namely that in concluding that the appellant could
    relocate to Baghdad the judge arguably erred in law because  "he  ought
    to  have  explored  further  whether  she  would  have  family  support
    available in Baghdad - her evidence was  that  all  her  relatives  had
    left".

10. The Secretary of State did not file a rule 24 notice in response to the
    grant of permission.

Discussion

11. At the hearing, I heard submissions from Ms  Pollard,  who  represented
    the appellants, and also from Mrs Aboni, who represented the  Secretary
    of State.  Ms Pollard relied upon both the ground upon which permission
    to appeal had been sought and also the  additional  ground  upon  which
    permission to appeal had been granted.

12. During the course of submissions, Mrs Aboni accepted that  the  judge's
    decision contained a material error of law and that it  should  be  set
    aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to re-make  the  decision
    on the humanitarian protection claim.

13. Mrs Aboni accepted that the issue of whether the appellants' home area,
    namely Saluhaddin, was a place to which  the  appellants  could  safely
    return, had not been raised at the hearing by the  Presenting  Officer.
    She accepted that both in the decision letter and at the  hearing,  the
    Secretary of State's position was that the appellants could  internally
    relocate to Baghdad.  The Secretary of State had not, before the judge,
    invited him to depart from the finding in AA that the appellants'  home
    area was a contested area.  Further, Mrs  Aboni  accepted  that,  as  a
    consequence, the judge had failed  to  consider  properly  whether  the
    appellants could reasonably be expected to relocate to Baghdad and,  in
    particular, whether they could obtain a CSID whether in the  UK  before
    travelling or, having returned to Baghdad, in Iraq.  She accepted  that
    the judge had found that the appellants would need to return  to  their
    home area and obtain a CSID from there.  That was,  she  accepted,  not
    sustainable if indeed that journey would expose the  appellants  to  an
    Art 15(c) risk in their home area.

14. In my judgment, Mrs Aboni's concession on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State that the judge's decision cannot stand is  entirely  proper.   It
    does not appear that the Art 15(c) risk to the appellants in their home
    area was contested before the judge.  The country guidance decision  in
    AA was in the appellants' favour.  Whilst the judge referred in para 13
    of his determination to a Home Office Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note (CPIN) - Iraq: Security and Humanitarian Situation  (March  2017),
    his reference is simply to paras 2.3.27  and  2.3.28  which  state  the
    Secretary of State's policy.  It does not set  out  the  evidence  upon
    which that policy is based and, in choosing  to  depart  from  AA,  the
    judge does not engage with any evidence which  would  be  necessary  to
    show that there were "very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence"
    for doing so (see R (SG) (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  940  at  [47]).
    In any event, the issue of departing from AA  was  not  raised  at  the
    hearing.  It is far from clear, indeed, that the CPIN was part  of  the
    Tribunal's documents.  It does  not  appear  to  be  currently  in  the
    Tribunal's file.  No-one at the hearing was on notice  that  the  judge
    might be minded to depart from the country guidance in  AA  and,  as  a
    consequence, the appellants' Counsel was deprived of the opportunity to
    make any submissions in that regard, including as to the effect of  the
    CPIN or, indeed, any other post-AA evidence which might be relevant  in
    establishing a change of circumstances in  the  appellants'  home  area
    such that AA could be departed from.  That amounted to an error of  law
    which, as Mrs Aboni conceded before me, was  material  to  the  judge's
    adverse  conclusion  in  respect  of   the   appellants'   humanitarian
    protection  claims.   The  error  tainted   his   conclusion   on   the
    availability of internal relocation to Baghdad because of the issue  of
    whether the appellants could obtain CSIDs.

Decision

15. For these reasons,  therefore,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellants' appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds involved the making of an  error  of  law  and  that
    decision is set aside.

16. The judge's decision and findings in respect of the appellants'  asylum
    claims were not challenged and stand.

17. The proper disposal of the appeal, given the nature and extent of fact-
    finding required to re-make the humanitarian protection decision, is to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing  on
    that issue alone.

18. The judge's decision to dismiss the appeals on asylum  grounds  stands.





                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            26 February 2019
