

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number PA/04846/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Newport
               Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 23rd February 2018
             On 27th February 2018


      Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                  H M F A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Ms L Profumo (Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Project (Cardiff))
For the Respondent: Mr I Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Egypt. He claimed asylum on the 18th of
   November 2015 on the basis of his support for the Muslim Botherhood and
   the interest that the authorities had in him resulting from his
   activities. The claim was rejected and his appeal dismissed by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Frazer in a decision promulgated on the 23rd of November
   2016. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by the
   Upper Tribunal on the 19th of September 2017.

2. A significant feature of the Appellant's case was a letter sent to the
   Appellant said to be from a friend of the Appellant's father. The Judge
   considered the letter in paragraphs 34 and 44 of the decision. In
   paragraph 34 the Judge noted that he did not have the original letter or
   the envelope in which it had been sent. In paragraph 44 the Judge
   rejected the letter as being unreliable.

3. Before the hearing the Home Office Presenting Officer and the
   Appellant's representative spoke with each other and agreed a mutual
   position on the error of law issue. It was agreed that as the Home Office
   had been in possession of the original letter but had made submissions on
   the basis that negative findings could be made in its absence the
   findings made were made on an erroneous basis. Given the central
   importance of the letter to the Appellant's case it was accepted by the
   Home Office that the submissions made by the Home Office Presenting
   Officer to the First-tier Tribunal had been sufficiently misleading that
   the findings made as a result amounted to an error of law and that the
   decision would have to be set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-
   tier Tribunal for re-hearing. Ms Profumo agreed.

4. Accordingly on the basis of the agreed position of the parties I find
   that the First-tier Tribunal erred in the approach taken to the
   supporting documentation was such that it erred and that the decision
   cannot stand. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-
   heard with no findings preserved. It should not be listed before Judge
   Frazer.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing with no
findings preserved, not before Judge Frazer.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

I make no fee award which remains an issue for the First-tier Tribunal at
the conclusion of the appeal.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 23rd February 2018

