
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04504/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st February  2018               |On 26th February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Ahmed, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  22nd
    June 2017, dismissed his claim for protection.

 3.   The  Appellant's  immigration  history  is   set   out   within   the
    determination at paragraphs 1-5, and in the papers before the Tribunal,
    namely, that the Appellant had applied for entry clearance  as  Tier  4
    (general) student. He arrived in the United Kingdom on  the  17th  June
    2012. He was subsequently granted leave to remain until 6th  June  2015
    however his leave was curtailed to expire on the 15th August 2014.

 4. On the 25 January 2016 the appellant  was  named  as  dependent  in  an
    asylum claim made by MW. The basis of his claim for protection  related
    to his sexual orientation as a gay  man.  It  was  asserted  that  this
    appellant was the partner of MW. The application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 28 July 2016. He lodged an  appeal  against  that
    refusal and it came before the First-tier Tribunal. Both  MW  and  this
    appellant gave evidence at that hearing.

 5.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  27  February  2017  his  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 6. In the intervening period, the appellant applied for asylum in his  own
    right on 17 October 2016. He attended a  substantive  interview  on  24
    March 2017. A decision was made refusing that application on  the  31st
    of March 2017 and the Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. He appeal came before the FTT on the 9th June 2017 and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on the 22nd June 2017 his appeal was dismissed.

 8. The judge set out his findings and conclusions at paragraphs 22  -  45.
    It was common ground before the tribunal that if the  judge  had  found
    the appellant's account of his sexual orientation to be true, that  the
    respondent accepted that he would be at  risk  persecution  or  serious
    treatment and harm if returned to Pakistan (see paragraph 22).

 9. Thus the issue  was  credibility.   At  paragraph  23  the  judge  made
    reference to the earlier determination  of  the  FTT  relating  to  the
    appellants  claimed  partner  MW  and  stated  that  the  determination
    "remains determinative of the matters in his appeal unless and until it
    is overturned by  the  Upper  Tribunal."  The  judge  stated  that  the
    findings made by the FTTJ "are my starting point insofar as they relate
    to MW."

10. At paragraph 24 he summarised the decision of the FTT  namely  that  he
    had found MW to have fabricated his account of his sexual  orientation;
    that he was not in a relationship with MJ(the appellant) and  that  the
    evidence given by both of them was "contrived and fabricated". The  FTT
    had heard from both MW and MJ.

11. At paragraph 25 the judge stated that the findings made by the FTT were
    "capable of being transposed into this appeal.  They  are  my  starting
    point  in  my  consideration  of  the   appellant's   case"   (applying
    Devaseelan).

12. He concluded that he did not find it at all likely that  the  appellant
    would be perceived  as  being  homosexual  in  Pakistan  and  was  "not
    satisfied that is established to the low standard that he faces a  real
    risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  in  Pakistan."Thus  the  judge
    dismissed his appeal.

13. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    initially refused but was granted by the Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy
    on the 1st December 2017 as follows:

         "The grounds of appeal assert the judge in the first-tier has aired
         in his application of the Devaseelan principles and that he had not
         looked at the facts of this case afresh. Taking  into  account  the
         fact that the Upper Tribunal set aside the decision in  the  appeal
         PAxxxxx, I consider that it is clearly arguable that the  judge  in
         this case erred in the way that he placed on the decision which has
         now been set aside.

         I therefore grant permission to appeal."

14. It is common ground between the parties  that  the  appellants  claimed
    partner MW sought permission to appeal the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which was granted and at a hearing at before an Upper Tribunal
    panel on 19 October 2017 they set aside the decision  of  the  FTT  and
    remitted it for a fresh hearing. That is to take place  on  a  date  in
    2018.

15.  There is no dispute between the advocates that the decision of the FTT
    involved the making of an error of law based on the grounds. Mr Wilding
    on behalf  of  the  Respondent  conceded  that  that  in  view  of  the
    litigation history that the  findings  on  credibility  were  unsafe  (
    having been set aside) and that the correct course was for the decision
    to be set aside  and to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.  There
    is a date already listed and this appeal should be linked and heard  on
    the same day.

16. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by dismissing the appeal and
    in particular by applying the Devaseelan principles  in  rejecting  the
    appellants claim and that of his partner on credibility grounds. Whilst
    both the appellant and MW had given evidence before FTT  J   which  had
    been rejected and his appeal was subsequently dismissed,  however,  the
    Upper Tribunal had granted permission to appeal against  that  decision
    and subsequently set aside that decision on  19  October  2017  on  the
    basis  that  not  all  the  evidence  had  been  properly   considered.
    Consequently as  the  judge  in  this  appeal  heavily  relied  on  the
    determination of the previous Judge the findings were  not  independent
    from those earlier findings and therefore  could  not  be  properly  or
    safely relied upon.

17. I am satisfied that the concession was  correctly  made  and  that  the
    FTT's decision is vitiated by an error of law and his decision shall be
    set aside. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates  were  in
    agreement that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    to be reheard and linked to the appeal of MW.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]
     Date: 22nd February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
