
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04829/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 9 November 2020                   |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     TN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar
For the Respondent:      Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1986 and is a female citizen of Zimbabwe. She
    first entered the United Kingdom in July 2003 as a visitor. She applied
    for asylum in June 2004. That application is refused and  a  subsequent
    appeal dismissed. She made  fresh  submissions  leading  to  a  further
    refusal by the Secretary of State dated 23 April  2019.  The  appellant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  24  July  2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  an  error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside. At [35],  judge  found  that
    the appellant could return to Harare and  would  face  'no  significant
    difficulties.' However, the application's  home  area  of  Zimbabwe  is
    Chegutu, which is in Mashonaland west Province. Her home  area  is  not
    Harare. Nowhere in the decision does the  judge  consider  whether  the
    appellant would be at real risk if she returned to her  home  area.  It
    was necessary for the judge to consider  whether  the  appellant  could
    return to her home area before determining whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh for her to exercise the option of internal flight  by  living  in
    Harare or elsewhere within Zimbabwe; different  legal  tests  apply  in
    each  instance.  In  the  judge's  analysis,  internal  flight  is  not
    mentioned and there has not been any assessment of  whether  return  to
    Harare would be unduly harsh given the  particular  characteristics  of
    this appellant. As a consequence, the analysis of the judge is  flawed.
    The appellant is entitled to  receive  a  decision  which  applies  the
    relevant law to the actual facts found  in  her  appeal.  That  is  not
    occurred in this instance.

 3. I indicated my view on error of law at the initial hearing. There was a
    discussion at court with a view to narrowing  the  issues  between  the
    parties. Mr Jafar, who appeared for the appellant, pointed out that the
    judge had failed to make any clear findings in respect of a  letter  in
    support of the appellant's account at [40] of the respondent's  bundle.
    He submitted that the Secretary of State, in  the  decision  letter  at
    [24], appears to accept gave an accurate account of the appellant's sur
    place activities. Mr McVeety, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,
    did not agree. Whilst I accept that the judge may not have given  clear
    findings regarding that part of  the  appellant's  evidence,  it  is  a
    matter for the next Tribunal; given that this issue was not  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal, I made no finding as to the extent to which  the
    Secretary of State may or  may  not  have  accepted  any  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence.

 4. There will need to be a fresh fact-finding  exercise  which  is  better
    conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to which Tribunal this  appeal  is
    now returned for the decision to be remade at or following a hearing de
    novo.

    Notice of Decision

    This decision of the FTT which was promulgated on 24 July 2019  is  set
    aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House; not before Judge GD  Davison;
    2 hours; no interpreter; first available date)  for  that  Tribunal  to
    remake the hearing at or following a hearing de novo.


Signed                              Date 9 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

