

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/04531/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 3 January 2018                     |              On 4 January 2018      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     SY
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nazeer a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Moueety a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. This decision is in short form,  as  given  the  concession  by  the
       Respondent that the appeal should be allowed, no specific detail  is
       required.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify SY or any of his family members. This  direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to Contempt of Court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity of SY who, as will be seen,
       is a refugee.

    3. The Respondent refused SY's  application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection on 27 April 2016. His appeal against this  was  dismissed
       by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kempton  ("the  Judge")  following  a
       hearing on 16 May 2017.

The grant of permission


   4. Judge Brunnen granted permission to appeal (18 September 2017)  as  it
      is arguable that the Judge materially erred as, having found SY to  be
      Syrian, she did not allow the appeal given the  Respondent's  explicit
      concession that he  was  a  refugee  if  he  was  Syrian  due  to  his
      particular circumstances.


Respondent's position

    5. It was conceded in the rule 24 notice (9 October 2017) and orally to
       me that the appeal should be allowed given the Respondent's explicit
       concession.


Discussion

    6. Given the concession made by the Respondent I am  satisfied  that  a
       material error of  law  occurred.  I  set  aside  the  decision.  As
       requested by both parties, I remake the decision  by  allowing  SY's
       appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I allow the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.














Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
3 January 2018

