
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: pa/04275/2016
     PA/04240/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 September 2017                      |On 14 September 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [h a]
                                    [g a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Wood, instructed by Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, [HA]  and  [GA],  are  citizens  of  Iraq.   The  first
    appellant is the son of the second appellant.   The  first  appellant's
    wife and children are dependants on his appeal.  By decisions  dated  2
    April 2016, the appellants were refused asylum by the respondent.  They
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lever) which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 30 November 2016 dismissed the appeal.   The  appellants
    now appeal, with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  Granting permission, Judge Plimmer wrote:

         "Whilst both appellants base their claim upon the same  facts  [21-
         33] and the First-tier Tribunal  made  clear  credibility  findings
         regarding the first appellant [24] (referred to as "the appellant")
         there was arguably  no  clear  credibility  finding  regarding  the
         second appellant and arguable failure  to  take  into  account  the
         second appellant's first hand knowledge of the matters  predicating
         the account of the first appellant [sic]."

 3. Permission was granted on all grounds of appeal but it is fair  to  say
    that the submissions before the Upper Tribunal concentrated to a  large
    extent upon that ground which has been summarised by Judge  Plimmer  in
    her grant of permission.

 4. Judge Lever wrote at [22]:

         "The basis of a claim for asylum rests on a single  issue.   It  is
         said that the first appellant's sister had  run  away  with  a  man
         called Kawa.  It had been the intention of the  appellant's  uncles
         that she would marry one of their sons (her cousin) and accordingly
         thwarted in that regard, they had demanded the first appellant kill
         his sister to restore the family honour and his refusal led to  the
         fear for the whole family that they would be subject to revenge  by
         the relatives and tribe generally."

 5. In the preceding paragraph [21] Judge Lever had recorded at:

         "I have carefully considered all the documents in evidence in  this
         case.  Whilst the second appellant has her own asylum claim, it was
         agreed by the representatives that the facts relating to her  claim
         are the same facts as  relied  upon  by  the  first  appellant  and
         therefore the second appellant does  not  rely  upon  any  separate
         features in respect of her claim.  The first appellant's  wife  and
         children are dependent upon his claim."

 6. The second appellant had given evidence,  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter, at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.   The  judge  recorded
    what  she  had  said  under  cross-examination  at  [15].   The  second
    appellant claimed never to have met Kawa.  She denied having  gone  out
    to the shops and claimed that she had spent most of her  time  at  home
    notwithstanding the fact that in her interview record  it  is  recorded
    that she had gone "to town to do shopping when she had been  threatened
    by her brother-in-law".  The judge also noted that, "she said that  her
    brother-in-law had come to the house to threaten her".

 7. Having recorded the basis of the appeals at [21] (see above), the judge
    went on to deal exclusively in his analysis with the  evidence  of  the
    first appellant which he found to  be  untruthful.   As  Judge  Plimmer
    noted, in the judge's analysis, the  first  appellant  rapidly  becomes
    simply "the appellant".  The second appellant is referred to  later  in
    the discussion but only in relation to her claim to  have  rarely  left
    the family home and yet  they  have  been  in  possession  of  a  valid
    passport.   Whilst  the  judge  found  inconsistencies  in  the  second
    appellant's evidence as regards her possession of a passport,  he  made
    no findings regarding credibility of her account more generally.

 8. Mr Wood, who had also appeared before Judge  Lever  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, told me that  there  had  been  no  agreement  or  concession
    regarding the second appellant's claim and  appeal.   This  raises  the
    unfortunate possibility that the judge has at [21]  taken  a  different
    view of what was "agreed by the representatives" from  that  which  the
    representatives or, at least,  Mr  Wood  seemed  aware.   I  concluded,
    however, that there was no need to seek Judge Lever's clarification  on
    this matter as I find that he  did  err  in  law  in  failing  to  make
    findings of fact in respect of  the  second  appellant  in  any  event.
    Whether or not there was an agreement that "the same facts relied  upon
    by the first  appellant"  would  be  adopted  entirely  by  the  second
    appellant in her appeal, I agree with Mr Wood that the judge should, in
    any event, have made findings in relation to those parts of the  second
    appellant's evidence which directly  supported  the  first  appellant's
    account and, if the judge did not believe the second appellant, then he
    should have given reasons for not doing so.  As it  is,  there  are  no
    findings in relation to the  second  appellant's  claim  that  she  was
    threatened and assaulted by her brother-in-law in her own home  or  her
    claim that she had witnessed the brother-in-law threatening  the  first
    appellant with a gun.  The nature of the threat to both the  first  and
    second appellant may be the same but this does not excuse the  Tribunal
    from making findings of fact in relation to the  evidence  of  all  the
    witnesses.  I accept that the judge did consider "all the documents and
    evidence in this case" as he said he would at [21] but his  failure  to
    make findings on the second appellant's evidence fatally undermines the
    decision in respect of both appeals.

 9. I heard submissions in respect of the other grounds of appeal  but,  in
    light of the fact that I intend to set aside Judge Lever's decision and
    that there will need to be  a  new  fact-finding  exercise,  I  do  not
    propose to discuss those grounds in any further detail.  I note in  his
    analysis of risk on return  [36]  that  the  judge  departed  from  the
    country guidance of AA [2015] UKUT 00544; having carried out a new fact-
    finding exercise, the Tribunal will need to look  at  country  guidance
    and relevant background material as at the date of the fresh hearing in
    order to determine risk on return.

10. In conclusion, therefore, I find  that  the  judge's  failure  to  make
    findings  of  fact  in  respect  of  the  second  appellant's  evidence
    undermines his decision in these consolidated  appeals.   None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand.  The First-tier Tribunal is better placed
    to make new findings of fact and to hear what may prove to  be  lengthy
    evidence in court from both appellants and  any  other  witnesses.  The
    appeals are,  therefore,  returned  to  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decisions.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  30
November 2016 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.   The
appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not  Judge  Lever)  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 13 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 13 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

