
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04049/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2021                       |On 2 June 2021                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     RS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 1 July 2020, a judge of the Upper Tribunal found a judge of  the
        First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in a manner  material  to  the
        decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal.  Following   the   respondent's
        representative accepting that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had
        erred in the approach to the medical assessment, when assessing the
        credibility of the claim, and erred in relation to  assessing  risk
        on return, the decision was set aside.
     2. The appeal comes back before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  following  the
        making of a Judicial Transfer Order, to enable  a  decision  to  be
        made to either allow or dismiss the appeal.
     3. At the conclusion of the hearing, I announced in court that I allow
        the appellant's asylum appeal for which I now give  my  reasons  in
        writing.

Discussion

     4. The appellant is a citizen of Russia born on  the  1  January  1992
        whose protection claim was refused by the Secretary of State  in  a
        Reasons for Refusal letter dated 26 February 2018.
     5. The appellant has provided in support of his claim  a  considerable
        volume of evidence, including expert reports.
     6. The appellant has also, since arriving in the United  Kingdom,  had
        part of his right arm amputated for which medical evidence has been
        provided.
     7. Reports from the country expert, Robert Chenciner,  are  dated,  17
        September 2018, 6 December 2019, and 8 January 2021, which confirm,
        inter alia, the documentary evidence the appellant has provided  to
        support his claim of an adverse interest in him by the  authorities
        and to face a real risk on return are reliable, with no evidence to
        show they are fake.
     8. The country expert's findings in relation to a real risk  faced  by
        the appellant set out in the initial report of September  2018  are
        maintained in the later report of 8 January 2021.
     9. The appellant has also provided medical evidence from Freedom  from
        Torture dated 17 December 2020, in which the summary of the  report
        reads:

Summary

        110  Mr S reports that  in  the  Chechen  Republic  he  experienced
             imprisonment and ill treatment on two occasions  and  that  he
             has been informed that Chechen authorities planned to kill him
             and continue to search for him (Paragraph 18).
         111  I have made diagnoses of PTSD and moderately severe depressive
             disorder, and have  also  described  disturbances  of  Mr  S's
             autobiographical memory which may not be fully  accounted  for
             by these diagnoses.
         112  I have found no clinical indications of fabricated symptoms or
             of false allegations of torture.
         113  On the basis of the  history  that  Mr  S  has  given  and  my
             observations at interview, it is my opinion that it is  highly
             likely that Mr  S's  PTSD  is  due  to  his  imprisonment  and
             mistreatment in the Chechen Republic and that the time  course
             and content of his symptoms make earlier childhood experiences
             highly unlikely to be sufficient explanation. It is my opinion
             that more generally his psychological problems arise from  his
             traumatic experiences of  detention  and  threat,  along  with
             other  factors,  including  his  amputation,   other   ongoing
             stresses in the UK and uncertainty over his future.
         114  In my opinion, if Mr S's asylum application is refused and  he
             believes himself at risk of  being  returned  to  the  Chechen
             Republic, there would be a significant risk of his suicide, as
             well as of further deterioration in his mental health.
         115  In my opinion, differences between  Mr  S's  accounts  of  his
             detentions can be understood as effects of normal  limitations
             of  memory  and  recall,  with  likely   additional   problems
             associated with depression and PTSD, recall under stress,  the
             traumatic nature of  the  events  and  his  difficulties  with
             autobiographical memory.
         116  I have recommended that Mr S is offered treatment for his PTSD
             and depression and, if his asylum claim is  refused,  that  he
             has an immediate reassessment of  his  suicide  risk.  I  have
             written to his GP about his treatment needs and  have  made  a
             referral to the  Freedom  from  Torture  clinical  service.  I
             recommend that he continues to  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
             adult in view of his mental health.


    10. The later report  does  not  change  this  diagnoses  but  provides
        guidance on the best way to enable the appellant, who  was  treated
        as a vulnerable witness, to cope with the court environment.
    11. A further medical report dated 28 September  2018,  written  by  Mr
        Graham Johnson an A &  E  Consultant  finds  the  scarring  on  the
        appellant to  be  'typical  of'  injuries  inflicted  by  glass  as
        described by the appellant. The use of such  a  phrase  within  the
        Istanbul Protocol means that the scars have an appearance that   is
        usually  found  with  this  type of trauma,  but  there  are  other
        possible causes.
    12. It was accepted  by  Mr  Diwnycz  that  the  situation  in  Russia,
        particularly with regard to those from Chechnya who  have  been  in
        the United Kingdom, has moved on considerably since the reasons for
        refusal letter was written,  and  that  if  the  appellant  claimed
        asylum today is highly unlikely that the refusal letter would  have
        been written in similar terms. It was accepted by Mr  Diwnycz  that
        he  had  nothing  that  would  undermine  the  credibility  of  the
        appellant's claim or warrant a finding being made  that  the  claim
        was not credible in light of the weight of evidence that  had  been
        obtained to prove that it was and current country conditions.
    13. Country evidence cases include RM (Young Chechen Male - Risk - IFA)
        Russia CG (2006) UKAIT 00050 in which  the  Tribunal  said  that  a
        young Chechen male will not as such be at real risk of  persecution
        or a breach of Article 3 either on return to Russia, or on the rail
        link to Chechnya, or in Chechnya, and, as  an  alternative,  has  a
        viable  internal  relocation  option  in  Ingushetia.  However,   a
        Chechen, who is recorded as wanted by the  Russian  authorities  in
        connection with or for supporting the rebels in Chechnya,  will  be
        at real risk on return at Moscow or  St  Petersburg  Airports,  and
        anywhere else in the Russian Federation.
    14. In OY (Chechen Muslim women)  Russia  CG  (2009)  UKAIT  00005  the
        Tribunal indicated the position had changed somewhat since RM.  The
        Tribunal found, despite the existing country guidance cases,  there
        are circumstances in which a female Muslim Chechen may be  at  risk
        and may not be able to relocate within Russia.  In  this  case  the
        appellant was of predominantly Chechen but part  Russian  ethnicity
        and a Muslim.  Her husband was of Russian ethnicity.  She had  been
        detained in 2002 and again in 2006 and she was ill  treated  during
        each detention.  The Respondent relied on AV (IFA - Mixed Ethnicity
        Relationship - Russian/Chechen) Russia CG (2002)  UKIAT  05260  and
        argued that the option of internal relocation  was  available.  The
        Tribunal had before it evidence from an  expert  Mr  Chenciner  who
        said that the appellant's family name would,  in  Russia,  indicate
        that she was of the Muslim faith and from  the  Caucasus.   If  she
        tried to change her name and was  able  to  do  so  this  would  be
        recorded with her earlier name and the rest of her history.  Ethnic
        Russians would look at her and conclude that  her  facial  features
        were not those of an ethnic Russian. They were likely  to  conclude
        that she came from either Chechnya or  somewhere  in  the  Northern
        Caucasus.  Many Russians would describe  her  with  the  pejorative
        word  "Chorny"  which  means  "black".  Russians  apply   this   to
        Caucasians.  Many Russians would view a woman wearing  a  headscarf
        as linked to Wahibi terrorists.  Moderate, devout Muslim women  who
        wear hijab or headscarves are often targeted  as  Wahibi  extremist
        terrorists by the Russian authorities. It was  clear  that  another
        Russian would recognise  her  as  having  a  Caucasian  accent.  Mr
        Chenciner indicated that she would be seen as  a  potential  threat
        because she would be perceived as a Muslim woman trying  to  settle
        in non-Islamic Russia and because she would be  returned  from  the
        United Kingdom which the Russian authorities perceive as  a  hotbed
        of Islamic terrorism.  As she would be  travelling  on  a  one  way
        ticket the likelihood was that she would stopped  at  the  airport.
        If a perception arose of any connection  with  Chechen  insurgents,
        then she was likely to be detained for a lengthy period and  suffer
        further serious ill-treatment. If she was fortunate  enough  to  be
        able to pass through the airport on arrival it was not likely  that
        without an internal  passport  she  would  be  able  to  travel  to
        Chechnya without being stopped, identified and  detained  with  the
        same outcome as if she had been stopped at the  airport.   Even  if
        she was able to reach Chechnya  she  would  be  at  risk  from  the
        Russian supported authorities.  Such an  individual  would  not  be
        able to live in Chechnya with  a  husband  or  partner  of  Russian
        ethnicity because he would be at constant risk from the authorities
        who, whilst they are supported by the Russian  central  government,
        are also Chechen in outlook and attitude.  He  would  also  face  a
        real risk of death at the hands of the Chechen population.  If  she
        lacked an internal passport it would be unduly harsh to expect  her
        to attempt to relocate.  She would not be able to live anywhere  in
        Russia for any length of time without running a real risk of  being
        stopped, identified as Chechen, having the lack of  a  registration
        document discovered and being forced to return to Chechnya.
    15. Reliance was placed upon OY by Ms Khan in her submissions.
    16.  The  most  recent  case  examining  this  issue  is  I  v   Sweden
        (Application no 6129-04/09 ECtHR September 2013). The  court  noted
        the situation in Chechnya, the  ongoing  disappearances,  arbitrary
        violence, ill treatment in detention facilities, particularly  with
        regard to certain categories of people such as former rebels, their
        relatives, political adversaries, journalists and  others  who  had
        complained to  international  organisations:  but  found  that  the
        unsafe general situation was not sufficiently serious  to  conclude
        that the return of Chechen  applicants  to  Russia  amounted  to  a
        violation of Article 3 though all the facts of an individuals  case
        had to be considered.
    17. I find in light of the acceptance of the  appellant's  credibility,
        combined with  the  current  country  conditions,  expert  evidence
        supporting the credibility of not only the  evidence  provided  but
        also of the claim to face a real risk of ill treatment on return to
        Russia, and the medical evidence, that the appellant has discharged
        the burden of  proof  upon  him  to  the  required  lower  standard
        applicable to show that he faces a real risk of harm on  return  to
        Russia for the reasons claimed.

Decision

    18. I allow the appeal.

   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 18 May 2021












