
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04133/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2019                   |On 16 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               B A (Pakistan)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Alex Burrett, Counsel instructed by Rahman &
                    Company solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Steven Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse him international protection under  the  Refugee  Convention,
    humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His  claim  is  based  on  his
    alleged sexual orientation as a gay man and on a relationship developed
    with another man while in the United Kingdom.

 3. The respondent accepts that homosexuality is unlawful in  Pakistan  and
    that a person who is known or  perceived  to  be  gay  is  at  risk  of
    persecution  there.   This  appeal  therefore  turned  on  whether  the
    appellant is a gay man, or whether he would be so perceived if he  were
    to be returned to Pakistan.

 4. A claimed breach of Article 8 ECHR was not relied upon before the First-
    tier Tribunal and I am not seised of any challenge to that concession.

Background

 5. The appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom,  on  his  account,  on  27
    February 2013.  He claimed asylum on 19 June 2013, on the  basis  of  a
    claimed fear because he had assisted his sister to  leave  Pakistan  in
    order  to  avoid  an   arranged   marriage.    That   application   was
    unsuccessful.  The appellant exercised his in-country right of appeal.

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 30 October  2013  (the  2013
    Tribunal decision) is the  Devaseelan  starting  point  for  any  Judge
    considering the present appeal.  The appellant told the  2013  Tribunal
    that he had first come to the United Kingdom in 2010 with  his  mother,
    to visit an uncle here, and again in November 2011 to visit  his  uncle
    and aunt, the only family  he  had  here;  that  there  was  a  further
    application for a visit visa in May 2012 to visit the same  uncle,  and
    that he finally came to the United Kingdom in 2013, around the time his
    mother died in Pakistan.

 7. He had lost contact with his father two weeks after  arriving  here;  a
    friend in Pakistan said that they could not find  his  father  anywhere
    and the appellant feared that his father might have been  kidnapped  or
    murdered.   The appellant and his sister considered that  their  mother
    had been killed by the same brother who  was  a  risk  to  his  sister,
    following her marriage to an unapproved husband outside their religion.
      There was a suggestion of a  fatwa  in  Pakistan,  but  no  copy  was
    provided.  There were serious discrepancies in the appellant's  account
    and that of his sister.

 8. At [6.30], the 2013 Tribunal held that the appellant was not a credible
    or reliable witness.  The Judge rejected the core account and dismissed
    the appeal. The appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 1  December
    2014.  The appellant did not mention his claimed sexual orientation  in
    his 2013 asylum claim nor during that appeal process.

 9. Following the exhaustion of his appeal remedies against the decision of
    the 2013  Tribunal,  the  appellant  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully and did not seek to regularise his position until May  2017,
    when he lodged further submissions, which were refused without a  right
    of appeal on 4 August 2017.

10. On 7 September 2018, that judicial review  application  was  withdrawn,
    the respondent having agreed to reconsider her  decision.   I  was  the
    Judge who granted oral permission on the judicial review:  the  parties
    reminded me of this, and I offered to  recuse  myself  but  neither  Mr
    Burrett nor Mr Kotas wished me to do so.  I have no recollection of the
    judicial review hearing and I proceeded to hear the appeal.

11. On 3 April 2019, the respondent made a new decision, with an in-country
    right of appeal.  That is the decision under challenge in this appeal.

Refusal letter

12. In her refusal letter, the respondent set out the appellant's  account.
    He was born in 1990; in 2009, when he was 19 and still  at  school,  he
    realised he was gay and had  a  three-year  relationship  with  another
    student, meeting during school time in empty classrooms when  they  got
    the opportunity.

13. In 2013 he came to the United Kingdom  and  here  the  appellant  lives
    openly as a gay man.  He met another man from his  home  village  at  a
    wedding in the United Kingdom in 2014: they began their relationship in
    January 2016 when the other man invited the appellant to  stay  at  his
    home, while his wife and children were away.  The  appellant  made  his
    feelings clear to the other man, and they began a relationship.

14. His partner is married with children, and the wife is  aware  of  their
    relationship now,  though  initially  she  was  not.   The  appellant's
    account was that after he was arrested, his partner had told  his  wife
    about the relationship and  she  had  told  both  her  family  and  the
    partner's family, back in Pakistan, leading to threats  being  made  to
    the appellant and an allegation that a fatwa had  been  issued  against
    both of them in Pakistan.  The  appellant  contends  that,  given  that
    homosexuality is illegal in Pakistan and that there was a fatwa against
    them, there would be no internal relocation option for him if  he  were
    returned: he was likely to be killed because of his orientation.

15. The appellant had not told anyone else in the United  Kingdom  that  he
    was gay, nor about his relationship, because he considered it to  be  a
    private matter between the two of them, and also, he feared that nobody
    would talk to him if he said he was gay.

16. The appellant and his partner had now fallen into a pattern of spending
    their weekends together, with the appellant's partner spending weekdays
    with his wife and family.  The appellant asserted that this was  family
    life and that his removal would breach his Article 8 ECHR rights.

17. The respondent began with the 2014 First-tier Tribunal decision as  her
    Devaseelan starting point. She noted that the First-tier Judge in  2014
    had not considered the appellant to be a reliable or credible  witness,
    and that his account was fabricated and he was  not  at  real  risk  on
    return to Pakistan.

18. Moving to the SOGI (sexual orientation or gender identity)  element  of
    the appellant's new claim, the respondent referred to  her  April  2016
    CPIN on SOGI in Pakistan and accepted at [15]  in  the  refusal  letter
    that some LGBT persons are at risk of societal discrimination amounting
    to persecution, whereas others might be able to live  openly,  provided
    they did so discreetly.

19. The respondent then considered the account in more detail.  She did not
    consider it reasonably likely that the appellant would make advances to
    the man who is now said to be his partner, in a situation where he  had
    told nobody else in the Pakistani community in London about his  sexual
    orientation.   There was no documentary evidence of the Pakistani fatwa
    against them.  She dismissed a number of photographs  produced  by  the
    appellant because they were undated and there was no explanation of how
    they had been taken, where or by whom.

20. She also dismissed telephone  bills  and  hotel  invoices  produced  in
    support of the relationship as not proof of cohabitation and adding  no
    significant weight to the claim.  The hotels in question were very near
    where the appellant lived and the invoices  were  discreet,  giving  no
    indication whether his partner had stayed there also.

21. The respondent rejected the  appellant's  account  of  his  gay  sexual
    identity and in the alternative, considered that as he lived discreetly
    in the United Kingdom, he could be expected to do the same in Pakistan.
     HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC  31
    was mentioned but the reason for  the  appellant's  discretion  in  the
    United Kingdom was not examined.

22. Articles 2 and 3 ECHR fell with  the  Refugee  Convention  claim.   The
    appellant's claimed family and private life in the United Kingdom  with
    his partner was rejected on the basis that the partner was still living
    with his wife during the week.  The appellant was not considered to  be
    a partner as defined in paragraph GEN1.2 of the Immigration  Rules  and
    the appellant could not show that the marital relationship  had  broken
    down.

23. The appellant's private life did not meet the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE (1)(iii)-(vi).  The respondent did not consider that there  were
    'very  significant  obstacles'  to  the  appellant's  reintegration  in
    Pakistan if he were to be returned.   No exceptional circumstances were
    advanced engaging Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules or  paragraph  353b,
    and the application was refused.

24. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

25. The First-tier Judge set out at [5] a  number  of  preliminary  matters
    which were settled at the beginning of the appeal:

      i) Although there was a rather poor translation of the  alleged  fatwa
         in the papers, the original was not available and Mr  Briddock  for
         the appellant indicated that he did not seek to rely on  the  fatwa
         document;

     ii) The appellant had provided  Mr  Briddock  on  the  morning  of  the
         hearing with an USB stick containing sexually  explicit  videos  of
         himself and his partner.    This was new evidence  and  the  First-
         tier Judge was minded to  adjourn  so  that  the  respondent  could
         consider it.  Mr Briddock then indicated that he was instructed  to
         proceed without the video evidence rather than adjourn the  hearing
         and incur additional expense; and

    iii) Mr Briddock confirmed that Article 8  ECHR  was  no  longer  relied
         upon. The First-tier Judge  was  seised  only  of  the  asylum  and
         humanitarian protection claims.

26. On that basis, the Judge set out the  written  and  oral  evidence  and
    reserved her decision.  At [15], she set out the burden of proof on the
    appellant, but limited her explanation of the standard of proof to that
    applicable to the Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, and the ECHR:

         "15. The burden is on the appellant to show as at the  date  hereof
         there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  the  appellant
         meets the requirements of the Qualification Regulations and further
         that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  be   granted   humanitarian
         protection in accordance with paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration
         Rules and that returning him to  Pakistan  will  cause  the  United
         Kingdom to be in breach thereof and/or insofar  as  applicable  the
         decision appealed against is a breach of his protected human rights
         under the 1950 Convention."

    There is no self-direction in the decision on the burden  and  standard
    of proof for the main claim made by  the  appellant,  an  international
    protection claim under the Refugee Convention 1951.

27. At [22] and [24], the  Judge  directed  herself  that  the  appellant's
    failure to claim asylum  on  arrival  affected  his  credibility,  with
    reference to section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants etc) Act 2004, although she stated that section 8 was not the
    starting point for  her  assessment  of  credibility.   The  Devaseelan
    guidance was set out at [26].

28. At [30], the Judge set out the test in HJ (Iran):  the first stage  was
    to consider whether the appellant  was  indeed  gay,  or  would  be  so
    perceived in Pakistan if returned.  The self-direction continued:

         "30. ... The appellant must establish this first part of  the  test
         before I go on to consider the effect on him,  if  he  returned  to
         Pakistan, of whether if he was  openly  gay,  and  thus  liable  to
         persecution in Pakistan, or if he would in fact live discreetly and
         so avoid persecution in his country of origin."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

29. At [31] in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Judge  found
    that it was 'unlikely' that the  appellant  would  have  been  able  to
    maintain a sexual relationship in empty school rooms as  a  student  in
    Pakistan for 3 years without detection, and that it  was  not  credible
    that the relations between the appellant and  his  school  friend  were
    casual and opportunistic, rather than a proper partnership; and that it
    was 'unlikely' that the appellant was in a homosexual relationship with
    his school friend as he claimed.

30. In relation to  the  appellant's  adulterous  affair  with  his  United
    Kingdom partner, whom he met in 2014 but with whom he did not claim  to
    have been in a relationship until 2016,  the  appellant's  account  was
    that he was living as an openly  gay  man,  but  the  account  of  both
    partners was that they kept their relationship secret because the other
    man was married with children.   They were enjoying their relationship,
    despite those constraints.

31. The Judge was not satisfied that the appellant  was  'cohabiting'  with
    the other man at the weekends, and dismissed the hotel receipts,  which
    primarily  related  to  a  period  after  he  made  his  2017   further
    submissions, not the period between January  2016  and  December  2017,
    when the relationship was already under way but the submissions had not
    yet been made.

32. The Judge considered the hotel, bank statement and invoice evidence  at
    some length.  She also considered the  photographs  produced  (not  the
    sexual videos on the USB) but considered that  the  appellant  and  his
    claimed  partner  looked  like  friends  rather  than  lovers  in   the
    photographs, and that the photographs added no weight to the  claim  by
    this appellant that they were in a gay  relationship  or  attended  gay
    clubs.   The videos were not produced and no weight was placed on them.



33. The Judge considered the fatwa question: the appellant claimed  that  a
    friend of his partner had telephoned and told  him  that  it  had  been
    filed.  There was no statement from that friend before the Judge.   The
    First-tier Judge placed no  weight  on  the  fatwa  issue,  finding  it
    'improbable' that the fatwa  existed  or  that  the  appellant  was  of
    interest to the police or the Pakistani authorities. In  the  light  of
    all the evidence the Judge  did  not  accept  that  the  fatwa,  if  it
    existed, was evidence of people in Pakistan knowing of the  appellant's
    claimed sexuality, and that  it  was  'unlikely  that  the  appellant's
    claimed sexuality is known or suspected in Pakistan'.

34. The First-tier Judge found that the appellant was not living an  openly
    gay  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  dismissed  both  the  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Article 3  ECHR  elements  of  the  appeal,
    reminding herself that Article 8 ECHR was no longer relied upon.

Permission to appeal

35. The grounds of appeal asserted that  the  appeal  was  decided  on  the
    balance of probabilities, not  to  the  lower  standard  applicable  in
    international protection  claims.  As  regards  the  rejection  of  the
    appellant's account of his sexual activities with another classmate  at
    school, the appellant contended that it was an error  of  law  for  the
    Judge to  reject  that  evidence  for  the  reason  she  gave,  without
    reference to the  potential  for  differences  of  culture  and  social
    background (see HK v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1037 at [29] in the judgment of Lord Justice Neuberger (as  he
    then was)).

36. The appellant further contended that in  relation  to  the  fatwa,  the
    Judge made her decision  after  she  had  already  reached  a  negative
    conclusion on the appellant's claimed sexuality  (the  Mibanga  error).
    The second ground  of  appeal  challenged  the  Judge's  reasoning  for
    rejecting the appellant's account of sex  with  a  classmate,  and  her
    failure to make it clear that both the appellant and his  partner  gave
    oral evidence of the partner giving the  appellant  a  Valentines'  Day
    card.

37. The appellant contended that at [32] in  the  decision,  the  Judge  so
    conflated her findings that it was not clear whether  she  intended  to
    find that the appellant was not living openly  as  a  gay  man  in  the
    United Kingdom, or that he was not in fact gay.

38. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Judge  Holmes,  on  the
    basis that:

         "3.  It is arguable that some of the Judge's use  of  language  may
         indicate the application of the wrong standard  of  proof,  and  as
         such it is a challenge  that  is  best  ventilated  fully  in  oral
         argument.  It may also be arguable that the Judge was wrong to look
         at the fatwa only after concluding that the appellant was  not  gay
         as claimed, although it is also arguable that this was the  correct
         approach pursuant to Tanveer Ahmed.  There  appears  to  be  little
         merit in the complaint that  the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons; it is clear to the reader that the Judge did not  consider
         the account credible, but this too may be argued."

Rule 24 Reply

39. There was no Rule 24 Reply from the respondent.

40. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

41. For the appellant, Mr Burrett said  that  there  was  only  one,  lower
    standard of proof applicable to international protection  claims,  that
    of a real risk or reasonable degree of likelihood  (see  STARRED  Kacaj
    (Article 3, Standard of Proof, Non-State Actors) Albania  [2001]  UKIAT
    00018 at [12]).  Where a Judge applied a higher threshold, as  in  this
    case where it seemed that the standard of balance of probabilities  had
    been used, the facts found were  of  no  assistance  in  assessing  the
    international protection claim.   The  alleged  contradictions  in  the
    appellant's evidence were not, properly seen, discrepant at all and the
    First-tier Judge's reasoning was unsound and could  not  be  sustained.
    The decision should be set aside and remade afresh  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

42. For the respondent, Mr Kotas observed that the video evidence of sexual
    activity between the appellant and his claimed partner was  irrelevant.
    He relied on Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11 at [15] and argued that the application by the First-
    tier Judge of the correct standard of proof was not to be confused with
    her observation that various matters were 'unlikely':  she  was  simply
    separating out one of  the  four  types  of  evidence,  as  Karanakaran
    required.

43. The First-tier Judge had heard the oral evidence and  was  entitled  to
    refer to it, including the evidence about the hotel, if it  was  relied
    upon.  It had been the appellant's case that he and his  partner  lived
    together at the weekends and  the  Judge  had  been  entitled  to  make
    findings on whether they  were  cohabiting.   The  appellant  had  been
    content to rely on his relationship with his claimed partner,  and  the
    Judge had not erred in focusing thereon.

44. The arguments before the Upper  Tribunal  amounted  to  an  attempt  to
    relitigate the facts: the First-tier  Judge  had  applied  the  correct
    standard of proof,  had  correctly  directed  herself  in  relation  to
    section 8 of the 2004 Act and had been entitled to find  the  appellant
    not to be a credible witness overall.

45. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

46. The reasoning in this decision is  inadequate.   It  is  striking  that
    although there is a self-direction on the standard of proof for Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC (the Qualification Directive) and the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006, as well as for human rights, there is no  self-direction  on  the
    standard and burden of proof in asylum  claims.   Nor  is  the  Judge's
    summary of the HJ (Iran) guidance accurate or sufficient.

47. The Karanakaran point is not well taken by Mr Kotas on  behalf  of  the
    respondent. The burden of proof is on the  appellant  in  international
    protection claims, but the correct standard of proof is  whether  there
    is a real risk or reasonable degree of  likelihood,  as  has  now  been
    settled for many years.

48. Even if the guidance at [55] in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke  in
    Karanakaran (with whom Lord Justice  Robert  Walker  and  Lord  Justice
    Sedley agreed) were relevant, the reasoning of the First-tier Judge  in
    this  appeal  could  not  be  so  characterised.   The  approach  there
    commended was as follows:

         "55. ... when assessing future risk  decision-makers  may  have  to
         take into account a whole bundle of disparate pieces of evidence:

             (1)  evidence they are certain about;

             (2)  evidence they think is probably true;

             (3)  evidence  to  which  they  are  willing  to  attach  some
             credence, even if they could not go so far as  to  say  it  is
             probably true;

             (4)  evidence to which they are  not  willing  to  attach  any
             credence at all."

49. It cannot be said that such an approach was taken in  this  appeal,  in
    which the Judge's findings are a mixture of supposition (she  does  not
    believe that  the  appellant  and  another  school  friend  had  sexual
    relations in empty classrooms at school when the opportunity presented)
    and of application of an unadjusted balance of probabilities test  (she
    finds the appellant's claims 'unlikely').

50. If the Judge had given herself a proper self-direction  on  burden  and
    standard of proof in international protection  claims,  she  would  not
    have fallen into error as she did and might have found that some or all
    of the evidence rejected at the higher standard  was  credible  to  the
    lower international protection standard.

51. The correct approach to consideration of sexual orientation claims  was
    set out at [82] in the opinion of Lord Rodger JSC in  HJ  (Iran)  (with
    whom Lord Hope JSC, Lord Walker JSC, Lord Collins  JSC,  and  Sir  John
    Dyson SCJ agreed): the Tribunal should make findings of fact on whether
    an appellant was gay, or would  be  perceived  to  be  gay  on  return,
    whether he was living openly as a gay man here in the  United  Kingdom,
    and how he would behave on return to the country of origin.

52. The Tribunal should then go on to consider, if the appellant would  act
    discreetly, the reason why he would do so:

         "82. ... If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be
         exposed to a real risk of persecution, then he has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution - even if he could avoid  the  risk  by  living
         "discreetly".

         If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.

         If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.

         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

53. The summary of that test by the First-tier Judge at [30] is inadequate:

         "30. ... The appellant must establish [whether he is gay] before  I
         go on to consider the effect on him, if he returned to Pakistan, of
         whether if he was openly gay, and thus  liable  to  persecution  in
         Pakistan, or if he would in  fact  live  discreetly  and  so  avoid
         persecution in his country of origin."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

54. The emphasis on section 8 (despite the Judge's insistence  that  it  is
    not treated as a starting point) suggests that the Judge was minded  to
    find the appellant not credible before  any  of  the  oral  or  written
    evidence was considered.  Although the Devaseelan guidance  is  briefly
    (and not entirely accurately) set out in the decision, there is no sign
    that the First-tier Judge in the present decision  did  actually  begin
    from the findings in the 2013 Tribunal decision and decide whether, for
    example, she should diverge  from  the  negative  credibility  findings
    there made.

55.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  conflates  whether   the
    appellant's partner is open about his relationship, given that he is  a
    married man with children, with whether the appellant lives  an  openly
    gay life in the United Kingdom.  There are no findings at all as to how
    he would be perceived or how he would behave in  Pakistan  if  he  were
    returned there, nor why.

56. If the  Judge  had  applied  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  and  had
    considered the appellant's sexual orientation rather  than  his  sexual
    activity, and whether and why he behaves discreetly (if he  does),  the
    outcome of this appeal may well have been different.

57. This decision is legally erroneous and cannot stand.  The  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge  is  set  aside,  with  no  findings  of  fact  or
    credibility preserved.  The next  Judge  to  consider  this  appeal  is
    reminded that the findings of fact and credibility in the 2013 Tribunal
    decision are the Devaseelan starting point for any future Tribunal.



DECISION

58. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.

    The decision in this appeal will be remade  afresh  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     11 October 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
