
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04332/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 January 2020                             |On 16 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                   ms H D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk of Counsel, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant who claims to be a national of Eritrea has permission  to
    challenge the decision of Judge Hall of the First-tier Tribunal sent on
    17 September 2019 refusing her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 25 April  2017  refusing  her  protection  claim.   In
    common with the respondent, the judge did not accept that the appellant
    was a national of Eritrea.  The  judge  stated  that  if  he  had  been
    satisfied the appellant was a national of Eritrea it was common  ground
    that the appeal of the appellant would stand to be  allowed.   In  this
    connection the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  a  Pentecostal
    Christian and was of conscription age.  In finding that  the  appellant
    had not given a credible account of her nationality, the  judge  placed
    particular reliance on inconsistencies  in  her  evidence.   The  judge
    considered that she had given two different accounts,  one  being  that
    following receipt of a deportation order when in Ethiopia she travelled
    by bus to meet with her aunt outside Addis Ababa and the other  account
    being that her aunt was present when the deportation order was received
    and they left  together.   The  judge  also  considered  there  was  an
    inconsistency in the appellant's evidence as set  out  in  her  witness
    statement and in the evidence she had given to  the  previous  Tribunal
    judge regarding whether her father and aunt had agreed that  she  would
    go to Sudan.  The judge also considered  inconsistent  the  appellant's
    evidence regarding whether she was present when her  father  was  being
    deported and implausible her account of her father  being  an  Eritrean
    national yet choosing to remain living in Addis Ababa until 2000 albeit
    travelling frequently to Eritrea as part of his occupation as  a  lorry
    driver.  The judge also considered that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    explain why she had not sought to make contact with her aunt who helped
    her escape or any members of her family.

2.   Two grounds were advanced by  the  appellant.   First  of  all  it  was
    contended that the judge had been procedurally unfair in failing to put
    apparent discrepancies in the appellant's evidence to her which had not
    formed part of the respondent's case at  the  de  novo  hearing.   This
    meant, it was submitted, that the appellant had been  deprived  of  the
    opportunity of addressing the alleged  inconsistency  in  circumstances
    where there was no reliance placed on this issued  by  the  respondent.
    Issue was also taken with the judge relying on evidence  the  appellant
    had given at a previous hearing.  It was said that this failure on  the
    part of the judge was compounded by the fact that the  discrepancy  was
    not part of the case highlighted against  the  appellant  and  did  not
    arise as a result of the evidence taken at  the  hearing.   The  second
    ground contended that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for
    finding that the expert report from Dr Allo dated 18  August  2019  did
    not assist the appellant in establishing her Eritrean nationality.   It
    was contended that the judge had placed  no  reliance  on  this  report
    simply on the basis of a minor error on  the  part  of  the  expert  in
    stating that the appellant's mother had voted in  the  1993  referendum
    when in fact she was already deceased at that time.  It  was  submitted
    that having accepted the validity of the  conclusions  reached  by  the
    report at paragraph  47  of  the  determination,  the  judge  seemingly
    ignored it when addressing the reasons why the  appellant  had  limited
    personal  knowledge  about  Eritrea  and  also  why  (contrary  to  the
    respondent's presumption) the appellant's father would not  necessarily
    have taught the appellant either the Tigrinya  language  or  about  the
    ethnic group itself.

3.   I heard submissions from both Mr Fraczyk and Ms Aboni.  Ms  Aboni  said
    that the respondent now accepted that the judge had materially erred in
    law in failing to  put  discrepancies  that  had  not  been  identified
    previously.

4.   Having heard submissions from  both  representatives,  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did materially err in law.  That is not  because  I  see
    any difficulty with the judge relying in paragraph 55 on a recording of
    the appellant's evidence from the previous hearing before Judge  Parkes
    on 14 May 2018 that she and her father received a deportation order  in
    the evening and her father, aunt and maid were in the house.  The issue
    of whether or not at the time when the appellant's father received  the
    deportation order the aunt and the appellant were present with him  was
    one that was raised by  the  respondent  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter: see  paragraph  12.   Hence  in  relation  to  that  issue  the
    appellant  was  on  notice  of  the  need  to  provide  a  satisfactory
    explanation for the discrepancy in her  evidence.  However  it  is  not
    evident from perusal of the record of proceedings  that  the  different
    inconsistencies relied on by the judge in paragraphs 57 to 58 were  put
    to the appellant.  Accordingly I consider ground 1 to be made out.

5.   As regards ground 2, I also consider that the judge's treatment of  the
    expert report was flawed.   At  paragraph  38  the  judge  appeared  to
    consider the expert report reliable.  At paragraph 47  the  judge  said
    that he had considered the expert report in detail and he  agreed  with
    the conclusion at paragraph 38 that it is plausible for  the  appellant
    to be of Eritrean nationality without necessarily speaking the Tigrinya
    language or despite speaking the Amharic language.  In  light  of  that
    positive  finding  in  relation  to  the  expert  report,  the  judge's
    assessment at paragraph 64 that the expert report did  not  assist  the
    appellant in proving that she is  Eritrean,  is  deficient.   The  only
    reason given for rejecting the report in full was that the  expert  had
    found that the appellant's parents voted for Eritrean  independence  in
    1993 and had accepted Eritrean nationality and therefore were deemed to
    have renounced their Ethiopian nationality, whereas the judge said that
    could not be the case because the  appellant's  mother  died  in  1983.
    However, irrespective of  what  the  appellant's  mother  did,  if  the
    appellant's father had voted for  Eritrean  independence  in  1993  and
    accepted Eritrean nationality, as was  the  view  of  the  expert,  the
    expert's error  in  relation  to  the  mother  did  not  undermine  the
    conclusion of the expert.  Accordingly, I consider  that  ground  2  is
    also made out.

6.      In light  of  the  nature  of  the  judge's  errors  I  consider  it
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal,  not  before
    Judge Hall.  It being accepted by the respondent that if the  appellant
    is a national of Eritrea she is entitled to succeed in  her  protection
    claim, the only remaining  issue is a limited one,  namely  whether  or
    not the appellant is a national of Eritrea. It is nevertheless  one  on
    which there will need to be an assessment of the  appellant's  evidence
    de novo.

7.   I would add one observation.  It appears to be  the  reasoning  of  the
    respondent in the Reasons for Refusal Letter that the appellant  is  to
    be considered a national of Ethiopia because she has the opportunity to
    acquire that nationality.  However as a matter of  nationality  law,  a
    decision on whether an appellant is a national or not must be  made  on
    the basis of  present nationality.  If  the  respondent's  position  is
    simply that the appellant has an opportunity or an entitlement to apply
    for Ethiopian nationality through some national  procedure,  then  that
    does not establish for the purposes of the Refugee Convention that  the
    appellant is a national of Ethiopia.  However it is not necessarily the
    case that this assists  the  appellant  because  on  one  view  of  the
    evidence she would be  entitled  by  operation  of  law,  ex  lege,  to
    Ethiopian nationality and therefore, whether or not she applies for  it
    would be immaterial to whether  she  possessed  that  nationality.   In
    order to examine the nationality issue further, the next Tribunal  will
    need to consider not only the expert report  but  also  the  background
    country materials relied on by the respondent.

8.     To conclude the decision of the First-tier Judge  is  set  aside  for
    material error of law.  The decision  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, not before Judge Hall or Judge Parkes.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2020

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

