
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04359/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 December 2016                       |On 7 February 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                  Omar [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Reynolds (Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by  the  appellant  in  respect  of  a  decision  and
    reasons by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Devittie) promulgated  on  11
    October 2016 in which the appellant's appeal was dismissed  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  and  he  made  a  claim  for
    asylum on the grounds that he was targeted by the Taliban, who believed
    he was a Government informer.  The appellant's father was arrested  and
    detained one month after an incident in April 2015 when fighting  broke
    out between the Taliban and the police outside the tea shop run by  the
    appellant.

3.   In a decision and reasons the FTT found  a  number  of  "unsatisfactory
    features" in the appellant's evidence which led to its conclusion  that
    the core of his account lacked credibility and that the evidence relied
    on was fabricated.  The decision and reasons  went  on  to  list  those
    factors at [8(i) to (iv)].   Thereafter  the  FTT  considered  risk  on
    return with reference to AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT
    00163 (IAC).  In the alternative the FTT also considered the  issue  of
    internal relocation.

Grounds for Permission to Appeal

4.   The appellant argued that the FTT failed to make findings  on  material
    facts as to whether or not the appellant's father  was  detained.   The
    decision and reasons at [8(iii)] was incomplete and did not amount to a
    proper finding (ground 1).

5.   Ground 2 argued that there was a misdirection in law  on  the  part  of
    the FTT with regard to the evidence of two letters from village  elders
    in Afghanistan which corroborated the  appellant's  account.   The  FTT
    rejected that evidence finding that they "were authored  for  the  sole
    purpose of enhancing the appellant's asylum claim".  The FTT failed  to
    follow the guidance in Cledias Moyo [2002] UKIAT 01104 at [14]  and  in
    accordance with Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.

6.   Ground 3 argued that the FTT failed  to  direct  itself  in  accordance
    with the law when assessing credibility and did not  follow  principles
    outlined in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 [28].

7.   Ground  4  argued  that  the  FTT's  alternative  conclusion  that  the
    appellant could relocate to Kabul was based on speculation only and  no
    consideration was given to country background evidence relied on by the
    appellant.  In particular, that the  appellant  was  from  Karghayi  in
    Laghman Province bordering Kabul, his father had  been  detained  as  a
    result of the incident and there was no family support, social network,
    accommodation or employment in Kabul.

Grant of Permission

8.   Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  McCarthy  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 10 November 2016 in the following terms:-

     "I am satisfied it is arguable the judge has failed  to  make  adequate
         findings or  to  give  adequate  reasons.  Specifically,  paragraph
         [8(iii)] of the decision is meaningless.  It may be that the  judge
         failed to proof read his decision before it  was  issued,  but  the
         text as promulgated simply states, "(iii) whether  father  detained
         and loss of contact in interview January 2015.  I  had  no  contact
         ... maybe father's mobile war".
         Specifically,  paragraph  [8(iv)]  does  not  provide  reasons  for
         finding the letters from the village chief had  been  provided  for
         the sole purpose of enhancing the asylum  claim.   It  is  arguable
         that the judge failed to have regard to the approach encouraged  in
         Tanveer  Ahmed  as  there  is  no  indication  why  they  might  be
         unreliable.
         The last ground of the application challenges the judge's  approach
         to internal relocation.  At paragraph [11] the judge indicated that
         he  considered  the  possibility  of  internal  relocation  as   an
         alternative and  did  so  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had
         established a well-founded fear of persecution in  his  home  area.
         In assessing the risks  the  appellant  might  face  in  Kabul,  he
         considered the country guideline case GS Afghanistan and  concluded
         that there was no evidence the appellant would be at risk in  Kabul
         from either the Afghan Government. The grounds argue that the judge
         failed to have regard to what risks the appellant  might  encounter
         from the Taliban in Kabul.  This had been raised in paragraph  [15]
         of the  skeleton  argument  and  reference  to  background  country
         information had been provided which postdated the country guideline
         case.  It is arguable that the judge has  failed  to  address  this
         issue and this is an arguable legal error".

Rule 24 Response

9.   The Secretary of State responded to the grounds of appeal in a Rule  24
    response dated 6 December 2016.  Mr Kotas expanded on the response  and
    contended that the grounds essentially complained  about  the  lack  of
    findings and the judge's approach to  the  documentary  evidence.   The
    reality was that this was a very straightforward claim  with  a  simple
    factual matrix: the appellant claimed that the Taliban came looking for
    him because they believed he was a Government informer.  There  appears
    only to have been one incident which was a  fight  when  the  appellant
    escaped.  The brief findings made in the light of this simplistic claim
    were appropriate.

10.  The FTT was  entitled  to  reject  the  appellant's  account  that  the
    Taliban would not have approached him, and  more  critically  that  the
    appellant failed to enquire of the mullah how he had responded  to  the
    Taliban's request, as inherently implausible.  The typographical errors
    did not undermine the findings made by the FTT.  The FTT looked at  the
    documentary evidence of the letters in the round.  In the light of  the
    above any error of law on internal relocation  was  utterly  immaterial
    and did not arise where the appellant's account had been  fundamentally
    disbelieved.

Error of Law Hearing
Submissions

11.  Mr Reynolds relied on the detailed grounds of appeal  and  argued  that
    the  judge  granting  permission  had  made  strong  observations.   Mr
    Reynolds expanded on the grounds of appeal arguing that the errors made
    by the FTT were material and relevant in that the FTT failed to set out
    adequate reasons for finding that the appellant's claim was lacking  in
    credibility.  The FTT indicated that it would give reasons  in  support
    of its findings but these were incomplete or meaningless  as  shown  in
    paragraph [8(iii)] and [8(ii)] of the decision.  The FTT  was  required
    to show why an appeal is won or lost and to show that anxious  scrutiny
    has been given to the evidence before it.

12.  In respect of ground 2 the FTT made a clear  error  of  law  by  simply
    disregarding the letters as being "self-serving".

13.  Ground 3 related to a mistake fact on the  part  of  the  FTT.  It  was
    clear from the evidence adduced  that  the  appellant's  father  had  a
    conversation with the mullah and it  was  not  the  appellant  who  had
    spoken to the mullah.

14.  Ground 4 argued that the FTT erred by  failing  to  expressly  consider
    all matters raised in the skeleton argument.

15.  Mr Kotas relied on the Rule 24 response.  In respect  of  ground  4  he
    argued that the FTT had  properly  considered  internal  relocation  by
    taking the case at its highest  and  looking  at  the  various  factors
    relevant to return to Afghanistan.

Discussion and decision

16.  I find there are material errors of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and reasons.  I am satisfied that the appellant has  made  out
    grounds 1 and 2.  In making findings as regards the  appellant's  claim
    to be in fear of persecution from the Taliban and from the  authorities
    in  Afghanistan,   the  FTT  proceeds  on  the  basis  that  there  are
    unsatisfactory features of the appellant's evidence  which  lead  to  a
    conclusion that the account is fabricated and lacking  in  credibility.
    The decision and reasons then goes on to list those features and in  my
    view does so inadequately  and/or  without  giving  full  reasons.   In
    particular, at paragraph [8(iii)]  the  decision  simply  records  what
    appear to be notes and no specific finding is made in  respect  of  the
    material issue of whether or not the appellant's father  was  detained.
    As it stands the wording at [(iii)] is meaningless.  In a similar  vein
    at paragraph [8(i)] the last sentence makes no sense and it is  unclear
    what the FTT's reasons are.

17.  Furthermore, I am satisfied that with reference  to  paragraph  [8(iv)]
    the FTT  failed to adopt the correct approach to  documentary  evidence
    following the principles in Tanveer Ahmed.  The FTT has  simply  stated
    that the letters were authored for the sole purpose  of  enhancing  the
    appellant's claim and accordingly limited weight is attached to them.


Notice of Decision

18.  The appellant's appeal is allowed to the extent that  I  find  material
    errors of law by the FTT.

19.  The decision and reasons is set aside.

20.  The matter is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  at
    Taylor House (excluding Judge Devittie).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 13.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made


Signed                                  Date 13.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
