

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04640/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                                              Decision and   |
|Reasons Promulgated                                                                |
|On 21 February 2019                                                   On 19 March  |
|2019                                                                               |
|                                                                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                    F B S
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:    Ms Marian Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law Firm
For the respondent: Ms Rhoda Petterson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier  Tribunal  refusing  her  international  protection  on  asylum   or
   humanitarian protection grounds, or leave to remain in the United Kingdom
   on human rights grounds.  The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iraq  and  is
   Kurdish.

Background

2. The appellant's husband has British citizenship which was acquired  while
   he was a refugee in the United Kingdom, in fear of  Saddam  Hussein.   In
   2013, 7 years after Saddam Hussein's execution, he returned  to  live  in
   Iraq, where he met and married the appellant who was then still living in
   Iraq.  The parties married in July 2013 and their first child was born on
   19 June 2014 in Iraq.

3. The appellant's account that her family were happy for  her  to  marry  a
   British citizen, on condition that he agreed to stay in  Iraq  after  the
   marriage, but that when, at some time in 2013 (so  when  they  were  very
   newly married) he began working for a British company in order to provide
   a living for his wife and the coming child, the  appellant's  family  was
   not happy and asked her to divorce her husband.  The appellant refused.

4. After the marriage, and despite  his  promise  to  remain  in  Iraq,  the
   appellant's husband returned to the United Kingdom three times, once  for
   15 days and twice for 3 months.  The first return was in 2014 just  after
   their son's birth, and the second in 2015, just  after  the  child  began
   walking. He needed to renew his British driving licence and taxi  permit.
   The appellant said at her asylum interview that he probably also needed a
   break from the pressure exerted on him  by  her  family  because  he  was
   working for a British company.  The pressure from the appellant's  family
   on her to separate from her husband increased in his  absence,  including
   seclusion and physical violence, but  she  was  not  persuaded  that  she
   should end her marriage.

5. On 18 November 2016, the family attempted to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
   without  obtaining an entry clearance visa for the appellant or her child
   (which as a British citizen should not have needed  a  visa).  They  were
   refused entry at  the  coach  station  at  Coquelles,  France,  when  the
   appellant showed an Iraqi passport with no United Kingdom visa.

6. The appellant then arranged to ente the United Kingdom  clandestinely  on
   12 December 2016. By this time,  the  appellant  was  pregnant  with  the
   couple's second child, a daughter who was born in the United Kingdom on 4
   July 2017.   Both children are British citizens. The elder boy is 4 years
   old and his sister is 19 months old now: at the date  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal hearing, the baby girl was not yet a year old and the  boy  only
   3.

7. The appellant claimed asylum on 12 January 2017  and  had  her  screening
   interview on that date and her full asylum interview on 30 January  2018.
   She did not disclose the refusal of entry at  Coquelles  on  18  November
   2016.  The appellant claimed to fear an honour killing by her  family  in
   Sulaymaniyah, should she return to Iraq.

8. It is not suggested that the appellant's children have  any  physical  or
   mental difficulties.  They are  very  young,  healthy,  and  not  yet  in
   education.  There is no other evidence about their best  interests,  save
   that they are British citizens.

9. The respondent  refused  the  appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
   claims and the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

10. The First-tier Judge found the asylum claim to be fabricated.  He  noted
   that Sulaymaniyah, where the appellant came from, was in the IKR and that
   she either had valid documents or could obtain  them  by  contacting  her
   family.  He expressly disbelieved her claim to be at risk  of  an  honour
   killing or serious harm from her family in Iraq.   The  First-tier  Judge
   found that there was no Article 15(c) risk to the appellant in  her  home
   area and that she would have the support of her family there.

11. He accepted that the appellant, her husband and the children had  family
   life together in the United Kingdom but found  her  private  life  to  be
   limited as the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for less  than  2
   years at the date of hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  any
   event, applying section 117B(4)(a), as her private life  was  established
   while the appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully,  little  weight
   can be given to it.

12. The Judge found that the decision  to  refuse  the  appellant  leave  to
   remain would not compel her husband or children to return  to  Iraq  with
   her but that they were likely to do so if she went.  He did not find  the
   appellant to be a witness of  truth.   He  considered,  applying  section
   117B(6) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended),
   that it was not unreasonable to expect such young children to go and live
   in Iraq.

13. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal and the appellant  appealed
   to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

14. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin,
   limited to considerations of family and private life.  Judge Martin found
   the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  on  the  protection
   appeal to be without merit and that challenge was not renewed  before  me
   today.

15. The material part of the grant of permission is at [4]:

         "4.  However, it is arguable  that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  his
         consideration of  Article  8  [ECHR]  in  particular  EX.1  of  the
         Immigration Rules and section 117B(6), given that the appellant  is
         the wife of a British citizen and the  mother  of  British  citizen
         children in the United Kingdom.  It is arguable that the Judge  has
         erred in his application of the Home Office policy and paragraph 49
         of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 as to  the  reasonableness  of
         British children leaving the UK. "

Rule 24 Reply

16. The respondent filed no Rule 24 Reply.

17. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

18. When granting permission on 13 July 2018, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin
   did not have the benefit of the guidance  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
   (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53  in
   particular at [18]-[19] in the opinion of Lord Carnwath  JSC,  with  whom
   Lord Kerr JSC, Lord Wilson JSC and Lord Briggs JSC agreed:
         "18.          On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance acknowledges,
         it seems to me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider
         where the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are  expected
         to be, since it will normally be reasonable for  the  child  to  be
         with them. To that extent the record  of  the  parents  may  become
         indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have  a  right
         to remain here, and having to leave. It is only if,  even  on  that
         hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to leave  that
         the provision may give the parents a right to remain. The point was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:
             "22.    In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."
         19.              He noted (para 21)  that  Lewison  LJ  had  made a
         similar point in considering the "best interests"  of  children  in
         the  context  of  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
         Immigration Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:
             "58.     In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"
         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."                                              [Emphasis
         added]

19. The real world situation for these children, as Ms Cleghorn accepts,  is
   that their mother has entered the United Kingdom unlawfully  and  has  no
   right to be here.  Their father  is  here  lawfully  and  their  mother's
   removal will not oblige the children to leave with her because they, like
   their father, are British citizens, but in practice, it  is  likely  that
   the family will leave together and live in Iraq.  The  asylum  claim  not
   having been accepted, there is no risk in  Iraq  to  the  appellant,  her
   husband or her children, from her family as non-State actors.

20. The judgment in KO (Nigeria) is fatal to the  appellant's  challenge  to
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and this appeal cannot succeed.

DECISION

21. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law

   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         21 February 2019               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson





