
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/04705/2017
                                                               PA/04726/2017
                                                               PA/04739/2017
                                                               PA/04753/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 February 2018                  |On 26 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                 MONSURU [H]
                                OLAWUNMI [O]
                                    [P H]
                                    [N I]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the First Appellant:        In person
For the Respondent:        Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born on [ ] 1983, [ ] 1988, [  ]
    2014 and [ ] 2016. The first two appellants are husband  and  wife  and
    the third and fourth appellants  are  their  children.   They  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 2  May  2017  refusing  to
    grant them asylum and humanitarian protection under paragraphs 336  and
    339M/339F of HC395 (as amended) of the Rules.  Their appeals were heard
    by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Abebrese on 16  June  2017.   Their
    appeals were dismissed on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and also under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of ECHR, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 3 July 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  before  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal and was refused  by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Shimmin on 9 October 2017.

 3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made
    and was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 8 January  2018.   The
    permission states that it is unclear from the Judge's decision, whether
    or not he accepted that the appellant has converted to Christianity and
    that is not without materiality to the claim that the appellant will be
    at risk on return.  The matters raised in the  grounds  concerning  the
    background evidence referring  to  risks  to  converts  from  Islam  to
    Christianity in Nigeria and the challenge to the  Judge's  findings  in
    respect of the witnesses, raise arguable challenges to the decision  as
    a whole.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 5. The Presenting Officer's file was incomplete and it was not clear  from
    the decision what evidence was before the First-Tier Judge.  I had  the
    bundle that was before the First-Tier  Judge  together  with  a  bundle
    submitted  a  few  days  before  this  hearing  from  the   appellants'
    representative.  I gave the Presenting Officer time to read  these  and
    compare them as the First-Tier Judge  appears  not  to  have  addressed
    issues which were in the evidence before him.

 6. After a short adjournment the Presenting Officer submitted that  it  is
    clear that the First-Tier Judge did not make a decision as  to  whether
    the first appellant is a Christian convert from  Islam  or  has  always
    been a Christian.  He submitted that if he is a Christian convert  then
    the witness statements have merit, particularly as they state that  the
    first appellant is a preacher.

 7. He submitted that there appears to have been enough evidence before the
    First-Tier Judge for him to consider the evidence relating to Christian
    converts returning to Nigeria but he did not consider  this  risk.   He
    submitted therefore that there are material errors of law in the First-
    Tier Judge's decision and that the claims should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-Tier Tribunal.

 8. He submitted that the grounds of appeal to the First-Tier  Tribunal  do
    not appear to have mentioned the threat of FGM to the  third  appellant
    on return and if that is  indeed  the  case,  if  the  claim  is  being
    remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal it will require  to  be  considered
    based on religion only.

 9. The first appellant submitted that the FGM point  is  crucial.   I  was
    unable to find the original grounds of application  to  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal for reconsideration of the hearing,  and  I  asked  the  first
    appellant if he could provide me with this.  He assured me that it  had
    been in the grounds and I gave him 7 days to produce this.

10. After I had risen I was handed what the first appellant stated were his
    grounds of application to the First-Tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and these do indeed refer to his  daughter
    perhaps being subjected to  female  genital  mutilation  on  return  to
    Nigeria. I am going to remit the claim and  this  will  require  to  be
    considered along  with  the  first  appellant's  claim  that  he  is  a
    Christian convert.

11. It is clear that there are material errors of  law  in  the  First-Tier
    Judge's decision.  He did not properly consider all the evidence before
    him and has made no decision as to whether the appellant is  a  convert
    to Christianity or has always been a Christian.

Notice of Decision

12. I direct that the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.
    None of its findings are to stand other than as a record  of  what  was
    said  on  that  occasion.   It  is  appropriate  in  terms  of  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit  the
    case to the First-Tier  Tribunal  for  an  entirely  fresh  hearing  on
    religion and particular social group (FGM) to the third appellant.

13. The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are
    not to include First-Tier Immigration Judge Abebrese.

14. Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed   Date 23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
