
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04644/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 3rd June 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Mrs S S H
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Williams (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Parkes, promulgated on 11th September 2018, following a hearing at
Birmingham on 24th August 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied
for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus
the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq, was born on [~] 1993, and is a female.
Her husband is dependent on her claim.  The essence of the claim is that in
April 2016 she was approached by a man called [D], who asked her to marry
him.  [D] later contacted the Appellant's husband and threatened him.
Later on, two men tried to kidnap the Appellant's son.  [D] even shot at
her husband's car, which was parked outside their house.  It is a feature
of this appeal that the Appellant's husband had previously sought entry to
the UK, claiming to be an Iranian.  It is accepted that the Appellant is a
Kurd from Kirkuk in Iraq.

The Judge's Findings

The judge did not accept that the Appellant was targeted as claimed or that
she and her family were forced to flee Iraq as a result of the interest
expressed in her by [D].  The judge was clear that

"it may be there is an individual known to her as [D], or by a different
spelling, but the inconsistencies in the account given are such that I do
not accept that the Appellant and her family were threatened by him or that
there was any campaign of intimidation against them" (paragraph 27).

The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

The grounds of application state that the judge had accepted that the
Appellant and her husband had a family in Kirkuk, with whom they had
contact.  The judge concluded that they would have access to CSID documents
or passports.  The Appellant and her husband could return to Kirkuk.  If
they could not do so, then in the alternative they could relocate to IKR
via Baghdad (see paragraphs 20 to 29).  The grounds argue that in so
concluding, the judge failed to have regard to the country guidance case of
AAH [2018] UKUT 00212.  Under this decision the judge had to consider
whether it would be possible for the Appellant and her family to relocate
to IKR without family support.  The same would apply if they were required
to return to Kirkuk without family support.  It was in these circumstances
that the issue of whether relocation would be "unduly harsh" became
relevant.  The judge had not properly considered the matter.

On 8th October 2018 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

At the hearing before me on 17th May 2019, Mr Howard, appearing on behalf
of the Appellant, made the following submissions.  First, if the judge had
accepted that the Appellant and her husband were from Kirkuk, and that for
that reason they were returnable, this overlooked the fact that under the
country guidance case of AA (Iraq) [2015] UKUT 00544, the region of
"Kirkuk" was a contested area.

Second, the judge had found that the Appellant and her husband spoke one of
the Kurdish languages, and this being so, they would be able to move from
Baghdad to IKR (paragraph 29) but the judge failed to consider all the
factors relevant when considering whether return to Baghdad city is
feasible.  After all, the Appellants, as Kurds, belong to a minority ethnic
group.  It was important for the judge to consider whether there were any
family or friends to accommodate the Appellant and her husband in Baghdad,
before such a conclusion could be made.  In fact, the judge does not refer
to the case of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018, which
makes it clear that in general the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and
in the case of Sunni complainants, are unwilling to provide sufficient
protection.  The judge, on the other hand, simply focused on the fact that
the Appellant had contact with family members, without considering other
factors, such as the fact that sectarian violence had increased since the
withdrawal of US-led coalition forces in 2012.  The Appellant and her
husband would have to rely on support given to other IDPs in Baghdad.

Third, the judge provided inadequate reasoning in concluding (at paragraph
59) that internal relocation to the IKR would be possible after a journey
from Baghdad, given that such an assessment is fact-sensitive and involved
consideration of the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such
as Erbil by air).  In this regard, the judge did not give consideration to
the recent case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT
00212, paragraph 39 of which makes it clear that certain conditions would
have to be fulfilled before such a possibility could materialise.

Finally, none of the family members of the Appellant and her husband
originate from the IKR, which is an area that had been associated with
ISIL, and her husband was male, and of fighting age, and if it was the case
that he would be placed at risk, then a relocation to that area would not
be feasible.

For his part, Mr Williams submitted that the judge had made clear that
there was no personal and specific risk to the Appellant (see paragraph 27)
because she was not targeted as claimed, and nor was it the case that her
family were forced to flee Iraq as a result of interest expressed in her by
a man called [D].  The family were not threatened by him.  There was no
campaign of intimidation against them.  Second, Kirkuk was no longer a
contested area.  Mr Williams placed reliance upon the High Court case of
Amin [2017] EWHC 2417, where Justice Cranston had made clear that

"Kirkuk is no a longer contested area.  In my view, country guidance cases
must give way to the realities, a point recognised by the Court of Appeal
in SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940, at paragraph 47.  There are apparently
still dangers there, but nothing like the position as when AA was decided"
(at paragraph 63).

In the circumstances, submitted Mr Williams, the judge's decision was
entirely sustainable.

In reply, Mr Howard submitted that the case of Amin was a judicial review
decision and not directly relevant to the present proceedings.  In any
event, the judge had not made a finding on whether Kirkuk was safe or not.
He had simply concluded that return to Kirkuk would be viable.  In fact, he
had then gone on to also express himself in the alternative, by stating
that "if return to Kirkuk is not viable there is the alternative of
residing in the IKR" (paragraph 29), but had still failed to demonstrate
that such an alternative was reasonably exercisable by the Appellant and
her husband.

No Error of Law

I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did not involve
the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007)
such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision.  My
reasons are as follows.  Whilst it is true that the judge does not refer to
the range of cases that Mr Howard has meticulously drawn my attention to,
the factual basis of the decision by the judge is sustainable on the basis
of the reasons given and the findings made.

First, it is the case that the judge does not find the claim that the
Appellant fled as a result of an interest expressed by [D] to be credible.


Second, the judge observes that the Appellant's husband had previously
impersonated himself as of Iranian nationality.

Third, the judge rightly points out that the Appellant and her family are
from Kirkuk and are of Kurdish ethnicity, and that

"with there being evidence of there being contact with the families of the
Appellant and her husband and having rejected the core of the Appellant's
account I find that the Appellant has not shown that either the relevant
CSIDs and other documents such as passports are not available"

to them.  This was "given the presence of family in Iraq it has not been
shown that the Appellant and her husband would be unable to obtain renewed
CSIDs or passports as required" (paragraph 28).  That conclusion is
consistent with the latest country guidance case of AAH [2018] UKUT 00212.

Fourth, in relation to the alternative expressed by the judge, the
alternative expressed by the judge, here, again, adequate reasons are given
when the judge points out that "if return to Kirkuk is not viable there is
the alternative of residing in the IKR".  The reason why the judge finds
this alternative to have been made out is because "the Appellant and her
husband speak one of the Kurdish languages and I find that they have access
to the relevant identity documentation that would enable them to move on
from Baghdad to the IKR and to access the services required" (paragraph
29).  This demonstrates the judge has been perfectly alive to the relevant
issues of access to services, and access to relevant documentation.

Finally, I might as well also add that one other finding that the judge
made was in relation to the Appellant's husband, who had made a 2008 asylum
claim on the basis that he was of Iranian nationality.  After that, he had
returned to Iraq.  The judge explained how, "whatever the basis of his
claim then it appears that he was not in danger then as he returned to Iraq
following his father's death and makes no suggestion that he had any
problems until those raised in this appeal" (paragraph 24).  For all these
reasons, the decision made by the judge was, when looked at in its
entirety, entirely one that was open to him.  There is no error of law.

Decision

An anonymity order is made.

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th May 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th May 2019
