
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/04427/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Wednesday 19 December 2018              |On Tuesday 15 January 2019    |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    R T B
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt, Counsel instructed by Legal Rights
                    Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Jessica Pacey promulgated on  14  December  2018  ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 15 March 2018  refusing
      his protection claim.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Cameroon.  He  claims  to  be  at
      risk for three reasons. First, based on  his  father's  membership  of
      SCNC and the authorities' interest in  the  family  on  that  account.
      Second, because he is himself a member of Friends of  Liberty.  Third,
      because he is an anglophone  Cameroonian  will  be  perceived  by  the
      Cameroonian authorities as a secessionist and political opponent.

3.          The Judge did not accept as credible the  Appellant's  claim  to
      be at interest of the authorities due to family  membership  of  SCNC.
      Even if his father were arrested as he claimed for that reason  (which
      the Judge did not accept), the authorities  had  on  his  own  account
      arrested his sister because she protested about their father's  arrest
      which the Appellant had not done.   The Judge did not accept that  the
      Appellant would come to the authorities' attention due  to  membership
      of Friends of Liberty.  The Judge did not accept that, as someone with
      no political profile, previous activity or even interest  in  politics
      that the Appellant would be at risk from the  Cameroonian  authorities
      on return.

4.          The Appellant raises four grounds of challenge to the  Decision.
      First, it is said  that  the  Judge  did  not  carry  out  a  complete
      assessment of the risk claimed.  That is based on an asserted  failure
      properly to consider the bases of risk as set out in an expert  report
      of Dr Walker Said ("the Expert Report").  The second ground is  allied
      to this and asserts a failure to take account  of  the  Expert  Report
      when assessing credibility.  Third, the Appellant says that the  Judge
      failed to take into account  certain  evidence  including  the  Expert
      Report  but  also  evidence  corroborating  the  Appellant's  sister's
      account,  background  evidence  and  evidence  concerning  sur   place
      activity.  Fourth, on the basis that the  Judge  had  ignored  certain
      factors said to be relevant or had failed to give adequate reasons for
      her adverse credibility findings in light of those factors.

5.          Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Lambert on 11 October 2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:

            "...3.     Grounds 2-4  take  issue  with  the  judge's  adverse
           credibility findings, but in  effect  amount  to  no  more  than
           disagreement with those findings and an attempt to  reargue  the
           Appellant's case.


            4.   Ground 1 is however arguable.   It  takes  issue  with  the
           failure of the Judge, having accepted at paragraph 60  that  the
           Appellant  financially  supported  'Friends  of   Liberty',   an
           Anglophone independence group in the United Kingdom, to  address
           specific evidence of risk on this  basis  as  presented  by  the
           expert  evidence.   A  further  risk  factor  derived  from  the
           Appellant's Anglophone origins and heritage, identified  by  the
           expert, is also arguably not addressed.


                  5.     There  is  therefore  an  arguable  error  of   law
      disclosed by the application."


6.    The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit to the  First-
tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


Submissions

7.    Ms Moffatt put forward  the  Appellant's  case  on  essentially  three
      grounds, identifying the overlap between grounds two and three.

8.    In relation to the first ground,  she  pointed  out  that  the  Expert
      Report identifies three bases for the Appellant being  potentially  at
      risk on return to Cameroon.  First, he says  that  he  is  the  family
      member of a former member of SCNC (his father).  Second, he says  that
      his own political activity would bring him to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities. Third he says that he is an  anglophone  Cameroonian  who
      would be perceived as supporting secession irrespective of  the  other
      factors.  Although the Judge rejected the first basis  of  the  claim,
      the adverse credibility findings did not  impact  on  the  second  and
      third.  It was therefore accepted that the Appellant is  a  member  of
      Friends of Liberty and  an  anglophone  Cameroonian.   Notwithstanding
      that acceptance, the Judge had failed to consider the risk on  account
      of those latter two factors.  Ms Moffatt drew my attention to  various
      parts of the Expert Report and  in  particular  [20]  of  that  report
      ([AB/380]) which makes clear that the third basis of the claim  arises
      irrespective of the Judge's view  of  the  first  basis.   The  expert
      expressly states that  all  anglophone  Cameroonians  would  be  under
      suspicion on arrival and the government would examine their background
      and activities very closely.  Allied  to  that,  the  expert  provides
      information  about  the  ability  and  intent   of   the   Cameroonian
      authorities to monitor activities ([53] to [55] of the Expert  Report)
      which the Judge failed to take into account.  Although that passage is
      concerned with monitoring and  surveillance  in  Cameroon  itself,  Ms
      Moffatt pointed to the summary of the  risk  at  [91]  of  the  Expert
      Report which made plain that there was still a risk of  the  Appellant
      being viewed as a potential  dissident  irrespective  of  whether  his
      father was in fact involved with the SCNC as claimed.

9.    Ms Moffatt dealt with the second and third grounds together.   As  she
      rightly identified, there is some overlap with ground  one.   However,
      the thrust of these grounds is that  when  assessing  credibility  the
      Judge failed to take into account the views expressed  in  the  Expert
      Report  in  particular  about  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's
      father's involvement with the SCNC  ([15]  of  the  report),  and  the
      detention of the Appellant's sister as a result  of  that  involvement
      ([36] and [37]  of  the  report).    The  expert  also  confirmed  the
      authenticity of the father's  SCNC  membership  card.   That  was  not
      considered (although Ms Moffatt accepted that only a copy of the  card
      was at that time available to the Judge;  the  Appellant  has  applied
      under Rule 15(2A) to adduce the original which he has  now  obtained).
      The claim to be at risk based on family membership was also consistent
      with the background evidence which the Judge also failed  to  mention.
      The Judge also failed to refer to the evidence about  the  Appellant's
      involvement with other organisations whilst in the UK as evidenced  at
      [AB/356-357].  Those grounds were therefore not merely a  disagreement
      with the findings.

10.   Although Ms Moffatt did not expand on ground four, accepting  that  it
      was a "rag-bag" of issues, Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that, in  any
      event, this ground is unmeritorious and impacts on the other  grounds.
        From  [51]  onwards  of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  set   out   the
      inconsistencies in the Appellant's case and gave reasons for rejecting
      the claim based on the Appellant's father's membership of SCNC because
      his father would not have been in Cameroon at the relevant time.  Once
      that  part  of  the  account  was  disbelieved,  the  claim  that  the
      Appellant's sister was detained falls away which disposes of the point
      at ground [3(a)].

11.    Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  did  however  accept  that  she  was  in   more
      difficulty defending the Decision in relation to the second and  third
      bases of claim.  She did however point out that all the Judge accepted
      in relation to the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities  was  that  he
      provided financial support to Friends of Liberty ([60]) and  she  said
      that the finding that the authorities  would  not  be  aware  of  such
      support was therefore open to  the  Judge.    She  said  it  could  be
      inferred from [68] of the Decision that the Judge had not accepted the
      remainder of the account of activities in the UK (although Ms Willocks-
      Briscoe did accept that the Judge had not gone on  expressly  to  deal
      with  the  other  evidence   about,   for   example,   attendance   at
      demonstrations).

12.    Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  accepted  that  the  Decision  does  not   deal
      expressly with the risk to the Appellant as an anglophone Cameroonian.
        She submitted however that this may not be material depending on  my
      view of the remaining grounds.

13.   In response to that latter point, Ms Moffatt submitted that the  bases
      of claim were interdependent, and it was not possible to separate them
      out when considering the risk on return.

Discussion and Conclusions

14.    I  deal  with  the  grounds  together  as  it  is  evident  from  the
      submissions that there is a significant overlap between them.   It  is
      also evident from my record of those submissions above that  the  main
      thrust of the grounds is the Judge's failure to  consider  the  Expert
      Report.  I therefore deal with that first.

15.   The Judge deals expressly with the Expert Report only at [67]  of  the
      Decision as follows:

           "Dr Walker-Said's report, though comprehensive, gave her  expert
           opinion  and  conclusions  on  the  basis  that  everything  the
           Appellant had said was credible and factually accurate.  It  may
           well be that someone with a family history of opposition to  the
           government would be at risk on return.  Given my findings as  to
           the Appellant's  credibility,  however,  I  attach  very  little
           weight to her report since it is based on what I have determined
           is a false premise,  namely  the  veracity  of  the  Appellant's
           account."


16.   I accept that the Judge's treatment of the Expert  Report  amounts  to
      an error of law for three reasons.  First, the  Judge  fails  to  note
      that,  irrespective  of  the  Appellant's  credibility,   the   expert
      identifies potential risks based on his sur place activities  and  his
      position as an anglophone Cameroonian.  The expert expressly says that
      those risks may materialise even if the first basis of the Appellant's
      claim is not accepted. The fact that the Judge may only have  accepted
      the Appellant's financial contributions to a secessionist organisation
      in the UK does not assist since the Appellant  was  asserting  further
      sur place activities about which the Judge ought to have made findings
      and provided reasons if she discounted those as having occurred.   She
      does not deal at all with the third basis of claim  (as  Ms  Willocks-
      Briscoe accepted).

17.   Second, the Judge fails to  take  account  of  the  expert's  evidence
      about the extent of the authorities' monitoring of those considered to
      be dissidents and their intent to do so.  As  I  have  observed,  that
      evidence does appear to  be  concerned  with  the  activities  of  the
      authorities in  Cameroon  itself  but  that  is  also  instructive  in
      relation to the interest which  the  authorities  may  take  to  those
      returning from abroad particularly where those persons are  anglophone
      Cameroonians as the Appellant is accepted to be.

18.   Third, when finding the Appellant not to be credible  in  relation  to
      the first basis of his claim, the Judge has failed to take account  of
      the expert's opinion about the plausibility of that aspect.  The Judge
      was of course entitled to rely on inconsistencies but  has  failed  to
      consider the claim on a holistic basis taking account of the  evidence
      which suggests  that  the  claim  is  plausible  (including  also  the
      background evidence).

19.   In light of the above, I do not  need  to  go  on  to  consider  other
      evidence which the Judge may have overlooked or failed to  deal  with.
      It is sufficient that the Judge  failed  to  engage  with  the  Expert
      Report.  Since I am satisfied that this  failure  potentially  affects
      all three bases of the Appellant's claim which I  accept  are  in  any
      event interwoven at least to some extent, it  follows  that  I  accept
      that the error is material.  Accordingly, I set aside the Decision.

20.   Both parties submitted that, if I found a material  error  of  law,  I
      should remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

21.   I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement  of
      the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal  of
      appeals in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows:

        "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
        proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
        the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
        that :-


        a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
           First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for
           that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-tier
           Tribunal; or


        b) the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
           necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made
           is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule
           2, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal."


22.   My decision is based on the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  and  make
      findings on evidence on which the  Appellant  places  heavy  reliance,
      namely the Expert Report.  Accordingly, in the interests of a fair and
      just disposal of the Appellant's protection claim, I am satisfied that
      it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
      re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Jessica Pacey.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jessica  Pacey
promulgated on 14 September 2018 is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Jessica Pacey.
 Signed          [pic] Dated: 7 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
