
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04475/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 January 2020                             |On 16 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                HAWRAMAN [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  He had  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Parkes of 29 August 2019  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision made by the respondent on 26 April 2019 to  refuse
    his protection claim. The appellant's grounds  are  threefold.   It  is
    contended that the judge erred:

    (1)  in irrationally providing inadequate reasons for finding that  the
         appellant is not at risk of persecution  upon  return  to  Iran  or
         alternatively Iraq;


    (2)  failing to apply country guidance in respect  of  return  directly
         from the UK to the Iraqi Kurdistan Region (IKR)  and  in  assessing
         whether it would be unreasonable and/or unduly harsh to expect  the
         appellant to reintegrate into the IKR;


    (3)  failing to make findings on the appellant's claim under  paragraph
         276ADE(i)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


    I am grateful to both representatives for their succinct submissions.


2.   I see no arguable merit in ground 1.  It is unparticularised and  as  a
    reasons challenge does not address the evident fact that the judge gave
    detailed reasons at  paragraphs  12  to  21  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant had not shown that he had ever faced difficulties in the  IKR
    from Ettela'at.

3.   Before proceeding to grounds 2 and 3,  I note that the  respondent  did
    not submit a reply seeking to challenge the finding of the  judge  made
    at paragraph 22 that the appellant having refugee  status  in  the  IKR
    meant that he would meet the relevant criteria for  refugee  status  so
    far as Iran was concerned.  In the  respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter it was concluded that there was no reason to consider  that  the
    appellant could not return  to  Iran.   Whilst  I  consider  that  that
    position has much to commend it, the judge's finding  to  the  contrary
    was not challenged by the  respondent.   Accordingly,  the  only  issue
    before me is whether or not the judge was entitled to conclude that the
    appellant could be returned to Iraq.

4.   Insofar as ground 2 seeks to rely  on  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant could be returned directly to the IKR, I do not consider that
    this constituted any legal error on the part of the judge.  It is  true
    that in AAH [2018] (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  UKUT
    00212 the headnote at paragraph 2 states that there  are  currently  no
    international flights to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR); it  is  stated
    that all returns from the United Kingdom are to Baghdad.  However,  AAH
    was heard in February 2018 and the decision of the respondent was  made
    in April 2019 and the respondent identified at paragraph  84  that  the
    appellant would be returned to Sulaymaniyah  International  Airport  or
    alternatively could take a direct flight  to  Erbil.   The  appellant's
    grounds fail to identify any background country material  contradicting
    that position  taken  by  the  respondent.   There  was  no  background
    material different from the position taken by the  respondent  produced
    by the appellant at the hearing before  the  judge.   Accordingly,  the
    judge did not err in finding at paragraphs 24 to 26 that the  appellant
    would be able to avail himself of direct flights to the IKR.

5.   Insofar as  the  grounds  contend  that  it  was  contrary  to  country
    guidance in particular that as revised by the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
    (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, again I see no legal error on the  part  of
    the judge.  The Tribunal country guidance in relation to the  CSID  was
    clearly concerned  with  persons  who  were  nationals  of  Iraq.   The
    appellant was not a national of Iraq.  It was never found by the  judge
    in any event that the appellant would be in the position of  having  to
    return to central or southern Iraq via Baghdad.   The  only  issue  was
    whether or not upon arrival in the IKR by direct flight  the  appellant
    would be able to live in safety and reasonably.

6.   This brings me to the third limb of ground 2 which contended  that  the
    judge had failed to apply country guidance relating to the  ability  of
    the appellant to relocate to the IKR.  However (leaving aside that  the
    case was not even strictly speaking one concerned with  relocation  but
    with return to a home area and so it was not  even  necessary  for  the
    judge to consider reasonableness) , again I do not consider that it was
    incumbent on the judge to treat the guidance given in AAH  as  relevant
    to the circumstances of the appellant.  On  the  judge's  findings  the
    appellant was in possession  of  an  Iraq  refugee  card  and  a  UNHCR
    certificate which the Home Office had confirmed could be used by him to
    return to the IKR.  The appellant had  lived  in  the  Barika  camp  in
    Sulaymaniyah previously and the judge addressed the issue  of  internal
    relocation at paragraphs 29 and 30 as follows:

         "29. The  Appellant  lived  for  many  years  in  the  IKR  without
             difficulty.  He obtained work regularly and was able to save a
             considerable sum which enabled him to travel to the UK.  There
             is no evidence to show that the Appellant could not return  to
             the IKR or that his circumstances there  would  be  materially
             different on return compared to his situation before  he  left
             the area.


         30.  The evidence does not show that as matters stand it  would  be
             unreasonable or harsh to expect the Appellant to return and re-
             establish himself there in the same way  that  he  did  before
             leaving.   The  Appellant's  circumstances  do  not  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules, there are no compelling
             circumstances and his removal would not place the UK in breach
             of its international obligations".


    In my judgment the assessment made by the judge of  the  reasonableness
    of relocation in respect of the appellant was entirely within the range
    of reasonable responses.  The appellant  did  not  produce  before  the
    judge, nor indeed has the appellant produced with the grounds of appeal
    before me, any background evidence to indicate that the IKR authorities
    would not readmit a person recognised as a refugee from  Iran  who  had
    resided in the Barika camp.  By contrast, the respondent had identified
    background country information in  the  form  of  the  Iranian  Kurdish
    Refugees in the Kurdistan Region of  Iraq  (KRI):  Report  from  Danish
    Immigration Service's fact-finding mission to Erbil,  Suleimaniyah  and
    Dohuk, KRI 7 to 24 March 2011 to  the  effect  that  the  head  of  the
    political department in Erbil had stated that it  was  considered  safe
    and secure for Iranian refugees to reside in the KRI.  (Paragraph  49).
    The respondent had also noted that the appellant had received  five  or
    six years of education in Iraq and had worked in Iraq and had been able
    to save the equivalent of US$9,000 to US$10,000  through  his  work  to
    fund his journey to the UK and he was in contact with a friend in Iraq.
     These matters were clearly in the mind of the judge at  paragraphs  29
    and 30 and the conclusion set out  in  those  paragraphs  was  properly
    based on the background evidence before the judge.  The grounds fail to
    identify any background country evidence to the contrary.


7.   In relation to ground 3, in  light  of  the  judge's  findings  on  the
    likely circumstances of the appellant on return to the IKR, it was  not
    realistically arguable that the appellant could  show  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to his return there and  he  had  singularly
    failed to identify any significant family or private life circumstances
    that would make his return unjustifiably harsh.

8.      For the above reasons I consider that the grounds are not made  out.
     Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Judge must stand.


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2020

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

