
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04545/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th September 2019               |On 9th October 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'TTN'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.     Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Allison, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Davidson (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 28 June 2019, by which
he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal in a
decision dated 30 April 2019 of her protection and human rights claims.

In essence, the appellant's claims involved the following issues: that by
virtue of her attendance at demonstrations on 20 March; and 3 and 5
November 2015, the appellant and her father came to the adverse interest of
the authorities in Vietnam, her country of origin. She therefore feared
persecution on the grounds of her political beliefs, as a result of
attending demonstrations in Vietnam and also as a result of 'sur place'
activities in the United Kingdom, specifically her attendance at a
demonstration on 28 April 2019 outside the Vietnamese Embassy in the UK.
She also claimed no longer to be in contact with her father in Vietnam as a
result of his detention by the authorities.

The core points taken against the appellant by the respondent related to an
inconsistency in the date on which the demonstration took place in March
2015, as objective external evidence (a media report) suggested that the
demonstration had taken place on 22 March 2015, not 20 March as the
appellant claimed; the implausibility of the appellant's account that her
father would have been detained following the demonstration on 5 November
2015, as the objective evidence suggested that low-level protests against
the visit of the Chinese Premier were tolerated; inconsistencies in her
account of where a notice had been attached to the family home; and,
finally, the respondent regarded as speculative the appellant's concerns
about her father, for which she relied solely on what she had been told by
his business partner.

The FtT's decision

The FtT was not impressed by the credibility of the appellant's evidence.
The FtT accepted that a demonstration may have taken place in 20 March
2015, but in his words, at [37], there was no evidence that the appellant
had been the subject of adverse attention as a result.  The appellant had
provided no explanation for why she would be detained, aged 15, for taking
part in a demonstration in March 2015 attended by many people.  The FtT did
not regard as plausible her account of attending a demonstration with her
father on 5 November 2015; and concluded, at [41], that she had not shown,
to the lower standard of proof, that their attendance had resulted in her
father's arrest and detention. The FtT found that objective country
information supported the claim that political activists and human rights
defenders were at risk of adverse attention, which could extend to family
members, but there was no evidence that the appellant and her father were
perceived as being critical of the Vietnamese government. The FtT also
found that her credibility was damaged by her lack of follow-up with the
International Red Cross in tracing her father; and her giving a rental
property as a contact address to the International Red Cross, which was
likely to result in him not being found.

Having considered the evidence as a whole, the FtT found that the
appellant's account of adverse interest in Vietnam and fleeing from there
as a result, was not credible, and she would not face any risk of adverse
interest on her return. He regarded her participation in demonstrations in
the UK as designed to bolster her claim. The FtT dismissed her asylum and
humanitarian protection appeals and also dismissed her appeal by reference
to article 8 in respect of her right to a private life.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on 11 July 2019, which are
essentially:

    (1)  the FtT had failed to explain why the appellant's account of
         attending the demonstration on 5 November 2015 was inconsistent
         with objective evidence;

    (2)  the FtT had erred in finding that there was no evidence  that  the
         appellant had attended the  demonstration  on  20  March  2015.  In
         contrast, the appellant had given evidence on that very point.  Not
         only was there  an  error  in  equating  a  lack  of  corroborative
         evidence with a lack of evidence; but there was in  fact  objective
         evidence suggesting that the protests had taken place;

    (3)  the FtT  had  improperly  made  adverse  credibility  findings  in
         relation to the appellant's  contact  with  the  International  Red
         Cross, when this  was  not  an  issue  relied  on  in  the  refusal
         decision, and there was no compliance with rule 24(2) the  Tribunal
         Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (IAC) Rules 2014, in order for  the
         respondent to rely on any new ground not included  in  the  refusal
         decision;

    (4)  the FtT failed  to  explain  why  he  preferred  the  respondent's
         Country Policy and Information Note ('CPIN'), that risk was limited
         to high profile activists, to extensive external evidence submitted
         by  the  appellant  which  suggested  risks  beyond  high   profile
         activists.

 1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes granted permission to  appeal  against
    the FtT's decision on 6 August 2019.  While he regarded  brevity  as  a
    virtue, he  concluded  that  there  was  arguably  some  merit  in  the
    assertion that the FtT did not adequately explain  his  preference  for
    the CPIN, as opposed to evidence adduced  by  the  appellant;  and  the
    findings about the appellant's attempts at  tracing  had  arguably  not
    been properly considered.  While Judge Parkes regarded  the  appeal  in
    relation to 'sur place' activity as having less  merit,  the  grant  of
    permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before us

Both representatives agreed that the FtT's reference to there being no
evidence that the appellant had been the subject of adverse interest must
properly be read as there being no evidence corroborating the appellant's
oral evidence.   Mr Allison and Mr Lindsay relied on the grounds of appeal
and the refusal decision respectively.

Discussion and conclusions

We agree with FtT Judge Parkes' observation that brevity is a virtue in the
reasons for a judicial decision. We accept Mr Lindsay's submission that an
assertion that the FtT did not provide adequate reasons, sufficient to
explain how he reached his decision, is a high hurdle for the appellant to
meet, and that we should be wary of focussing on minor aspects of a
decision, by which an attempt may be made to 'pick holes' in it.   We were
conscious of the recent guidance provided by the Court of Appeal in UT (Sri
Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095.  Nevertheless, we concluded that the
FtT's reasons were insufficient to explain his analysis and conclusions.
Mr Allison submitted that if the brief conclusions in the FtT's decision
were stripped away, there was very little by way of reasoning.

Taking two aspect of the decision, the first was at [40]. This was the
conclusion that the appellant's account of her attendance at the
demonstration on 5 November 2015 was inconsistent with the 'Radio Free
Asia' article, which referred to government interventions in protests in Ho
Chi Minh City and Hanoi. The FtT described the article as inconsistent with
the appellant's account.  The FtT's decision did not then explain in what
way the account was not consistent and why the inconsistency went to the
core of the appellant's credibility.  The appellant is therefore unable to
understand why her evidence was not accepted. That must amount to an error
of law.

In relation to the same demonstration, the FtT then went on to state that
even if the appellant were given the benefit of the doubt that she had
attended the November 2015 demonstration with her father, she had not shown
to the lower evidential standard that her father had been arrested and
detained as a result.  It is not entirely clear why the FtT reached this
conclusion, although the implication appears to be at [41] to [43] because
the appellant's father was not of sufficient political profile, which in
turn leads on to the final ground of appeal in relation to the FtT's
reasoning about why he preferred the respondent's CPIN evidence about risk
of detention being limited to those with a high profile, as opposed to the
external evidence referred to by Mr Allison in his skeleton argument before
the FtT, including Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and US State
Department reports, which suggested more widespread adverse attention.  The
FtT's conclusion on the point, at [43], comprises a single sentence, which
states that 'the objective evidence does not indicate that a person such as
the appellant's father who is not a major political figure would be
arrested and detained for four years.'  This begs the question of how the
FtT reached that conclusion. Once again, we conclude that the absence of
analysis and a basis for which the appellant can understand why her
evidence was not accepted amounts to an error of law.

While the FtT considered whether the appellant might be at risk on return
because of her involvement in 'sur place' activities while in the UK, even
if those activities were contrived for the purposes of bolstering a
protection claim([47]), the FtT concluded that she did not 'meet the
profile of a person who would be at risk.'   Once again, that begged the
question of what such a profile would be, and whether FtT intended to refer
to someone of sufficiently high political profile. If it did mean that, the
FtT's analysis was then in turn weakened by the FtT's failure, as already
discussed, to explain his resolution of external evidence about whether
risk was limited to high-profile individuals.

We also accepted Mr Allison's criticism of the FtT's assessment of the
appellant's account of her attendance and arrest at the demonstration on 20
March 2015.  Setting aside the issue of the reference to there being 'no
evidence' ([37]) (for which we must read no corroborative evidence), the
reasoning is then limited to the fact of the appellant being only 15 years
old; and the demonstration being attended by many people; and not objected
to by the authorities ([38]). The FtT did not explain the relevance of the
appellant's age and the fact that many people attended the demonstration as
being factors damaging the plausibility of the account. The FtT also did
not explain on what basis he reached the conclusion that the government
tolerated the demonstration (for example, by reference to any evidence
contradicting the appellant's oral account that there was such interest).
The FtT's findings were not adequately explained or reasoned.

The FtT had also drawn adverse inferences against the appellant's
credibility because of the fact that she had given a last-known temporary
rental address to the International Red Cross for the purposes of attempts
to trace her father, whom she believed to have been detained by the
authorities ([44]).   We accept Mr Allison's submission that it is unclear
from the reasoning what more the FtT expected to the appellant to have
done, such that she would not have adverse inferences against her
credibility, even if we ignore that the issue was never referred to in the
refusal decision.  We also concluded that the FtT erred in law in treating
the appellant's failure to follow-up on tracing enquiries with the
International Red Cross or other agencies as damaging the appellant's
credibility, without considering whether that responsibility lay with the
local authority in whose care the appellant was, or the respondent, given
that she was a 15-year old minor at the time of leaving Vietnam.

In summary, the adverse credibility finding on the basis of the
International Red Cross tracing enquiries is very brief and it is not clear
how much weight the FtT placed on what he regarded as an adverse factor. We
were unable to say that it was a minor factor, in the absence of which the
FtT would have reached the same conclusion.

For all of the above reasons, the FtT's analysis, which went to the core of
the appellant's credibility, was insufficiently reasoned so that the FtT's
decision cannot stand.

Decision on error of law

We conclude that there are material errors of law in the FtT's decision,
which is set aside in its entirety, without any preserved findings of fact.


Disposal

 2. With reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Practice  Direction  and  the
    necessary fact-finding, this is a case that must  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

 3. The remittal shall involve a complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal.  All
    aspects of the claims must be addressed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
we set it aside.

We remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

1.   This appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
rehearing with no preserved findings of fact;

2.   The remitted appeal shall not be heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Davidson.

3.   The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  7 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
