
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04719/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester                      Decision Promulgated
On 24th August 2018                                                  On
25th September 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   Ms M.M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                     Appellant
                                     and

              SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Ms Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal the decision of
      First-tier Judge RD Taylor.

   2. The appellant is a national of Albania who claimed protection saying
      she was forced into prostitute in her home country and she would be at
      risk if returned. Her daughter, born October 2014, is her dependent.

   3. The respondent did not find the account credible and did not accept
      she was a single mother. In any event, there was sufficiency of
      protection and if necessary she could relocate to a different part of
      Albania to avoid the claimed traffickers.

   4. The Competent Authority had concluded she was not the victim of
      trafficking. First-tier Judge RD Taylor did not find her credible. The
      judge noted that the conception of her child coincided with a time
      when she said her husband returned from Italy. Consequently, the
      claimed risk of re-trafficking and difficulties with her own family
      did not arise.

   5. Permission was granted on the basis it was arguable the negative
      credibility findings were flawed by not looking at the claim in the
      context of the country situation and information about trafficking.
      Reference was also made to the decisions of MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA
      Civ 594 and R -v- SSHD application of FK [2016] EW856.

   6. It is not apparent how these decisions assisted the appellant. They
      deal with how a tribunal should deal with trafficking claims in light
      of a decision by the Competent Authority. Para 79 of MS (Pakistan)
      stated the trafficking decision is only susceptible to an indirect
      challenge on a statutory appeal where it is demonstrated to have been
      perverse or irrational or one which was not open to the authority. The
      Queen (on the application of) FK [2016] EWHC 56 (Admin) is also
      referred to in the grant of permission. It was a judicial review of a
      conclusive grounds decision. In the judicial review proceedings that
      decision was found to be unlawful in failing to consider the Guidance.
      In the present case there was no dispute about the trafficking
      decision.

   7. It was also argued that the judge in making negative credibility
      findings failed to take into account the circumstances of the
      appellant's interview whereby she had recently given birth and her
      child, who was present, was distressed.

The Upper Tribunal

   8. At hearing, Ms Wilkins indicated she was no longer pursuing the
      argument advanced in relation to MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594 and
      the decision of the competent authority.


   9.  Having considered the decision in its entirety, along with a refusal
      letter and the points made by the representatives I find no material
      error of law demonstrated.

  10. I find this to be a well-reasoned decision which contains a concise
      record of the issues and the proceedings. The central issue was the
      credibility of the claim. The claim did not fail simply on the basis
      of inconsistencies in the account. Rather, the appellant was caught
      out in a lie by reason of her passport demonstrating travel to Italy.
      She said she had never been to Italy. Her husband was working there
      since mid-August 2013. Checks with the British authorities track
      movement from her passport to Italy. The travel from the passport
      contradicted her claim of events happening in Albania. When this was
      put to her it was then suggested on her behalf her passport might have
      been stolen and used for onward travel.

  11. The decision was not made in a vacuum. The judge had the refusal
      letter which refers to country information as well as the appellant's
      bundle and information on the prevalence of prostitution. Paragraph 8
      of the decision refers to the country information received by the
      judge. The judge was also clearly aware that the appellant was
      distracted because of her baby at her interview and the suggestion she
      was vulnerable.

  12. At paragraph 10 the judge summarises the cross-examination. The
      appellant claimed she was forced into prostitution in mid February
      2014 and did not know who the father of her child was. Her child was
      born on 10 October 2014. Medical records suggested she became pregnant
      in around December 2013 or early January 2014. This simple chronology
      undermined her suggestion the child was conceived as a result of her
      activities as a prostitute. In cross-examination the appellant sought
      to argue she did not know when her last period was. It was for the
      judge to assess this evidence.

  13. There were other inconsistencies which undermined her credibility. She
      was university educated having enrolled in 2012 but claimed her
      husband stopped her attending in September 2013. However, she had
      married on 5 August 2013 and her husband had gone to Italy in mid
      August.

  14. She was asked whether her husband returned to Albania. She referred
      him visiting for a week in December 2013. However, in her interview
      she said it was January 2014. When this inconsistency was put she said
      it was the baby that distracted her. There was also inconsistency
      between her account of always carrying her passport and her saying it
      was at her husband's house.

  15. At paragraph 17 the judge deals with the central issue of the
      appellant's credibility. The judge highlighted not so much the
      implausibility of the account but the evidence produced by the
      respondent from the British Embassy about her movements. This was
      strong evidence that fundamentally undermined her claim. The judge was
      aware of the claim by the appellant that her passport could have been
      used by third parties. The judge gave a clear reason for rejecting
      this. This was a matter entirely for the judge. At paragraph 18 the
      judge advances reasons for not finding the claim credible. I can find
      no fault with this.

  16. In conclusion, I find this to be a well-reasoned and careful decision.
      The judge did not find the appellant credible and gave sustainable
      reasons for doing so, largely supported by external evidence. The
      judge alluded to the country information about trafficking and the
      claim that the appellant was a vulnerable witness. The decision
      indicates the judge was not operating in a vacuum but appreciated
      fully the arguments made.

Decision


No material error of law in the decision of First-tier Judge RD Taylor has
been established. Consequently, that decision, dismissing the appellant's
appeal shall stand.
Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge












