
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04130/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 April 2019                         |On 29 May 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     S U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Puar instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the pubic identifying the appellant.  A failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant claims to be a national of Myanmar, born on 15 May  1986,
    and to be of Rohingya ethnicity.  He claims that in 1992, together with
    his family, he fled Myanmar and went to Bangladesh where he lived in  a
    refugee camp until 1998.  He claims that  he  left  Bangladesh  in  May
    2016, with the assistance of an agent, travelling to  Russia  and  from
    there entering the UK clandestinely  in  a  lorry  in  June  2016.   He
    claimed asylum on 12 December 2016.  That  application,  together  with
    his humanitarian protection and human rights claims, were refused on  9
    March 2017.  Principally, the Secretary of State did not accept that he
    was of Rohingya ethnicity and from Myanmar.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a determination promulgated on 27 June 2018, Judge Clemes
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  Like the Secretary of
    State, he did not accept that the appellant was  from  Myanmar  and  of
    Rohingya ethnicity but that he was, rather, from Bangladesh.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that  decision  on  a
    number of grounds, in particular that in reaching his  adverse  finding
    Judge Clemes had failed  properly  to  take  into  account  the  expert
    evidence of Mr Joshua Kurintzick in his report dated 20 May 2018  which
    supported the appellant's claim, in particular his  claimed  ethnicity,
    based upon, for example, his language and the authenticity of a "family
    book" upon which he relied.

 5. On 7 August 2018, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Haria)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the ground that the judge had  failed
    to give due consideration to that expert report. The respondent did not
    file a rule 24 response.

 6. Before us, Mr Mills, who represented the Secretary of  State,  accepted
    that the judge had erred in law by failing to give proper consideration
    to the expert report, in particular  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    language (and its relevance to his ethnicity) and in  relation  to  the
    authenticity of the relied upon "family book".  Mr Mills accepted  that
    the judge had fallen into the so-called Mibanga ([2005] EWCA  Civ  367)
    error, in that he had only made reference to the expert  report  having
    already concluded that the appellant's account was  not  credible.   Mr
    Mills invited us to set aside the judge's decision and to remit  it  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

 7. Whilst Mr Puar, who represented the appellant, did not seek  to  oppose
    Mr Mills' concession that the judge's decision could not stand  due  to
    his failure to properly consider the expert report, he  invited  us  to
    remake the decision on the  papers  and  to  find  in  the  appellant's
    favour.

 8. We are satisfied  that  Mr  Mills'  concession  is  properly  made  and
    consider that the proper disposal of the appeal, having set  aside  the
    judge's decision, is to remit it for a de novo rehearing.

 9. We are satisfied that in reaching an adverse conclusion in relation  to
    the appellant's spoken language (at para 22) and as to the authenticity
    of the "family book" (at para 23), the judge failed properly or at  all
    to consider the expert evidence which supported the  appellant's  claim
    in respect of the language he spoke and the authenticity of the "family
    book".  The judge fails to refer to  the  evidence  in  regard  to  the
    language issue in para 22 and, in respect of the "family  book",  fails
    properly to have regard to the expert's view that it  is  authentic  in
    para 23 of his determination.   Those  errors  are,  in  our  judgment,
    compounded by the judge's treatment of the expert evidence at  para  28
    where, having already found  the  appellant  not  to  be  credible,  he
    characterised the expert report  as  only  being  concerned  with  "the
    plight of Rohingya refugees ejected  by  Myanmar"  and  the  "state  of
    living conditions in the camps".  The expert report was,  as  Mr  Mills
    conceded, of much wider scope and support to the appellant.

10. We do not, however, consider it appropriate  to  remake  the  decision,
    including reaching a finding in respect of the appellant's credibility,
    on the basis only of submissions.  We  note  that  the  appellant  has,
    since  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  hearing,  submitted  a  substantial
    "supplementary bundle" on 10 April 2019.  As far as we can tell,  these
    documents  were  never  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    addition, we have not had the opportunity to hear  the  appellant  give
    oral evidence and given that his credibility is in  issue,  we  do  not
    consider it appropriate to remake the decision de novo on the papers.

Decision

11. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    We set aside that decision.

12. In the light of the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and  in
    the light of para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the
    proper disposal of this appeal is to remit it for a de  novo  rehearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Clemes.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 29 May 2019


