
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04745/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 31 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                       JUDE ARJUNA CRIZANTHA LAZAROUS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision, dated 25 April 2019, declining to  grant
         asylum, humanitarian protection, or any other form of leave.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (in
         general terms only).

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge David C Clapham SSC,  promulgated  on  22
         August 2019, dismissing the appellant's appeal.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  his
         application for permission, filed on 15 October 2019.

      v) The grant of  permission  by  the  UT,  dated  4  November  2019  -
         principally on [4] of the grounds and [53] of the  FtT's  decision,
         regarding evaluation of a "witness summons", but not excluding  the
         other grounds.

     vi) The respondent's response under rule 24, dated 20 November 2019.

    vii) Directions of the UT, set  on  16  January  2020,  for  parties  to
         clarify whether the appellant had asked the SSHD to make  enquiries
         in Sri Lanka, and whether the SSHD had done so.

   viii) The  SSHD's  response,  dated  24  January  2020,  clarifying  that
         enquiries were made through the British High Commission at  Kandana
         police station on  30  November  2016,  and  documents  found  "not
         genuine".

     ix)  The  appellant's  response,  dated  6   March   2020,   clarifying
         verification procedures by his  solicitors  through  a  Sri  Lankan
         lawyer and with Kandana police station  in  January  2017;  British
         Embassy staff had been at the police station on 30  November  2016;
         the record was not available, but a complaint had  been  lodged  by
         the appellant on 13 December  2009  "regarding  receiving  a  death
         threat".

      x) Further directions of the UT, dated 6 and issued on 29 April  2020,
         with a view  to  deciding  without  a  hearing  whether  the  FtT's
         decision involved the making of an error of law and, if so, whether
         it should be set aside.

     xi) Submissions for the appellant made on 13 May 2020, inviting the  UT
         at [8] to uphold the grounds, set aside  the  FtT's  decision,  and
         remit the case to the FtT; and at [9], alternatively,  "to  further
         consider matters ... through agents continuing their submissions".

    xii) The SSHD's submissions, headed "skeleton argument",  dated  15  May
         2020, raising  no  objection  to  decision  "on  the  papers",  and
         inviting the UT to find no material error of law, and to uphold the
         decision of the FtT.

 2. The first question is whether a hearing is required to resolve error of
    law.

 3. Parties have had a prolonged opportunity to advance their arguments  in
    writing.   While oral advocacy is often  of  great  value,  it  is  not
    required in every case.  Fair resolution of issues such as the  present
    on written materials is carried out in this and in other jurisdictions,
    and is well within professional and judicial competence.  The appellant
    does not develop any argument on why oral submissions might  be  needed
    in  his  particular  case.   His  alternative  request,  in  colloquial
    language, seeks "a second bite at the cherry".

 4. I find that this case may now be determined justly, in terms of rules 2
    and 34, without an oral hearing.

 5. The reason for not concluding the hearing on 16 January 2020  was  that
    in spite of the  history  of  the  case  over  several  years,  neither
    representative, on the day, could clarify the point at 1 (vii) above.

 6. If there was any lack of clarity on that matter in the FtT, it appeared
    to be through little, if any, fault of  the  judge;  but  there  was  a
    possibility of inadvertent procedural unfairness.

 7. Parties have dealt with that matter in the  submissions  listed  above.
    It is now clear that a representative of the  British  High  Commission
    did make an enquiry at Kandana Police Station on 1 December  2016,  but
    there was only one visit, not two, as the appellant suggested - see the
    SSHD's submission at [7].

 8. The Judge commented at  [60]  that  he  "would  be  very  surprised  if
    officers of the BHC had ... gone to Kandana  police  station  twice  to
    check ... documents".  They did not go twice.

 9. The judge went on, "I would be surprised if British  officials  started
    to try to bring the appellant back to Sri Lanka".

10. Such behaviour by officials in Sri Lanka would be surprising, but I  do
    find the Judge's remarks unclear.  Verification of  documents  is  only
    indirectly linked to the return of the appellant, and return  would  be
    organised from the UK, not from Sri Lanka.

11. The SSHD's submission at [7], is that even if there was "an element  of
    confusion" by the FtT it is immaterial in light of its other reasoning.

12. Any lack of clarity in those remarks needs to be put in context.

13.  The  main  issue  on  which  permission  was  granted   was   possible
    misinterpretation of the court document.   The  SSHD  argues  that  the
    judge's main point was that the documents were unreliable.  It was  not
    that they appeared to relate to a witness  summons  rather  than  to  a
    criminal charge.  That point is well taken.

14.  In  any  event,  the  appellant  has  not  shown  that   the   judge's
    interpretation of the document as a summons,  not  a  charge,  was  not
    sensibly open to him, or that it lacks reasoning.

15. The appellant relies on a  trace  emerging  from  his  later  enquiries
    through  the  police  station;  but  that  refers  to   the   appellant
    complaining of a threat received by him, not  to  criminal  proceedings
    against him (translation of police letter dated 15 January 2017, page 7
    of appellant's submission / "inventory 8", 6 March 2020).

16. If any point about that document was missed, it appears to run contrary
    to the appellant's case.  He has not explained how it might improve his
    position.

17. The themes of  the  FtT's  decision  are  that  the  previous  negative
    tribunal decision  was  the  starting  point;  there  was  no  reliable
    evidence to displace that; and, prominently, the  unlikelihood  of  his
    enemy in Sri Lanka, Mr Bandara, waiting 9 years  to  bring  proceedings
    against him in Sri Lanka, knowing that he was in the UK.

18. The appellant suggests that Mr Bandara may have wished to trap  him  by
    ensuring he was on a "stop list", in case of his return to the country;
    but he not shown that point, or the rest of his grounds, to  amount  to
    more than continued insistence and selective disagreement on the facts.



19. At best, the grounds show  that  the  judge  may  have  been  led  into
    confusion about the extent of enquiries made in Sri Lanka.  This  is  a
    minor element, which does not undermine his overall reasoning.

20. The SSHD at [8] makes a sound final point.  The FtT at [68] held  that,
    taken at highest, the claim disclosed prosecution not persecution,  and
    therefore failed on any view of credibility.  Although the  grounds  of
    appeal to the UT burrow into  the  facts,  there  is  nothing  directed
    against that conclusion, and the appellant has not  sought  to  counter
    the SSHD's point.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

23. The date of this determination is to be  treated  as  the  date  it  is
    issued to parties.



        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
            On 21 July 2020




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.
