
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Numbers: PA/04466/2019

                                                         PA/04467/2019
     PA/04469/2019
     PA/04471/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 14 November 2019                         |On: 21 November 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     RR
                                     AR
                                     MR1
                                     MR2

                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Khan, instructed by Leonard & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants appeal, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the respondent's decision  to
refuse their protection and human rights claims.

The appellants are citizens of Afghanistan,  born  on  1  January  1988,  14
September 1946, 14 June 1981  and  15  May  1980  respectively.  The  second
appellant is the father of the first appellant  and  the  third  and  fourth
appellants are the sisters of the first appellant. The appellants,  together
with the first appellant's wife, arrived in the  UK  on  26  June  2018  and
claimed asylum on arrival.  They  were  interviewed  about  their  claim  in
November 2018. Their claims were refused on 5 April 2019 and  their  appeals
against that decision were heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 13 June  2019
and dismissed in a decision of 28 June 2019.

The appellants claimed to be Shia Muslims from Kabul who  were  attacked  by
members of the Taliban looking for the first appellant's  brother,  S.  They
claim that the first and second appellants were beaten  and  threatened  and
the first appellant's wife and his sisters were beaten and  threatened  with
kidnapping and forced marriage. They fled Afghanistan  as  they  feared  the
Taliban, because they were Shia and also because of their connection to S.

The appellants' appeals against the respondent's  decisions  were  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson. The judge heard evidence  from  all  the
appellants, including the first  appellant's  wife.  The  first  appellant's
wife and sisters all stated that  they  were  teachers  in  Afghanistan  but
experienced harassment and  discrimination  because  they  were  women.  The
fourth appellant, MR2, gave evidence  about  her  medical  condition,  which
included high blood pressure  and  a  kidney  condition  requiring  dialysis
three times a week.

The judge found the appellants' evidence to  be  inconsistent  and  did  not
accept that they were at risk on return to Afghanistan  on  account  of  the
Taliban's claimed interest in S, their Shia  faith  or  on  account  of  the
women being teachers. The judge did not accept that MR2's medical  condition
met the threshold for establishing an Article 3 claim and she dismissed  the
appeals on all grounds.

The appellants sought permission to appeal Judge Davidson's decision on  two
grounds, the first being the  judge's  failure  to  consider  Article  8  in
relation to the fourth appellant and the second being  the  judge's  failure
fully to appreciate the appellants'  claim  to  fear  persecution  from  the
Taliban.

Permission to appeal was granted by the First tier  Tribunal  with  specific
reference to the first ground, but stating that all grounds  were  arguable.


The appeals were listed for a hearing on 23 September  2019.  Prior  to  the
hearing, the appellants made a written request for  an  adjournment  on  the
basis that they required legal representation  but  were  unable  to  secure
such representation as they were awaiting  a  legal  aid  certificate.  That
request was refused on 20 September 2019. At the  hearing  counsel  appeared
for the appellants on a pro bono basis to renew the adjournment  request  on
the basis that the legal aid certificate was still awaited.  He  made  clear
that he was not able to represent the appellants for a full hearing  without
funding being in place and  that  the  appellants  would  be  in  difficulty
proceeding with the appeal as there was no interpreter available  for  them.
The Home Office Presenting Officer,  Mr  Clarke,  had  no  objection  to  an
adjournment and accordingly, and in the interests of justice,  I  agreed  to
adjourn the matter and issued the following notice:

                           "NOTICE AND DIRECTIONS

       1.    Following a grant of permission to the appellants, this matter
          came before the Upper Tribunal today for an error of law  hearing
          with respect to a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidson
          dismissing the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  Secretary  of
          State's decision to refuse  their  protection  and  human  rights
          claim.


       2.    The case was adjourned, at the appellants' request,  owing  to
          the  delay  in  the  Legal  Aid  Agency  approving  a  Legal  Aid
          Certificate to enable the appellants'  legal  representatives  to
          appear on their behalf. There was no objection to the adjournment
          request and accordingly  the  matter  will  be  re-listed  for  a
          hearing on another date, when the Upper  Tribunal  will  consider
          documentary evidence and submissions from both  parties  for  the
          purpose of determining whether the First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
          error of law.

       3.    If the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside the decision of the
          First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal may go on to re-make  the
          decision without any further hearing, in particular if a material
          error of law is identified in respect to the first ground  alone.
          The appellant is therefore directed to ensure that  all  relevant
          evidence upon which reliance is to be placed is available at  the
          hearing, including, with respect to  the  first  ground,  updated
          medical reports for the appellant PA/04469/2019.

       4.    Not later than 7 days before the hearing,  the  appellants  or
          their representatives are to file with  the  Tribunal  and  serve
          upon the respondent an indexed and  paginated  bundle  containing
          all documentary evidence relied upon."


The matter then  came  before  me  again  today.  No  further  evidence  was
submitted prior to the hearing, but  at  the  hearing  Mr  Khan  produced  a
bundle of supplementary evidence consisting of medical records for MR2.  The
medical records and letters, although not previously before  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge, in fact largely pre-dated the evidence before her,  and  the
most recent detailed  letter  in  that  supplementary  bundle  had  actually
already been produced before the First-tier Tribunal.

Mr Khan made submissions on both grounds  of  appeal.  With  regard  to  the
second ground, namely the judge's  failure  to  appreciate  the  appellants'
claim, he submitted that it was credible for the Taliban  to  have  come  to
the appellants' house, contrary to the judge's findings at  [38];  that  the
judge was wrong to  make  adverse  credibility  findings  about  the  second
appellant's level of Pashtu as he understood a little of the language;  that
the appellants' account  of  being  targeted  because  they  were  Shia  was
credible;  that the judge was wrong to make the  adverse  findings  at  [40]
and [41] as it  was  credible  that  the  women  were  targeted  as  defying
convention by not being married;  that  the  judge's  finding  at  [42]  was
irrational as it was credible that the Taliban would flee  when  they  heard
gunshots since Kabul was under the control of the government; and  that  the
appellants' account of the women being at risk  as  educators  was  credible
and the judge had erred by finding that it was not. Mr Khan  submitted  that
the judge's approach was irrational and unfair as  the  appellants'  account
could have been credible in all those respects.

As for the first ground, Mr Khan confirmed that the appellants had not  been
pursuing an Article 3 claim and that they accepted that they could not  meet
the Article 3  threshold  in  relation  to  MR2's  condition.  He  confirmed
further that it was accepted that  there  were  renal  dialysis  clinics  in
Kabul and that MR2 had had treatment in Kabul. However the judge had  failed
to consider MR2's Article 8 rights in the  context  of  the  instability  in
Kabul and the relationship that she had developed with  those  treating  her
in the UK, not only for kidney failure but also  bone  marrow  problems  and
DVT.  There  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  MR2's  integration   in
Afghanistan on that basis. The judge should have considered Article 8.

Ms Jones submitted that the judge had considered  all  matters  relevant  to
Article 8 but in any event, even if she had erred  by  failing  to  consider
Article 8 specifically, there was no  material  error  given  that  MR2  had
failed to discharge the burden of showing that she could not be  treated  in
Afghanistan. It was clear from the supplementary evidence produced that  she
had been treated in Afghanistan before coming to the UK. As for  the  second
ground, the judge had considered all relevant matters and had been  entitled
to conclude that the appellants' account was not credible.

Discussion.

Taking the second ground first, as Mr Khan did, it is to be noted  that  the
First-tier Tribunal, in granting permission, did not  specifically  conclude
that the ground raised an arguable challenge, but  simply  did  not  exclude
it. The ground plainly has no merit and is simply a  disagreement  with  the
judge's adverse credibility findings and her findings  on  risk  on  return.
The judge considered all the matters raised by the appellants  and  all  the
risk factors upon which they relied.  She  considered  the  account  of  the
Taliban's attack on the family home but did not find  the  account  credible
for various reasons which she gave at [37], [38], [42] and [44].  The  judge
considered the appellants' claim  to  be  at  risk  as  Shias  and  properly
addressed the matter at [39]; she  considered  the  claim  that  the  female
appellants were targeted for being women, for being teachers and  for  being
unmarried, but provided cogent reasons for rejecting that claim.  The  judge
had regard to the evidence as a whole when considering all elements  of  the
appellants' claim to be at risk but  was  fully  and  properly  entitled  to
conclude that there was no support for any of the claims in  the  background
country evidence and the Home Office CPIN  guidance.  As  such  the  judge's
conclusion, that the appellants were at no risk on  return  to  Afghanistan,
was one which was properly open to her on the evidence before her.

As for the first ground, it is indeed the case that the judge did  not  make
any particularised findings on Article 8. At [48] she concluded  that  MR2's
medical issues did not meet the threshold to establish an Article  3  claim.
That conclusion is not challenged and indeed the appellants accept that  the
Article 3 threshold could not be met and do not  pursue  such  a  claim.  It
would have been relevant and appropriate for the judge  to  then  go  on  to
address Article 8, given the matters raised about MR2's  medical  condition,
but I am in agreement with Ms Jones that her failure  to  do  so  cannot  be
considered to be a material omission in light of the very  limited  evidence
before her. The only recent and  substantive  medical  evidence  before  the
judge was a letter dated 11 June 2019 from a  Dr  M  Uniacke,  a  Consultant
Nephrologist, which the judge referred to at [11a]  and  plainly  took  into
account when considering the impact of removal  upon  the  appellants.  That
letter gave details of MR2's advanced kidney failure for which she  received
dialysis three times a week, as well as an  investigation  for  bone  marrow
failure. However there was no evidence before the judge, aside from a  brief
reference by MR2 in her statement,  of  the  availability  of  treatment  in
Afghanistan and nothing to support  a  claim  that  no  such  treatment  was
available. The respondent, on the contrary, had provided  information  about
treatment available in Kabul, in the refusal decision of 5 April  2019,  and
that is indeed confirmed by the evidence now produced (although  not  before
the judge at the time of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing)  confirming  that
MR2 had been diagnosed in Afghanistan two or three  years  previously  (page
161, dated February 2019) and  had  been  treated  there.   Accordingly  the
appellants had failed to provide any evidence to the judge to  show  a  lack
of available treatment in Afghanistan such that the impact on MR2's  quality
of life in Afghanistan could give rise to an arguable Article 8 claim.

In any event it is relevant  to  note  that  the  Court  of  Appeal,  in  GS
(India), & Ors v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA
Civ 40, made it clear that Article 8 could not be used  in  a  medical  case
simply as a substitute to Article 3 where the higher threshold could not  be
met, but that there had to be additional factors: [86]  "If  the  Article  3
claim  fails  ...  Article  8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate   or
additional factual element which  brings  the  case  within  the  Article  8
paradigm - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
affairs having some affinity with the paradigm." In  the  appellants'  case,
there were no additional elements or factors. Mr  Khan  submitted  that  the
unstable situation in Kabul and MR2's relationship with those  treating  her
in the UK were sufficient  to  demonstrate  very  significant  obstacles  to
integration in Afghanistan. However that was not  an  argument  put  to  the
judge and there was, and is, certainly  no  evidence  submitted  to  support
such an argument.

In the circumstances there was no arguable Article 8 claim before the  judge
on the evidence available and, whilst it would have been preferable for  the
judge to have specifically addressed Article 8, her failure to do so  cannot
in any way be said to be material to the outcome of the  appeal  and  cannot
require  her  otherwise  sound  decision  to  be  set   aside.   There   is,
furthermore, and in any event, nothing in the evidence now produced  by  the
appellants to suggest that there is still an arguable Article 8 case  to  be
made.

For all of these reasons I find no material error  of  law  in  the  judge's
decision requiring it to be set aside. I uphold the judge's decision.






DECISION

The appellants'  appeals  are  accordingly  dismissed.  The  making  of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a  point  of
law requiring the decision to be set aside.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
appellants' appeals therefore stands.



    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.







Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 14
November 2019
