
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04023/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 9th August 2019                   |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     X K
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Besso (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Butler, promulgated on 11th  February  2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Nottingham on 23rd January  2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Albania, and  was  born  on  22nd
    September 1997.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dismissing his claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395, in a  decision  dated
    4th March 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he  fears  persecution  by
    unknown persons in Albania.  He had been beaten up by five people prior
    to his coming to the UK.   He  now  has  memory  loss.   He  has  other
    seriously complicating medical conditions.  He cannot return.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered how, the Appellant in this  appeal  suffered  very
    serious injuries after entering the UK  illegally.   These  included  a
    small acute subarachnoid haemorrhage overlying the right parietal lobe;
    intraventricular  haemorrhage  in  right   lateral   ventricle;   three
    fractures of his jaw and the loss of several teeth; a fractured  ankle;
    and various cuts and bruises.  He was in a  coma  for  four  weeks  and
    detained in hospital until 19th October 2015.  He is noted to have made
    a good physical recovery from his injuries but his cognitive process is
    still causing problems.  For example, he is noted as "having difficulty
    in processing his thoughts and carrying out  relatively  simple  tasks"
    (paragraph 25).

 5. The judge went on to evaluate the Appellant's condition in the light of
    this background information.  He observed  that  "the  essential  issue
    regarding the Appellant's medical condition  is,  however,  his  memory
    loss" and that his witness statement referred to his having  flashbacks
    (paragraph 26).  The judge referred to the expert report and noted that
    "Dr Thomas concludes that the Appellant will never fully  recover  from
    his psychological problems ..." (paragraph 27).

 6. In the same  way  Dr  Thomas  went  on  to  say  that  the  Appellant's
    "medication does not and cannot provide a cure for psychiatric  illness
    nor is it in any way a substitute for a situation of  external  safety,
    necessary for  lasting  psychiatric  recovery,  together  with  skills,
    psychological help" (paragraph 28).

 7. There was also a report from Mr Young, and the judge observed  that  he
    had observed that "there is insufficient  medical  care  and  treatment
    available to support the Appellant in Albania" (paragraph 29).

 8. However, in evaluating all of this evidence, which the judge considered
    amounted to a degree of inconsistent  background  evidence,  the  judge
    observed that "in  view  of  the  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
    account, particularly regarding his family, I have  considered  whether
    this leads to the conclusion that he  has  not  been  credible  in  his
    various statements to the Home Office" (paragraph 30), before observing
    that the Appellant was a vulnerable witness and that this could  affect
    his account "to the extent that the medical reports all conclude he was
    not fit to give evidence at this appeal" (paragraph 30).

 9. The judge ended by observing that "this is a very complex and difficult
    case" (paragraph 32).  Ultimately, the judge's conclusion was that

         "I accept that the Appellant  will  not  have  a  realistic  family
         support on return.  I have also considered the country evidence  as
         to  the  provision  of  mental  healthcare  in   Albania.    Having
         considered all the circumstances of this appeal, I  find  that  the
         Appellant's psychiatric illness and the lack of  proper  healthcare
         provision and family support in Albania amounts to very significant
         obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Albania  if  returned   there"
         (paragraph 33).

10. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the judge  reached  a  conclusion
    that was irrational.  This was because the judge had actually dismissed
    the appeal under Article 3, and if this was the case, then it could not
    be understood how the appeal was allowed under Article 8, on the  basis
    of family support and so-forth.

12. On 24th May 2019 the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 9th August 2019, Miss Besso,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant,  handed  up  a  Rule  24  response  which  she
    submitted provided a complete answer to  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State's appeal to this Tribunal.  For his part, Mr McVeety relied  upon
    the grounds of application.  He stated that the judge had  referred  to
    the medical condition of the Appellant as  one  which  did  not  breach
    Article 3.  If this was the case then the appeal could not  be  allowed
    under Article 3.

14. The judge has observed that there had been a disparity of standards  of
    medical care that will be available in Albania compared to the UK.   Mr
    McVeety submitted that there was evidence that the Appellant  did  have
    family support in Albania.  This is because "in hospital he is recorded
    as having lived with his parents and siblings in Albania ..." and  that
    moreover "that he appears to have been supported by relatives who  gave
    him food in Albania" (see paragraph 26).

15. For her part, Miss  Besso  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   She
    submitted that the Appellant was a young  man  who  had  suffered  life
    changing disabilities after  an  accident  in  the  UK,  following  his
    arrival in this country escaping from fear of being beaten up  by  five
    men in Albania.  He now had suffered very significant memory  loss  and
    was restricted in his many activities of daily living.

16. Although reliance was placed by the Respondent Secretary  of  State  on
    the case of GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, where the House of Lords had
    said that, "it is not easy to think of a foreign healthcare case  which
    would fail under Article 3 but not succeed under Article 8", this was a
    case where Judge Butler did not make any assessment of the Respondent's
    claim under Article 3 ECHR with respect to healthcare.  Article  3  was
    considered but it was dismissed.  It was in relation to the Appellant's
    protection claim.   There  was  no  distinct  finding  on  whether  his
    circumstances on return to Albania  are  capable  of  falling  with  an
    Article 3 ECHR.

17. Secondly, it was not a purely  healthcare  case  either.   The  judge's
    finding that there was "very significant obstacles", was dependent, not
    simply on the Appellant's healthcare  needs,  but  on  his  significant
    disabilities, which would  seriously  interfere  with  his  ability  to
    integrate into life in Albania.

18. In reply, Mr McVeety submitted that there were only a very few  factors
    that fell outside the  case of GS (India), but that otherwise  much  of
    the Appellant's claim fell squarely within the factual matrix that  had
    been considered by the House of Lords in GS (India), and this being so,
    the appeal could not have succeeded.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

20. This is not a case where the decision is based purely on the  basis  of
    healthcare needs.  Judge Butler  is  entirely  clear  about  this.   He
    states that, "I accept that the Appellant will  not  have  a  realistic
    family support on return", and  that,  "I  find  that  the  Appellant's
    psychiatric illness and the lack of  proper  healthcare  provision  and
    family support in Albania amount to very significant obstacles for  his
    integration in Albania" (paragraph 33).  What this means  is  that  the
    judge had undertaken a broad evaluative assessment under Article 8  and
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) with respect to  whether  the  Appellant  would
    have a realistic opportunity of being able to integrate  into  life  in
    Albania (see Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 83).

21. The appeal by the judge was ultimately allowed on the basis that due to
    the Appellant's disabilities, the lack of family or  social  ties,  and
    the damage to his memory, that he would not be able to  integrate  into
    the country of his origin.  That is a very different assessment to  one
    that is based simply on the lack of healthcare in Albania.   It  is  as
    well to remember that "perversity" has a high threshold  and  that  too
    often appeals are made on the basis of the  decision  was  "irrational"
    when that epithet would not be appropriate (see Lord Justice Brooke  in
    R (Iran) [1985] at paragraphs 11 and 12).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019



