
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/04277/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Monday 9 December 2019            |On Tuesday 17 December 2019          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     Q S
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cohen, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as
this is an appeal on protection grounds, it  is  appropriate  to  make  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.    The Appellant appeals against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge N Lodge promulgated on 15 August 2019 ("the Decision").  By  the
      Decision, the Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision dated 18 April 2019 refusing his protection  and
      human rights claims.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity.   He  comes
      from Sulaymaniyah.  He was born a Sunni Muslim.   He  claims  to  have
      converted to Christianity, following an incident at a hospital in Iraq
      where a nurse apparently healed  his  daughter.   His  claim  to  have
      converted was not accepted as credible by the Respondent.

3.    The Appellant's challenge is in broad terms  to  the  Judge's  adverse
      credibility findings.  He appeals on three grounds.  First, it is said
      that the Judge failed to have regard to  the  evidence  of  Ms  Alison
      Pargeter, a country expert who provided a report dated 30 May 2019  in
      support of the Appellant's claim.  Second, it is said that most if not
      all the Judge's adverse credibility findings rely on his view  of  the
      implausibility of the claim.  The Appellant contends  that  the  Judge
      has failed to exercise due caution when reaching  those  findings;  in
      other words, he has imposed his own view of what  is  likely  to  have
      occurred without considering the cultural and other differences  which
      may underlie the claim.  It is also said  that  the  Judge's  findings
      ignore the evidence or at least fail to deal with it.  Allied to  that
      ground, at ground three, the Appellant argues  that  the  hearing  was
      procedurally unfair because many of the  points  relied  upon  by  the
      Judge were not raised by him at the  hearing  and  the  Appellant  has
      therefore been unable to comment on them.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio  on
      7 October 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

      "1.   ...The grounds of application for  permission  to  appeal  argue
           that  it  was  agreed  by  the  parties  at  the  hearing   that
           credibility was the only matter in issue.  It is submitted  that
           the judge's assessment of credibility contained material  errors
           of law and was procedurally unfair.

      2.    The first ground deals with the treatment of expert evidence  it
           is noted that the judge stated as  follows,  'I  am  obliged  to
           observe that for almost  self-evident  reasons  Miss  Pargeter's
           conclusions must inevitably be premised on the  truthfulness  of
           the Appellant's account.' It is argued that the  approach  taken
           by the judge was erroneous in view of  the  case  of  Mibanga  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  367.
           Counsel argues that the report of the expert  should  have  been
           considered by the judge as supportive of the  Appellant's  claim
           and it was not premised on the truthfulness of  the  Appellant's
           account but rather commented on the possibility of his claim  in
           light of the country background information.

      3.    I find that the ground raised  by  Counsel  raises  an  arguable
           error of law this finding by the judge appears at  paragraph  63
           of the decision which indicates that it  was  not  given  proper
           consideration from the outset.  The other  grounds  raised  deal
           with the  judge  relying  a  lot  on  inherent  possibility  and
           procedural unfairness in view of alleged matters not  being  put
           to the Appellant.  I  find  that  the  ground  relating  to  the
           treatment of expert evidence by itself raises an arguable  error
           of law.  Permission to appeal is given on all grounds."

5.    The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision  contains
      an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the  decision
      or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Ground One

6.    At [26] of the Decision, having indicated at [25] that  he  found  the
      Appellant not to be credible, the Judge said that  "[i]n  making  that
      finding, I have throughout my analysis of the evidence had  regard  to
      the expert report of Alison  Pargeter".   As  Ms  Cohen  pointed  out,
      though, it is not until [63] of the Decision that the Judge makes  any
      finding about that report.  He there says this:

            "For the avoidance of doubt I  emphasise  that  in  reaching  my
           conclusions above I have throughout borne  in  mind  the  Expert
           Report of Alison Pargeter.  In  the  skeleton  argument  of  the
           appellant's counsel (at paragraph 16) four specific  points  are
           made in relation to plausibility of the appellant's account.   I
           have dealt with each above.  On the wider point of the  duty  to
           make a holistic assessment (para. 17) I am  obliged  to  observe
           that for almost self-evident reasons Ms  Pargeter's  conclusions
           must  inevitably  be  premised  on  the  truthfulness   of   the
           appellant's account."

7.    Ms Everett makes  the  point  that  Ms  Pargeter's  report  is  itself
      premised on plausibility and therefore that report  coupled  with  the
      way in which  the  Appellant's  case  was  argued  led  the  Judge  to
      considering the plausibility of the Appellant's account as  the  Judge
      has done.  She said that there was no error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
      approach as plausibility was the thread running  through  the  way  in
      which the Appellant presented the case and the way in which the  Judge
      determined it.

8.    I do not accept that the Appellant has demonstrated that there is  any
      error of law in the Judge's treatment of the expert report.   Much  of
      the report  is  devoted  to  general  conditions  for  Christians  and
      Christian converts in Iraq and the Kurdish area specifically  (as  one
      would  expect  from  a  country  expert).   When  dealing   with   the
      Appellant's situation at section [4] of the report, Ms  Pargeter  very
      fairly says that she is unable to comment on the plausibility  of  the
      conversion as it is "too personal and too incident-specific".   It  is
      from Ms Pargeter's report that the Judge  has  obtained  some  of  the
      evidence on which he relies (see for example that the Mar Josuf church
      is a Chaldean Catholic one and not Pentecostal: [40] of the Decision).
       Other parts of the report do not support the  Appellant's  case  (for
      example, Ms Pargeter says that the KRI authorities would not  tolerate
      a public denunciation of a person for conversion as they are  secular:
      [5.7]; see reference at [49] of the Decision).  Overall, Ms Pargeter's
      conclusion is unhelpful to the Appellant.  She says at  [6.4]  of  the
      report that "[w]hile it is true that the Kurdish  authorities  do  not
      recognise conversion  away  from  Islam,  the  authorities  would  not
      persecute [QS] on  account  of  his  new  faith"  (although  she  does
      conclude that "[w]ere he to practice his faith openly as a convert, he
      would likely face social stigma, ostracism and potential abuse" and  I
      note that the Respondent had apparently conceded risk if  the  claimed
      conversion were accepted).  The remainder of the report  concerns  the
      CSID issue and internal relocation.

9.    In short, therefore, the Judge was  entitled  not  to  refer  in  more
      detail to Ms Pargeter's report when dealing with  the  credibility  of
      the Appellant's claim.  He has done so briefly in relation to some  of
      the issues, Ms Pargeter herself says that she is unable to comment  on
      the precise detail of the asserted conversion and other aspects of the
      claim are positively undermined by the report (if the Judge had  found
      the claim of conversion to be true).

Ground Two

10.   I have subsumed into this ground what Ms Cohen said was an  additional
      ground which I allowed her to develop but which in my view falls under
      this heading in any event as the challenge is to the  overall  adverse
      credibility findings.

11.   Dealing first with the plausibility issue, the Upper Tribunal in KB  &
      AH (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 00491  (IAC)
      accepted  that  plausibility  is  a  relevant  factor  when  assessing
      credibility.   However, as Ms Cohen pointed out, it is a factor  which
      must be treated with a degree of caution.  The Tribunal in  that  case
      cited from HK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA
      Civ 1037 as follows:

      "28.   Further,  in  many  asylum  cases,  some,  even  most,  of  the
           appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not
           mean that it is untrue.  The ingredients of the story,  and  the
           story as a whole, have to be considered  against  the  available
           country  evidence  and  reliable  expert  evidence,  and   other
           familial factors, such as consistency with  what  the  appellant
           has said before, and with other factual evidence (where there is
           any).

      29.   Inherent probability, which may  be  helpful  in  many  domestic
           cases, can be a dangerous, even a wholly  inappropriate,  factor
           to rely on in some asylum cases.  Much of the evidence  will  be
           referable to societies with customs and circumstances which  are
           very different from those of which  the  members  of  the  fact-
           finding  tribunal  have  any  (even   second-hand)   experience.
           Indeed, it is likely that the country which an asylum-seeker has
           left  will  be  suffering  from  the  sort   of   problems   and
           dislocations with which the overwhelming majority  of  residents
           of this country will be wholly unfamiliar.  The  point  is  well
           made in Hathaway on Law of Refugee Status (1991) at page 81:

                  'In  assessing  the  general  human  rights  information,
                 decision-makers  must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid
                 implicitly recharacterizing the nature of the risk based on
                 their own perceptions of reasonability'

      30.   Inherent improbability  in  the  context  of  asylum  cases  was
           discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala v Secretary  of
           State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed  out  that  it
           was 'not proper to reject an applicant's account merely  on  the
           basis that it is not credible or not plausible.  To say that  an
           appellant's account is not credible is to  state  a  conclusion'
           (emphasis added).  At paragraph 24, he said that rejection of  a
           story on grounds of implausibility must be done  'on  reasonably
           drawn inferences and not simply on conjecture  or  speculation'.
           He went on to  emphasise,  as  did  Pill  LJ  in  Ghaisari,  the
           entitlement of the fact-finder to rely 'on his common sense  and
           his ability, as a practical and  informed  person,  to  identify
           what is or is not plausible'.  However, he accepted that  'there
           will be cases where actions  which  may  appear  implausible  if
           judged  by  ...Scottish  standards,  might  be  plausible   when
           considered within the context  of  the  applicant's  social  and
           cultural background."

      The Tribunal also made the point at [30] that  plausibility  ought  to
      be considered along with other factors; this is "also illustrative  of
      the  need  to  avoid  basing  credibility  assessment  on   just   one
      indicator".  Plausibility is also "not a concept  with  clear  edges";
      there may therefore be varying  degrees  of  implausibility  and  some
      aspects of a claim may be plausible even if others are not.

12.   With that general starting point, I turn to the individual  challenges
      made to the Decision.  First, as I have already noted, Ms Cohen raised
      an additional point about the finding at [39] of the Decision that the
      Appellant had said that he  attended  a  Pentecostal  church  in  Iraq
      whereas the church he named was said by Ms Pargeter to be a  "Chaldean
      Catholic Church".  As Ms Cohen points out, the  Appellant  deals  with
      this point in his witness statement which appears  at  [AB/5-22].   He
      says the following about this issue:

      "74.  ...It was only when I  came  to  the  UK  that  I  learnt  about
           different  denominations  of  Christianity.    My   friend   [D]
           explained this to me when we were talking about Christianity  as
           he was the only person I could understand because we  speak  the
           same language and he knew more about Christianity  than  I  did.
           When I was speaking to [D], he had explained to  me  that  there
           are  different  denominations  in  Christianity  like  Catholic,
           Protestant and Orthodox.  He said to me that he was a Protestant
           and he went to a Protestant Church in the UK.  [D] said  that  I
           should come to the Church with him and he said that it would  be
           the same as the one I  went  in  Sulaymaniyah  and  this  why  I
           thought 'only Pentecostal in Sulaymaniyah.'

      75.   Also I would like to  clarify  that  I  did  not  say  the  word
           'Pentecostal'.  I did not even know  that  the  denomination  of
           that name existed  within  Christianity.   At  the  time  of  my
           interview, I only knew about Catholics, Protestant and Orthodox.
            I think the interpreter may not have understood me properly.  I
           have a slight speech impediment and I sometimes struggle to  say
           some words.  I find it hard to say  the  word  'Protestant'  and
           that is why I think the Home  Office  think  that  I  have  said
           'Pentecostal'  and  not  'Protestant'.   Even   later   in   the
           interview, when the Home Office were  asking  me  questions,  my
           legal  representative  tells  me  that  the  Home   Office   say
           'Pentecostal' in their questions.  I  answered  their  questions
           thinking that this was the same as Protestant.  I only  realised
           that I was not saying 'Protestant' and that the word Home Office
           were saying is different later in the interview when they  asked
           me about the Church I went to in Leicester..."

13.   In my view of that evidence, there is a certain tension  between  [74]
      and [75] as to the Appellant's understanding of the different types of
      religion.  Nor am I impressed by the interpretation point.  Not  only,
      as Ms Everett points out, is it the case that the Appellant raised  no
      such issue at the interview but, in any event, there  is  no  evidence
      about the different words in the Appellant's own language which  might
      allow one to assess whether  any  speech  impediment  would  make  the
      difference which the Appellant asserts.  If what he says  is  that  he
      was saying the words in English  and  not  his  own  language,  it  is
      difficult to see how "Protestant" can sound like "Pentecostal".  As  I
      say, there is in any event  an  inherent  inconsistency  within  those
      paragraphs as to which word the Appellant used and why.

14.    What  I  do  accept  however  is  that  the  Appellant  provided   an
      explanation for why there may be an  inconsistency  about  the  church
      which he says he attended in Iraq on which the  Judge  has  based  the
      finding at [39] and [40] of the Decision and that the Judge has failed
      to consider that explanation.  However, I also note  in  passing  that
      this  undermines  the  Appellant's  central  point  that  the  Judge's
      findings are based on implausibility.

15.   Ms Cohen also  drew  my  attention  to  the  asylum  interview  record
      ("AIR").  She submitted that the answers to questions [202]  to  [204]
      are supportive of what is said by the Appellant.  That is true to some
      extent as, in particular at [204] the Appellant says "[t]he  name  you
      mention to me i can't say it as i never heard about it.   i  heard  in
      Protestant, Catholic and Orthodox.  Possible i miss understand you  or
      you misunderstand  me."   I  should  say  that  I  reject  Ms  Cohen's
      submission that the numerous typographical and spelling errors in  the
      AIR are indicative of interpreting problems.  In my view it is  likely
      that those are due to the interviewer typing during the  interview  or
      transcribing  notes  thereafter  and  failing  to  make   corrections.
      However, what is said in answer  at  questions  [202]  to  [204]  does
      provide some support for the Appellant's position that he did not know
      about Pentecostal religion at that time and  certainly  not  based  on
      attending such a church in Iraq.  That is relevant to what is said  at
      [39] to [40] of the  Decision  and  possibly  also  to  the  level  of
      knowledge which the Judge apparently  expected  of  the  Appellant  in
      relation to that religion at [41] to [42] of the Decision as  well  as
      the expectation that he would attend a Pentecostal church in the UK at
      [44] of the Decision.  I accept that the Judge there has  referred  to
      other answers given in the AIR which support the point he there  makes
      but, as Ms Cohen submits, and I accept, the Judge has failed  to  take
      into account other answers and in particular those at questions  [202]
      to [204]. Those were relevant to the findings made by  the  Judge  and
      the inference drawn.

16.   Turning then to the  examples  of  error  given  in  the  grounds,  my
      attention was drawn to various of the Judge's findings as follows:

      "30.  None of the above rings true.  If a child of five years  of  age
           was losing consciousness, she would not  be  released  from  the
           care of her paediatric  consultant  (she  initially  attended  a
           children's hospital) without significant steps  being  taken  to
           establish the  problem.   Even  if  the  problem  could  not  be
           established, she would not be discharged until it was safe to do
           so.  I doubt very much that she would be discharged on the basis
           that she 'could' have a heart condition.  If  she  continued  to
           lose consciousness, she would be taken back  to  the  children's
           hospital where  she  had  been  treated  before  and  not  to  a
           different hospital.

      31.   The appellant says that Iraqi hospitals do not  retain  people's
           medical records but they are given  to  patients  on  discharge.
           This is highly unlikely.  Medical records these days, and here I
           am using common sense, are generally  kept  on  computers.   The
           hospital, even if the appellant had a hard copy of  the  medical
           records, would still have copies of her records.  In any  event,
           the appellant has made no effort to get the medical  records  of
           his daughter.  He has contacts in Iraq.  He has a sister whom he
           is in contact with and he could have endeavoured to contact  the
           hospital directly.  He has made no effort to get his  daughter's
           medical records sent to the UK.

            ...

      34.   No  matter  what  stress  the  appellant  was  under  having  an
           apparently seriously ill daughter, it must have  been  clear  to
           him that the nurse was not reading from the Quran.  It must have
           been clear to him with a name like Maria as he  himself  implies
           that she was a Christian.  In the normal  course  of  events,  a
           Christian would make the  sign  of  the  cross  before  praying.
           Leaving that aside, the  appellant  apparently  didn't  pay  any
           attention to the words the nurse was speaking.  It is only later
           that the appellant apparently realises she is a Christian.

      35.   The appellant's daughter must clearly have been under  a  doctor
           at the hospital.  She would not be discharged by a nurse  simply
           saying she is now fine.  He later says 'The  doctors  did  tests
           and could not find the symptoms she had  before  (paragraph  21,
           witness statement).  This does not  make  sense.   The  symptoms
           'she had  before'  were  fainting  episodes.   Tests  would  not
           establish if she had those symptoms.   What  I  think  is  being
           suggested is the tests established that there was no  underlying
           causes for her illness.  But that was  the  case  prior  to  the
           miracle.  The doctors could not ascertain what was  causing  her
           losses of consciousness."

      Other examples are cited  in  the  grounds  relating  to  the  Judge's
      findings about the way in which the Appellant left Iraq, but the above
      examples suffice to illustrate the point.

17.   I begin by noting that when  those  paragraphs  are  considered  as  a
      whole (rather than the selective quotations from them in  the  pleaded
      grounds), they do not necessarily support what is said in the  grounds
      about the reliance on implausibility  (or  inherent  improbability  as
      pleaded).  For example, the points made about the Appellant's  ability
      to get the daughter's medical  records  from  Iraq  at  [31]  and  the
      comment about the way in which the Appellant's evidence is  framed  at
      [35] are ones which the Judge was entitled to take into account and do
      not rely on the Judge's view about plausibility.

18.   Nor do I consider that it can be said that,  overall,  the  Judge  has
      failed to have regard to the evidence before him.  Ms  Cohen  drew  my
      attention, for example, to the Appellant's witness statement about the
      incident involving the nurse which reads as follows:

      "17.  On 14 February 2018 we took [V] to a different hospital  to  the
           one she had been in before.  I do not  know  the  name  of  this
           hospital but we  called  it  the  Emergency  hospital.   On  the
           following day, on 15 February 2018, a nurse who was  working  in
           the hospital came to see us.  Her name was Maria  and  she  said
           that she would do a prayer for [V].  By this time I  was  really
           desperate; nothing was working for my daughter,  so  I  did  not
           object to this.  At that point I or my wife did not realise that
           she was a Christian lady, even though she told us that her  name
           was Maria.  My wife and I desperately wanted  to  do  everything
           possible to treat [V], we were not thinking about who the  nurse
           was or what religion she came from.

            ...

      [19]  Before we took [V] home, I wanted to thank  Maria  and  ask  her
           about the prayer that she had done for her.  Maria told me  that
           she is Christian and that if I was interested in Christianity  I
           should go to church and they would help me and tell me about the
           prayers."

      Contrary to Ms Cohen's submission  that  the  Judge  had  ignored  the
      evidence as to the Appellant's evidence about his state of  mind  when
      making his finding at [34] of the  Decision,  the  Judge  there  makes
      clear that he had in mind the evidence that the Appellant was stressed
      due to his daughter's condition.

19.   Although I am not persuaded that the Judge has relied  to  the  extent
      asserted on implausibility of the Appellant's claim, there  is,  as  I
      have already indicated, a failure to take into account certain of  the
      evidence which is central to the Appellant's case to  have  converted.
      Ms Everett accepted that this was the strongest of the  grounds.  This
      ground has to be read with  the  third  ground  concerning  procedural
      fairness to which I now turn.

Ground Three

20.   The Appellant has produced a witness statement from  Ms  Agata  Patyna
      of Counsel who represented the Appellant before Judge Lodge.  In  that
      statement, she records as follows:

      "3.   At the hearing, the Appellant was called to give  evidence.   He
           was cross-examined by Miss Simbi,  the  Home  Office  Presenting
           Officer.  I made a contemporaneous [note] of the  hearing  .....
           In my note, I recorded that the  Appellant  was  not  asked  any
           questions by the Judge.

      4.    At the conclusion of the evidence, the Judge  heard  submissions
           from the Presenting Officer and me.  I recorded  that  the  only
           question asked of me was in respect of the  feasibility  of  the
           Appellant obtaining an Iraqi CSID if his account were not to  be
           found credible.  Otherwise, I  was  not  asked  to  address  any
           specific issues regarding the  Appellant's  credibility  or  the
           plausibility of his account."

21.   Ms Patyna has appended the note to her statement.  That confirms  what
      she  says  in  her  statement.   I  note  that   the   Home   Office's
      representative asked questions only about the Appellant's  involvement
      in Christianity and attendance at Church.   No  questions  were  asked
      either by her or the  Judge  about  the  claimed  reasons  behind  the
      conversion, namely what occurred when the nurse is said to have healed
      the  Appellant's  daughter.   That  aspect  of  the  account  was  not
      therefore  challenged.   Although  as  Ms  Everett  pointed  out,  the
      Respondent has challenged the Appellant's credibility, she did not  do
      so in relation to this aspect.  The Appellant  was  not  therefore  on
      notice of  any  challenge  in  this  regard  and  was  not  given  the
      opportunity to deal with the Judge's concerns about the credibility of
      these events.

22.   In conclusion, therefore, I am satisfied that there  is  an  error  of
      law based on ground two (in part) when read with  ground  three.   For
      that reason, I set aside the  Decision.   As  the  challenge  and  the
      grounds  which  I  consider  are  made  out  concern  the  credibility
      findings, it is not appropriate to preserve any of those findings  and
      I therefore set the Decision aside in its entirety.  I  was  asked  to
      remit the appeal if I found an error of law.  The grounds on which  my
      conclusion that there  is  an  error  of  law  is  based  concern  the
      credibility findings and, moreover, I have  concluded  that  at  least
      some of those are vitiated by procedural unfairness.  For that reason,
      I am persuaded that it is appropriate to remit the appeal for  a  full
      de novo hearing before a different Judge as  a  matter  of  procedural
      fairness.

CONCLUSION

23.   I am satisfied that the grounds disclose an error of law  as  set  out
      above. I therefore set aside the Decision. I remit the appeal  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-determination of the appeal.   No  findings
      are preserved.



DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  Lodge
promulgated on 15 August 2019 is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge N  Lodge.


Signed           [pic] Dated: 12 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
