
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04120/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 6th of February 2018        |On 13th of February 2018             |
|Prepared on 6th of February 2018     |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                         MR CHANDRAKUMAR VEERASINGAM
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 17th of August 1982. He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Kainth
    sitting at  Harmondsworth  on  31st  of  May  2017  who  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  7th  of
    April 2017. That decision was  to  refuse  the  Appellant's  claim  for
    international protection.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 5th of December 2006  using
    a false passport and claimed asylum two days  later.  That  application
    was refused by  the  Respondent  on  18th  of  December  2006  and  the
    Appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by the  Tribunal
    on 15th of February 2007. The Appellant became appeal rights  exhausted
    on 27th of June 2007  and  he  voluntarily  departed  from  the  United
    Kingdom on 29th of March 2010. He re-entered the United Kingdom on 16th
    of November 2015 and lodged further submissions on 15th of  April  2016
    which were treated by the Respondent as  a  fresh  claim.  It  was  the
    refusal of those further submissions which gave  rise  to  the  present
    proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant's claim was that if returned to Sri Lanka he  would  face
    mistreatment due to his political opinion.  He  feared  being  arrested
    unlawfully by the Terrorism Investigation Department  (TID)  and  being
    ill-treated by them. Following his voluntary return  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    March 2010 he was  stopped  by  immigration  officers  on  arrival  and
    questioned by the TID for approximately 2 to  3  hours.  He  was  shown
    photographs of himself participating in an anti Sri  Lankan  government
    rally in London. He was detained and further questioned for one day  by
    interrogating officers. He secured his release  through  payment  of  a
    bribe by his uncle with whom he remained until he left Colombo  on  9th
    of April 2010 for India. The  TID  have  visited  his  uncle's  address
    looking for him.

 4. In India he married a Christian lady and  the  Appellant  converted  to
    Christianity. Her family disapproved of the marriage and  attacked  the
    Appellant. He realised that his life was at risk from his  in-laws  and
    decided to go back to Jaffna in  Sri  Lanka  where  he  stayed  at  his
    parents' house. He was arrested there on 23rd of January 2015 and taken
    to two separate detention camps before his uncle was once again able to
    secure the Appellant's release via an agent with the payment of a bribe
    on 13th of July 2015. During detention  he  was  ill-treated.  Using  a
    false passport, he left Sri Lanka  via  the  airport  arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom on 16th of November 2015.

 5. The Respondent did not accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a  person  of
    interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  and  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's claim to have been detained by the police in March 2010  or
    arrested without cause in January 2015 or held in  two  separate  camps
    until 13th of  July  2015.  The  Respondent  made  adverse  credibility
    observations in the light of the previous  Tribunal  proceedings  which
    had resulted in the dismissal of  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  January
    2007.

 6. I pause to note here that the Appellant's claim on  that  occasion  was
    that he had been arrested by the Sri Lankan authorities and  questioned
    about involvement with the LTTE. He claimed that he was held for  seven
    months and beaten every two days until he was released on 24th of March
    2002 after his father contacted some members of an organisation  called
    the EPDF. The Appellant was told to sign on weekly at a police  station
    and when he did so on the 3rd occasion he was detained and  again  ill-
    treated. The Appellant claimed he subsequently joined the LTTE  at  the
    end of 2003 and underwent training. Immigration Judge Turquet,  at  the
    hearing in 2007, did not find the Appellant's account  to  be  credible
    and considered that his claim had  a  number  of  inconsistencies.  The
    Judge indicated that she was not satisfied as to the  veracity  of  any
    material aspect of the Appellant's assertions on  which  he  based  his
    claim to need international protection. The number  of  inconsistencies
    and the implausibility of the account led the Judge  to  be  unable  to
    rely on the Appellant's accounts.

The Decision at First Instance

 7. In his determination Judge Kainth  took  the  2007  decision  of  Judge
    Turquet as his starting point following  the  authority  of  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKAIT 702. He also formed an adverse  view  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility. The Appellant had not made any enquiries  of  any  of  the
    various Tamil organisations based in the United Kingdom to confirm  the
    Appellant's  involvement  in  demonstrations.  At   its   highest   the
    Appellant's  involvement  was  as  a  mere  spectator  joining  in  the
    chanting.  The  Appellant's  claim  that  he  had  not  disclosed   his
    attendance at such demonstrations because it was  not  significant  was
    rejected by the Judge. At the  time  the  Appellant  had  contact  with
    family members including his brother and it was inconceivable that  the
    Appellant would not disclose such information with a  view  to  seeking
    further advice. The Appellant had  every  opportunity  to  answer  open
    questions as to the last time he attended a demonstration  and  yet  he
    had answered incorrectly first saying April 2009 and then changing that
    to May 2009.

 8. The Appellant's claim that he returned to Sri Lanka voluntarily in 2015
    notwithstanding that he was in violation of the terms of his release in
    March 2010 did not stand up to scrutiny. The Appellant's claim to  have
    suffered violence  from  his  wife's  family  in  India  was  also  not
    plausible. India was a substantial country with a  population  of  more
    than 1.2 billion people. The Appellant would have had  the  opportunity
    to live in a different location in order not to be  found  by  his  in-
    laws. The Appellant was inviting the Tribunal to accept that  his  fear
    of further assault from his in-laws was greater than  the  concerns  he
    had in returning to Sri Lanka. The Judge rejected that proposition. The
    Appellant claimed to  be  a  person  of  interest  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities yet had returned to his  parents'  address  notwithstanding
    that he was a wanted man. He was detained within a very short period of
    time upon arrival. The Appellant's account of time spent  in  detention
    contained no further detail other than to say he had been  interrogated
    and beaten.

 9. The Judge directed himself in  accordance  with  the  country  guidance
    authorities of GJ [2013] UKUT 319 and MP [2014] EWCA Civ 829. A  record
    of past LTTE activism did not as such  constitute  a  risk  factor  for
    Tamils returned to Sri Lanka because the government's concern  now  was
    only with current or future threats to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a
    unitary state. This is so even if the returnee had past links with  the
    LTTE which were more elaborate. Diaspora activism actual  or  perceived
    was the principal basis on which the Sri Lankan government  was  likely
    to treat returning Tamils as a current or future threat. However,  that
    did not mean that diaspora activism was  the  only  basis  on  which  a
    returning Tamil might be regarded as posing such a threat. There may be
    other cases where the evidence showed particular grounds for concluding
    that the government might regard the  applicant  as  posing  a  current
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka.

10. The Judge at [40] of the determination indicated that the  evidence  in
    this case did not identify that the Appellant had a significant role in
    relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora or  that
    the Appellant's name appeared on a computerised stop list.  In  seeking
    to establish  that  he  was  of  continuing  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities the  Appellant  had  produced  as  evidence  two  documents
    described as police messages  dated  25th  of  July  2015  and  4th  of
    December 2015. They were provided to the Appellant's father who in turn
    had posted the same to the Appellant.

11. Both police messages recorded the  Appellant's  name  with  a  slightly
    different spelling ("W" for "V"). The July 2015 message made  reference
    to the Appellant being required to attend the police station  in  order
    to obtain a statement but no further information was provided  (in  the
    message) as to what that statement was said to be in  connection  with.
    The documents provided little  assistance  to  the  Appellant.  If  the
    Appellant really was a person of interest to  the  authorities  it  was
    very likely he would have been detained prior to (and  prevented  from)
    departure. The Judge relied on the reference in GJ that the authorities
    utilised sophisticated social [it appears this is  a  spelling  mistake
    for "facial"] mapping technology yet the Appellant was not captured  by
    such technology and it was not his evidence that he was disguised  when
    departing. The Appellant did not come within any of the risk factors in
    GJ and was not a person of interest. His account was neither  plausible
    nor credible. He did not face a real risk of ill-treatment.  The  Judge
    also dismissed the appeal under Article  8  but  there  was  no  onward
    appeal against that part of the determination.

The Onward Appeal

12. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who had not appeared at  the  First-tier  and  did  not  appear
    before me. The grounds argued that the Judge had failed: (i) to make  a
    finding on the evidence of the Appellant's brother and (ii) have regard
    to news reports of honour killings in India in circumstances similar to
    those of the Appellant. The Judge had made material errors  of  law  in
    consideration of the  two  police  messages.  The  spelling  difference
    (spelling the Appellant's name with W as  opposed  to  V)  was  because
    names were often spelt differently when transliterated  from  Sinhalese
    to English. This could be shown by the evidence of a statement  from  a
    registered translator. The Appellant's name was a Tamil name and  would
    therefore have originated in the Tamil  script.  Both  police  messages
    clearly linked the Appellant's original claim of arrest at the  airport
    in 2010 on the Appellant's return to Sri Lanka from the United Kingdom.
    The first message specifically referred to this and the 2nd referred to
    the Appellant's failure to attend to give a statement in the same case.



13. The evidence in GJ was that it was possible to leave Sri Lanka  through
    the airport with an agent even if the individual was wanted. There were
    mass demonstrations on a daily  basis  outside  Westminster  throughout
    April and May 2009 leading up to the end of  the  conflict  where  many
    organisations were involved.  It  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to have approached Tamil organisations to see if they had any
    photographic evidence  of  the  Appellant's  participation.  Given  the
    numbers of people who attended it was highly unlikely that the  various
    Tamil groups would have been in a position to assist the Appellant  and
    identify evidence since he had no link with any of them.

14. Permission to appeal was at first refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Black on 19th of October 2017. He stated there was no  requirement  for
    the Judge to make findings on all matters before him  provided  he  had
    addressed the issues in dispute. The Judge had given  adequate  reasons
    for his finding that the Appellant had not attended  demonstrations  in
    the United Kingdom in 2009  having  noted  the  implausibility  of  and
    inconsistency in the evidence. The medical evidence was not  consistent
    it referred to an injury sustained while lifting a heavy weight on  the
    date on which the  Appellant  claimed  he  was  allegedly  beaten.  The
    finding that the Appellant would have been detained prior to  departure
    was consistent with GJ given the Appellant's account  of  returning  to
    his family home in Sri Lanka despite being a person of earlier  adverse
    interest to the authorities. The  Judge's  decision  was  detailed  and
    adequately  reasoned  on  the  evidence.  The   adverse   findings   on
    credibility were open to the Judge and sustainable on the evidence.

15. The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the same grounds as before. This time the application
    for permission to appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on  6th
    of December 2017. In a very brief decision she wrote that although  the
    First-tier Tribunal had made clear findings adverse  to  the  Appellant
    for the reasons set out in the grounds it was arguable it had  done  so
    without having taken relevant information into account  and  conversely
    had placed weight on immaterial matters.

16. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  16th
    of January 2018 opposing the Appellant's appeal. She  argued  that  the
    Judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant's claim to return  to
    Sri Lanka from India lacked credibility  in  the  light  of  his  self-
    declared risk in Sri Lanka and the Appellant's  failure  to  adequately
    explore internal relocation within India. The  Respondent  also  echoed
    the point made by Judge Black in refusing permission to appeal that the
    medical evidence did not support the claim of beating. The  Appellant's
    brother was not an eyewitness to the claimed events, his source was the
    Appellant and to a lesser extent their parents. His  witness  statement
    upon which he had not been cross examined could only be assessed in the
    round with the general credibility  of  the  Appellant's  account.  The
    Appellant's own evidence was vague and lacking in detail.

The Hearing Before Me

17. In consequence of the brief grant of permission to  appeal  the  matter
    came before me to determine whether there was a material error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that it fell to be  set
    aside and the decision remade. If there was no such error the  decision
    of the First-tier would stand.

18. For the Appellant, counsel who had not settled the  grounds  of  onward
    appeal indicated he relied on those grounds. The issues relating to the
    spelling of the Appellant's name, the  police  message  forms  and  the
    Appellant's ability to leave Sri Lanka showed the  clearest  errors  by
    the Judge. The Judge had complained that  the  police  messages  had  a
    different spelling for the Appellant but the Appellant had put in fresh
    evidence that names were often spelt differently. It was clear what the
    importance of the 2nd message was: that it was in connection  with  the
    arrest at the airport in 2010. These were two  key  documents  and  the
    Judge had erred in rejecting them.

19. The Judge rejected the possibility that the Appellant could  have  left
    Sri Lanka even though he was wanted but that  too  was  in  error.  The
    Judge had not said why it was implausible that the Appellant would have
    suffered violence from his wife's family. The Appellant  and  his  wife
    had already moved away from his wife's parents without success and that
    was why the Appellant had returned to Sri Lanka. The brother's evidence
    corroborated the Appellant's evidence and confirmed that the  Appellant
    had  been  hospitalised.  There  was   background   material   on   the
    difficulties  people  had  in  interreligious  marriages.  The  grounds
    indicated why the Judge had erred in rejecting the Appellant's evidence
    concerning participation in demonstrations in  London.  He  was  not  a
    member of any organisation and had no  links  to  them.  There  was  no
    reason why the Appellant would contact any of the organisations  if  he
    was not a member of them.

20.  In  reply,  the  Presenting  Officer  indicated  that  [40]   of   the
    determination which dealt with the two police messages had to  be  read
    as a whole. The remark about the incorrect  spelling  was  more  of  an
    observation rather than being given as a reason for the  Judge's  final
    conclusion. The Judge had applied the  correct  principles  of  Tanveer
    Ahmed. It was a question of interpretation. It may  have  said  in  the
    document that it was about the Appellant's previous arrest but  it  did
    not say what the arrest was  for  or  give  any  details.  The  Judge's
    rejection of those documents was open to him as he was looking  at  the
    documentary evidence in the round.

21. The  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  could  be  recognised  by  the
    authorities on leaving the airport because of facial mapping techniques
    was not a point which had been considered in GJ. The Judge  was  making
    an interesting observation on the use of modern technology.  The  Judge
    had regard to the Appellant's previous unsuccessful asylum claim  based
    on alleged connections to the LTTE whose dismissal  the  Appellant  had
    not  appealed.  The  Appellant's   evidence   was   vague   about   the
    demonstrations he had attended and he could not say which  organisation
    had organised them. The Judge's observation was perfectly legitimate as
    the Appellant chose not to contact any  organisations.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to say  that  this  was  the  Appellant's  claim  and  he  the
    Appellant needed to take steps to produce evidence to support it.

22. The important parts of the Judge's decision  were  at  [35]  and  [36].
    These  dealt  with   the   delay   in   indicating   involvement   with
    demonstrations and his return to Sri Lanka from  India  notwithstanding
    that he was a person of interest. The Appellant had moved  40  km  away
    from his in-laws' house which was hardly moving anywhere at all and did
    not take into account the options the  Appellant  had  to  relocate  in
    India, a vast country, as opposed to return to Sri Lanka  when  he  was
    wanted there. This undermined the Appellant's account. One had to  look
    at the determinations a whole. There might be one  or  two  matters  of
    concern but they did not undermine  the  credibility  findings  in  the
    determination which was sustainable. In conclusion counsel pointed  out
    that the brother had given  evidence  and  that  was  recorded  in  the
    determination when he had adopted his witness statement.

Findings

23. The Appellant adopts a reasons-based challenge to the determination  in
    which the Judge made an adverse credibility assessment of the Appellant
    as  indeed  had  Judge  Turquet  in  2007.  There  were  a  number   of
    difficulties with the Appellant's account which the Judge pointed  out.
    It was difficult to see why the Appellant should return to his  parents
    address in Sri Lanka in March 2010 when he  was  still  said  to  be  a
    person of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities. The Appellant himself
    claimed that he  had  participated  in  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2009 which if true would not reduce his profile in the  eyes
    of the Sri Lankan authorities. It was particularly implausible  however
    that the Appellant would return to Sri Lanka to escape his in-laws  and
    thus face the very real danger that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  posed
    rather than avoid both problems by moving to a safer part of India.

24. In assessing the possibility of relocation within India one has to take
    into account the  sheer  size  of  India  both  geographically  and  in
    population terms. The Appellant had made very little effort to relocate
    from his in-laws strongly suggesting that  there  was  no  threat  from
    them. I do not accept the criticism  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
    reasons why he rejected the Appellant's claim to have been assaulted by
    his  in-laws.  The  surrounding  circumstances  of  that  account  were
    inherently implausible. There was a further problem as pointed  out  in
    the First-tier  decision  refusing  permission,  the  medical  evidence
    relied upon by the Appellant was inconsistent.

25. In submissions before me the Appellant claimed that the main  criticism
    of the Judge's decision was the Judge's treatment  of  the  two  police
    messages. I agree with the submission made by the Respondent  that  the
    criticism of the spelling  of  the  Appellant's  name  is  more  of  an
    observation than forming the basis of  a  wholesale  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's  claim.  There  are  more  significant  problems  with  the
    documents which the Judge pointed out. The two police report forms  are
    brief and as the Judge pointed out contained very little information to
    support the Appellant's claim. The English used in the translations  is
    broken (it is not clear whether that is the fault of the interpreter or
    a reflection of the original document). The documents  are  dated  five
    years after the Appellant's alleged arrest in March  2010.  Both  forms
    referred to proceedings in the Magistrates' court of  Negombo  although
    no supporting information (such as court documents  from  Negombo)  was
    provided to the Judge. The messages are  from  one  police  officer  to
    another. It is not at all clear  why  the  Appellant's  relative  could
    obtain these rather than more substantial documents.

26. The Judge's conclusion at the end of [40] was  that  the  police  forms
    were of a type which could be  easily  reproduced,  they  were  message
    forms as opposed to something more substantial such as warrants  issued
    by the police or the courts. It was a matter for the Judge what  weight
    he placed on the evidence before him. The documents  were  unimpressive
    and left as many questions unanswered as they attempted  to  answer.  I
    find that this ground of appeal is a mere disagreement with the  cogent
    reasons given by the Judge.

27. The Appellant had  not  played  a  significant  role  in  post-conflict
    separatism. He claimed to have been involved in a demonstration in 2009
    but the Judge was unimpressed  by  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to
    produce  any  supporting  evidence  of  any  involvement  in   diaspora
    activities. The Appellant's claim that he could not do this because  he
    was only a minor player who was not a member of an organisation is  not
    an adequate answer to the criticism made of the Appellant's case by the
    Judge. For the Appellant to have attended  the  demonstration  he  must
    have been told about it and he could work backwards from the source  of
    the information that the demonstration was taking place to someone  who
    could confirm his attendance at the demonstration and/or the  level  of
    the Appellant's involvement.

28. The problem for the Appellant was that he had been found  once  already
    by another Judge to be someone whose evidence was  not  credible.  When
    the Appellant was once again vague in his evidence in the 2nd appeal it
    was not surprising that the Judge regarded the Appellant's account with
    a sceptical eye. The Judge noted that  the  brother  had  attended  the
    Tribunal and adopted his statement  indeed  the  Judge  summarise  that
    evidence at [22]. The brother claimed that he had advised the Appellant
    not to return to Sri Lanka in 2010 and was aware  of  the  difficulties
    the Appellant had experienced in marrying out of caste and  faith.  His
    evidence was not particularly clear referring only  to  becoming  aware
    through his parents that the Appellant was experiencing "some  problems
    from the Sri Lankan authorities". It  is  difficult  to  see  how  much
    further this  witness's  evidence  took  matters.  What  the  brother's
    evidence came down to was an assertion that the Appellant had told  him
    some  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  case  (although  not   necessarily
    important aspects).

29. The Judge was not obliged to set out each and every piece  of  evidence
    he relied on. In this case although he  had  summarised  the  brother's
    evidence since the brother's evidence did not take the case  materially
    further it was not necessarily a requirement upon  the  Judge  that  he
    should deal in terms with it.

30. I do not consider that the Appellant is able to indicate  any  material
    error of law in the determination. The First-tier Tribunal with  reason
    found the Appellant to be an economic migrant. The Appellant  had  made
    an unsuccessful and implausible application for  asylum  already  which
    had been roundly rejected in 2007. The Appellant has since made  a  2nd
    implausible application for asylum which was also roundly rejected  ten
    years later in  2017.  The  Appellant  is  unable  to  demonstrate  any
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  I
    dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 8th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 8th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
