
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/04952/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 January 2018                         |On 16 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                   Mr M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp of Counsel, instructed by Morden
Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rhys-Davies dismissing his appeal against the
    decision of the respondent refusing his application to remain in the UK
    on asylum grounds and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The appellant is a national of  Pakistan  born  on  5  July  1982.   He
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 September 2014.   He
    claimed asylum the following day.  His application was  refused  on  14
    September 2015.  His  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge McAll in a decision  promulgated
    on 10 June 2016.  His onward appeals to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    Upper Tribunal for permission  to  appeal  were  refused.   His  appeal
    rights were exhausted on 24 August 2016.
3.   The respondent and subsequently the First-tier Judge accepted that  the
    appellant was an Ahmadi Muslim.  On 10 May 2017 the respondent accepted
    that the appellant had demonstrated a fresh claim to  protection  under
    paragraph 353 Immigration Rules HC 395.  The appellant's claim depended
    upon two primary matters.

    (1)  He was at risk in Pakistan as  an  individual  by  reason  of  his
         profile as an Ahmadi, and/or


    (2)  returning him to Pakistan would place him in a situation  of  fear
         of persecution for a relevant reason and force him to restrain  the
         ordinary expression of his religious faith so  that  he  should  be
         recognised as a refugee consistently with the country guidance case
         in MN and others (Ahmadis - country  conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan
         [2012] UKUT (IAC).


4.   FtTJ Rhys-Davies recorded the respondent's case  at  paragraphs  16  to
    29. The respondent stated that  Judge  McAll's  decision  must  be  the
    starting point for the consideration of the second appeal in line  with
    the principles in Devaseelan.  At  paragraph  20(a)  -  (l)  the  judge
    recorded the various adverse findings made by Judge McAll  against  the
    appellant's credibility as identified by the respondent.

5.   The respondent also noted  [21]  that  the  appellant  had  produced  a
    letter from Mr K dated 3 February 2012 who claimed to  have  known  the
    appellant in Islamabad.  Mr K stated that the appellant was  an  active
    member of the Ahmadi community in Islamabad; regularly offering prayers
    at the Ahmadiyya mosque and preaching.  The judge noted that the letter
    mentioned no problems  experienced  by  the  appellant  and  failed  to
    substantiate his claimed prominent role in the Ahmadi population.

6.   The respondent also noted [22]  that  the  new  AMA  letter,  dated  20
    February 2017, was the first to refer to the appellant having  a  high-
    profile position in Islamabad, Lahore and Muzaffargarh, even though the
    appellant had claimed asylum in September 2014.  The  judge  said  this
    letter contradicted Mr K's account of  the  appellant's  activities  in
    Islamabad.  The AMA letter stated that the appellant had to  move  from
    Islamabad with his family on 24 August 2014 due to his fear, but  could
    not confirm whether that was due  to  his  religion  or  to  installing
    outdoor satellite antennae.

7.   The respondent said it was telling that no-one had  attended  from  the
    AMA to support the appellant, particularly given the comments  made  by
    Judge McAll regarding the AMA letter in the previous appeal.   He  said
    the appellant would have  known  that  a  letter  alone  would  not  be
    sufficient in these circumstances.

8.   The respondent noted that the photographs submitted  by  the  appellant
    captured only moments in time and were not cogent evidence of activism.
     The guidance set out in MN at head note  paragraph  9  was  applicable
    here regarding the appellant's alleged changes in  religious  practice.
    Consequently, the judge did not accept that the  appellant  had  proved
    that he was of any adverse interest in Pakistan now, or that  he  would
    be at risk if he returned and his claim  for  international  protection
    should be dismissed.

9.    The  respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  no  longer  pursued  his
    arguments under Article 8.

10.  At paragraphs 29 to 42 the judge identified the appellant's grounds  of
    appeal and submissions.

11.  The judge's findings on the appellant's asylum claim  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 43 to 62.

12.  The judge found that there was no good reason  for  him  to  go  behind
    Judge McAll's rejection  of  the  appellant's  credibility  as  to  his
    allegedly high-profile roles in the Ahmadi community  in  Pakistan  and
    his claim that he fled to the UK as a result of the danger he  felt  he
    was facing from KN or others.

13.  The judge held at [46] that the appellant has advanced no new  material
    evidence as to the alleged threats he faced in 2014.  He  repeated  the
    same account, but apart from his own  (previously  rejected)  evidence,
    there was nothing else of substance.  The judge said he had  difficulty
    with the statement  in  the  AMA  UK  letter  dated  20  February  2017
    paragraph (iv) that  "he  was  identified  by  anti-Ahmadi  agents  and
    remained in fear of persecution or arrest.  He had  to  move  with  his
    family from Islamabad on 24 August 2014 due to this fear".   The  judge
    said this was the first time this statement had  appeared  in  the  AMA
    correspondence that had been disclosed.

14.  The judge found that the AMA UK letter of 12 November  2014,  submitted
    at  the  previous  appeal  made  no  mention  of  the  appellant  being
    identified or in fear of arrest or persecution.  He found this was  odd
    as the source of the information in the two letters appeared to be  the
    same in each case, namely  the  records  held  in  Rabwah  and  reports
    obtained from the District President of Islamabad.  On that  basis  the
    judge said there would appear to be no reason why the 12 November  2014
    letter did not include this information.   The  judge  attached  little
    weight to the AMA UK letter of 20 February 2017 on this issue.

15.  The judge said at paragraph 49 that the only other evidence  which  was
    before him that might address this point,  and  which  was  not  before
    Judge McAll, was a statement from Mr K dated  3  February  2017.   This
    statement made  no  reference  to  the  appellant  facing  any  adverse
    attention, and in any event Mr K  did  not  attend  to  give  evidence.
    Again, the judge attached little weight to this statement.

16.  The judge at paragraph 50 considered that the appellant's sister  being
    granted asylum in the USA  was  not  a  matter  that  assisted  him  in
    determining this appeal.  The status document produced by the appellant
    did not set out the basis on which that status was granted.

17.  The judge further found that while the  appellant  may  have  held  the
    various positions  in  the  Ahmadi  community  in  different  areas  of
    Pakistan that the 20 February letter lists it does not prove that these
    roles or any of them were  high  profile,  or  that  they  brought  the
    appellant any adverse interest.

18.  The judge at paragraph 52 considered that  Judge  McAll's  finding  was
    relevant  here.   "The  appellant  has  lived  in  various  cities  and
    districts of Pakistan as an Ahmadi and he has,  on  his  own  evidence,
    never experienced any threats, ill-treatment, or persecution.   If  the
    appellant had been a longstanding and established prominent  figure  he
    would have experienced some level of harassment or intimidation but  on
    his own evidence he has not".  The judge stated that this point has not
    been adequately addressed by the appellant  before  him  and  therefore
    found that it materially damaged the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    claims.

19.  The judge set  out  at  paragraph  53  that  a  related  point  on  the
    appellant's credibility was the  question  of  whether  he  claimed  he
    experienced any threats at  all.   The  appellant's  witness  statement
    before him  referred  to  him  "constantly  facing  problems  from  the
    activist of KN which included threats to my  life".   The  judge  found
    that this was inconsistent with his account to Judge McAll and that the
    appellant then wrote back from his statement  when  asked  about  these
    alleged threats in oral evidence.  The appellant qualified  or  amended
    the version in his statement, by saying that he had heard  second-hand,
    via another Ahmadi, who had told him that the KN  were  going  to  move
    against him.

20.  The judge found that the appellant's failure to mention to Judge  McAll
    any such threat, however it came to his attention, was a further matter
    that damaged his credibility.

21.  The judge concluded in the light of his  findings  that  the  appellant
    had adduced nothing to persuade him that Judge McAll's  findings  about
    his status in Pakistan, or events that the appellant  claimed  occurred
    there, should be disturbed.

22.  The judge then looked at the related limb of  the  appellant's  appeal:
    the HJ (Iran) issue.

23.  The judge said the appellant  once  again  relied  principally  on  the
    letter from AMA UK of 20 February 2017 to  overcome  this.   The  judge
    accepted that this letter in addition to those dated 24  November  2015
    and 9 May 2016 also from the AMA UK as  well  as  the  photographs  and
    documents produced in the UK were evidence of his  many  activities  in
    the UK for the Ahmadi faith.  He noted that Judge McAll  accepted  this
    evidence too.

24.  However, the judge found  that  this  evidence  did  not  displace  the
    findings made by Judge McAll, which concerned the  appellant's  failure
    to provide any examples of going into  the  community  in  Pakistan  to
    preach his faith and his example of  preaching  to  a  co-worker  being
    "very vague" and amounting to "nothing more  than  a  minor  discussion
    about faith".  The judge found that the AMA UK letters relating to  his
    activities in Pakistan also  lacked  detail  and  did  not  assist  the
    appellant.

25.  The judge found that the fact that the appellant has been  more  openly
    active in his practice of his faith in the UK does not prove,  even  to
    the lower standard, that he would be so open in Pakistan,  or  that  he
    would be discreet, but because of his fear of persecution.

26.  The judge noted that the appellant  had  already  been  found  to  lack
    credibility and regarded his evidence as to his intentions  of  how  he
    would practise in Pakistan with caution  as  a  result.   Applying  the
    guidance in MN (particularly paragraphs 3, 6 and 9 of the head note and
    paragraphs 120, 123 and 126 of the main body of the text), the  adverse
    credibility findings led him to conclude  that  the  appellant's  claim
    that he would either practise openly, or be discreet out of fear,  were
    not credible, particularly given his many years of practising his faith
    actively but quietly by choice and without incident.   The  judge  also
    noted that the AMA UK letter of 20 February 2017 did  not  allege  that
    the appellant had undergone some material change in his outlook  as  to
    how he practises his faith.

27.  The judge said MN does not state  that  all  Ahmadis  are  at  risk  of
    persecution and the appellant  does  not  contend  that  it  should  be
    displaced by more recent country background evidence in this respect.

28.   The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  asylum,  for
    humanitarian protection and under Article 3 of the ECHR, all  of  which
    depend on the same account, must be dismissed.

29.  Mr Fripp relied on two issues.  He said that  the  appellant  sought  a
    fresh application by producing further evidence as manifestation of his
    fear and his involvement in  the  Ahmadi  community  in  the  UK.   The
    Secretary of State accepted this fresh  claim,  which  resulted  in  an
    appealable  decision  even  though  the  decision  was  to  refuse  the
    appellant's application.  He  submitted  that  by  accepting  that  the
    appellant had shown a fresh claim, the respondent was saying  that  the
    claim had a realistic prospect of success.  He accepted that this  does
    not mean that the appellant has proved his  case.   Nevertheless,  this
    was a relevant matter which the judge had to consider as  to  how  much
    weight to place on "the realistic prospect of success".   He  submitted
    that the judge's failure to take  into  account  this  relevant  matter
    amounted to an error of law.

30.  I reject Mr Fripp's argument.  I accept Mr Jarvis' argument that  there
    is no legal requirement on a judge to consider that the  claim  has  "a
    realistic prospect of success" was relevant to his  assessment  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim.  I find  that  following  acceptance  of  his
    application as a fresh claim, the respondent considered  the  substance
    of that  claim  and  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  require
    international protection.  That was the issue before the  judge  and  I
    find that the judge properly considered it.   The  Secretary  of  State
    made an appealable decision based on the fresh claim.  What was binding
    on the judge was the decision made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  McAll.
    The application of Devaseelan was binding on  the  judge  to  take  the
    findings made by Judge  McAll  as  the  starting  point.   The  judge's
    failure to address the "realistic prospect of success" does not  amount
    to an error of law.

31.   The  second  issue  submitted  by  Mr  Fripp  was  about  the  judge's
    understanding and application of MN.  He said the judge  relied  on  an
    earlier decision.  Therefore, the underlying problem was common to both
    decisions.

32.  Mr Fripp said that the guidance in MN is the starting point,  where  at
    paragraph 119,  the Tribunal held:

         "(i) The background to the risk faced  by  Ahmadis  is  legislation
             that restricts the way  in  which  they  are  able  openly  to
             practise their religion.  The legislation not  only  prohibits
             preaching  and  other  forms  of  proselytising  but  also  in
             practice  restricts  other  elements  of   manifesting   one's
             religious  beliefs,  such  as  holding  open  discourse  about
             religion  with  non-Ahmadis,   although   not   amounting   to
             proselytising.  The prohibitions include openly  referring  to
             one's place of worship as a  mosque  and  to  one's  religious
             leader as an Imam.  In addition, Ahmadis are not permitted  to
             refer to the call to prayer as azan  nor  to  call  themselves
             Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam.  Sanctions include a
             fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found,  there  is  a
             risk of the death penalty which to date has not  been  carried
             out although there is a risk of lengthy incarceration  if  the
             penalty  is  imposed.   There  is  clear  evidence  that  this
             legislation is used by non-state actors to threaten and harass
             Ahmadis.   This  includes  the  filing  of  First  Information
             Reports (FIRs) (the first step in  any  criminal  proceedings)
             which can result in detentions whilst prosecutions  are  being
             pursued.  Ahmadis are also subject  to  attacks  by  non-state
             actors from sectors of the majority Sunni population".


33.  Mr Fripp said that the prohibitions identified at paragraph  26  of  MN
    highlighted paragraph 295-C of the Penal Code.

34.  Mr Fripp relied on a letter from Lady Hale dated 4 November 2016 to  Mr
    Fripp and another Counsel, informing them why permission has been given
    in the case for R (on the application of FA  (Pakistan)  (Appellant)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent).    The  letter
    said:

         "The arguable point of law of general public importance is that the
         Court of Appeal's decision  has  the  potential  to  undermine  the
         principles in HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) about  the  right  to  live
         openly.  There is a category of single 'quiet' Ahmadis who  do  not
         face  persecution  where  the  country  guidance  case  of  MN,  as
         interpreted by the Court of Appeal in this case, does not  make  it
         sufficiently clear that the 'quiet' ones must be living in this way
         entirely voluntarily and not because of fear of the consequences of
         behaving otherwise".

35.  Mr Fripp said that the difficulty with both  decisions  was  to  decide
    what was prohibited and to compare that with  what  the  appellant  was
    doing.  He submitted that prominence is not  a  requirement.   What  is
    important is that an Ahmadi is likely to be at risk for  saying  "I  am
    Ahmadi and a Muslim".

36.  He said repeatedly the judge relied  on  concepts  such  as  preaching,
    proselytising, prominence but these were erroneous applications of MN.

37.  Mr Fripp said the judge assessed the appellant's  case  by  looking  at
    the new letter from the AMA.  He said that the judge had to acknowledge
    the relevancy by the Secretary of State of the fresh claim in line with
    what the Court of Appeal said in MN as they  endorsed  Devaseelan.   He
    said that the judge did not refer to the MN criteria in his finding  at
    paragraph 51.  The judge at paragraph 51 had found that the appellant's
    various positions  in  the  Ahmadi  community  in  different  areas  of
    Pakistan did not prove that these roles were high profile or that  they
    brought the appellant any adverse  interest.   He  submitted  that  the
    findings at paragraph 58 did not address the appellant's identity as an
    Ahmadi.

38.  Mr Fripp, said that t paragraphs 59 and 60 the judge did  not  set  out
    what MN says is protected and there was  no  independent  consideration
    short of preaching and facing direct fear by  KN  and  terrorists.   He
    said the appellant exercised his religion discreetly as in MN;  it  was
    unsuccessful.  There was  insufficient  consideration  to  the  concern
    raised by Lady Hale.  Mr Fripp said he accepted that MN does not accept
    all Ahmadis are at risk but that they are likely  to  be  at  risk  for
    basic expressions such as "I am Ahmadi" or say to the police that  they
    have had problems because they are an Ahmadi.  He said that the case of
    FA was filed by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  in  the
    Supreme  Court.   In  paragraphs  101  to  130,  the  Tribunal  in   MN
    anticipated that an Ahmadi would be able  to  practise  their  religion
    openly in defiance of 295-C of the Penal Code.  He said that there  was
    no coherent finding on the MN  guidance  decision  to  resolve  the  MN
    question or what MN protects in this decision.

39.  I was not persuaded by Mr Fripp's arguments.  I accept  the  submission
    made by Mr Jarvis that it is important to separate the  second  judge's
    approach from the first judge's approach.  The first judge rejected the
    appellant's appeal.  Further onward appeals to the First-tier  Tribunal
    and to the Upper Tribunal were refused.  In  other  words,  both  tiers
    found that Judge McAll had not made an error of law  in  his  decision.
    Consequently, this is not the forum to criticise Judge McAll's decision
    by claiming that the use of terminology was inconsistent with MN.

40.  I find that it was the appellant himself who based his claim to  asylum
    on his alleged high-profile roles in the Ahmadi community in  Pakistan.
    The letter from Mr K dated 3 February 2017 which the judge produced  at
    paragraph 21 mentioned that the appellant was an active member  of  the
    Ahmadi community  in  Islamabad,  regularly  offering  prayers  at  the
    Ahmadiyya mosque and preaching.  The  new  letter  from  AMA  dated  20
    February 2017 was the first to mention that the appellant  had  a  high
    profile in various cities in Pakistan.  I  further  note  that  in  the
    grounds of appeal  lodged  by  Mr  Fripp,  in  the  background  to  the
    application he mentioned that one of the primary matters was  that  the
    appellant was at risk in Pakistan as an individual  by  reason  of  his
    profile as an Ahmadi.  I therefore reject that the terminology used  by
    the judges was inappropriate because they did not comply with MN.  That
    terminology was used by the appellant to support  his  application  and
    used by Counsel, Mr  Fripp,  to  support  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal.  I find that  the  terminology  used  by  the  judges  was  not
    inconsistent with MN.

41.  I note that in MN the Tribunal did not conclude that  all  Ahmadis  are
    at risk because they are  Ahmadis.   In  head  note  2(ii)  of  MN  the
    Tribunal held: "It is, and has  long  been,  possible  in  general  for
    Ahmadis to practise their faith on a restricted basis either in private
    or  in  community  with  other  Ahmadis,  without  infringing  domestic
    Pakistani law."  The country guidance in MN was not saying that Ahmadis
    are not able to express their basis  religious  beliefs,  functions  or
    identity. It said that  they  may  choose  to  quietly  practise  their
    religion as part of their natural form of expression.

42.  I find that the judge considered the  reliability  of  the  appellant's
    claimed activities in Pakistan and the reliability of his activities in
    the UK.  The judge assessed the appellant's personal expression of  his
    religion within MN. I find  that  the  judge's  decision  was  entirely
    lawful.

43.  The second judge assessed the impact of the  new  evidence,  using  the
    decision of the first judge as the basis  and  made  his  own  findings
    about the new evidence.  I find that these findings do not reflect  the
    judge's misunderstanding of MN.

44.  I find that FA changes nothing.  It is a permission application by  the
    Secretary of State to the Supreme Court.

45.  Each case relies on its own merits.  I find that significant  parts  of
    the appellant's evidence were not accepted.   I  find  that  the  judge
    adopted the correct legal approach.

46.  I find that the decision made by FtTJ Rhys-Davies does not disclose  an
    error of law.

47.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 9 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
