
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/04179/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 February 2018                      |    On 20 March 2018                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     MSM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O James, of Counsel, instructed by Asylum Justice

For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of the DRC appeals with permission  against  a
    decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fowell  who  in   a
    determination promulgated on 10 July 2017 dismissed his appeal against
    a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse asylum.

2.   The appellant had claimed that he had been politically  active  in  the
    opposition UDPS Party in the Congo and had then fled to  Zimbabwe.   He
    claimed that while he was there a meeting which  he  had  attended  was
    raided by the CIO and he had therefore decided to  leave  Zimbabwe  and
    come to Britain and claim asylum.  His appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge
    Fowell who found that his claim was not credible, stating that  it  was
    not credible that the CIO of the DRC would make a cross-border raid  to
    attack the meeting at which the appellant had been injured.

3.   The grounds of appeal argued  that  the  judge  had  misunderstood  the
    appellant's evidence.  The appellant had not said that it was  the  CIO
    of the DRC that had attacked the meeting at which he  was  injured  but
    the Zimbabwean CIO.

4.   Mr Richards accepted that this was a fundamental error  which  went  to
    the heart of the judge's decision and therefore it was appropriate that
    the determination should be set aside.

5.   I agree that this is a fundamental error of fact and  I  therefore  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Judge.

Notice of Decision

This determination is set aside.

Direction

The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh on  all  issues  in  the  First-
tier.


Signed:                             Date: 17 March 2018

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


