
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04332/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   m h d d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, who is currently of undetermined nationality,  was  born
    on 1 January 1981.  She arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  6  November
    2015 and made an application for asylum the same day.  The basis of her
    claim is that she is of Eritrean nationality  but  had  been  born  and
    lived in Ethiopia until the age of 19 and that she  was  a  Pentecostal
    Christian.  On  20  January  2000,  she  and  her  father  received   a
    deportation order requiring them to leave Ethiopia and subsequently she
    left with her aunt and went to Sudan.  From there she travelled to  the
    UK and made her asylum claim.  Her claim  was  refused  in  a  decision
    dated 25 April 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes for hearing on  14  May  2018.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 31 May 2018,  the  judge  dismissed
    the  appeal,  finding  that  the  Appellant  could   obtain   Ethiopian
    nationality and she could be expected to live there, and thus her  fear
    of persecution in relation to Eritrea, i.e. having to undergo  military
    service and difficulties she  claimed  in  practising  her  Pentecostal
    Christianity would not arise.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis:  firstly,  that
    the judge failed to have proper regard to the country guidance decision
    in ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011]  UKUT
    252 (IAC).  It was asserted in this respect  that  the  judge  did  not
    reject the Appellant's claim to be ethnically Eritrean,  nor  that  she
    was made subject to a deportation order in 2000, but simply  found  she
    could obtain Ethiopian nationality and live there [29].   This  follows
    his finding at [27] that the Appellant would be entitled  to  Ethiopian
    nationality by virtue of  the  Ethiopian  Nationality  Proclamation  of
    2003.  However, that finding was inconsistent with the CG  decision  in
    ST at head note (4) which provides:-

         "A person who is regarded by the Ethiopian authorities as an ethnic
         Eritrean and who left Ethiopia during or in the immediate aftermath
         of the border war between Ethiopia and Eritrea, is likely  to  face
         very significant practical difficulties in establishing nationality
         and the attendant right to return, stemming from the reluctance  of
         the Ethiopian authorities to countenance the return of  someone  it
         regards as a 'foreigner'"

    and head note (6):-

         "A person who left Ethiopia as described in (4) above  is  unlikely
         to be able to re-acquire Ethiopian nationality as a matter of right
         by means of the 2003 Nationality Proclamation and would  be  likely
         first to have to live in Ethiopia for a significant period of  time
         (probably 4 years)".

    The Proclamation itself at [5.2] provides that a  person  applying  for
    nationality would have had to have lived in Ethiopia for the four years
    preceding their application.  This was also not considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

 4. The head note at (7) was also prayed in aid which provides:-

         "The 2004 Directive, which provided a means  whereby  Eritreans  in
         Ethiopia could obtain registered foreigner status and in some cases
         a route to reacquisition of citizenship, applied only to those  who
         were resident in Ethiopia when Eritrea became independent  and  who
         had continued to reside up to the date of Directive".

    It is asserted that the judge had also failed to take  this  aspect  of
    the country guidance decision into account.

 5. Secondly, it was asserted that the judge had failed to make findings on
    material issues of fact, in particular:-

      1)  whether  the  Appellant  had  in  fact  been  made  subject  to  a
         deportation order;

      2) whether the Appellant had previously had Ethiopian nationality  and
         whether this was taken away

    and the failure to make such findings was contrary to  the  first  head
    note of ST Ethiopia which provides, inter alia:-

         "Those perceived as ethnic  Eritreans,  who  remained  in  Ethiopia
         during the war, and who were  deprived  of  Ethiopian  nationality,
         suffered arbitrary treatment, contrary to international law.  Those
         who left Ethiopia at this time or who  were  then  already  outside
         Ethiopia were arbitrarily deprived of their Ethiopian nationality".

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant
    in a decision dated 18 July 2018, on  the  basis  that  the  judge  has
    arguably erred in law by failing to make any finding on the Appellant's
    nationality  from  which  the  findings  about  risk  on  return   will
    necessarily follow.

     Hearing

 7. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Mills  accepted  that  the
    approach taken by the  judge  was  contrary  to  the  country  guidance
    decision in ST (op cit) and the  relevant  legislation  which  suggests
    that  the  Appellant  is  unlikely  to  be  able  to  obtain  Ethiopian
    nationality.  Thus he conceded that the judge had made a material error
    of law in this respect.  He submitted however  there  were  outstanding
    issues relating to the credibility  of  the  Appellant's  account  that
    needed to be determined and thus the appropriate course of action would
    be a remittal back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Ms Smith on behalf of the Appellant accepted that further  findings  of
    fact needed to be made and that the country  guidance  decision  in  ST
    requires findings as to whether the Appellant left in the circumstances
    that she claimed.

     Findings and Reasons

 9. In light of  Mr  Mills'  helpful  concession  I  find  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes made material errors of law in his  Decision  and
    Reasons, in particular the failure to have proper regard to the country
    guidance decision in ST Ethiopia CG op cit for the reasons set  out  in
    the grounds of appeal cited in full above.

10. It is also the case that the judge failed to  make  any  or  any  clear
    finding on  material  issues  viz  as  to  whether  the  Appellant  had
    Ethiopian nationality previously and whether she had been made  subject
    to a deportation order as she claimed on  20  January  2000.  For  this
    reason, it is necessary to remit the appeal  back  to  the  First  tier
    Tribunal for findings of fact on these key issues to be made.



     Decision

11. I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal
    sitting in Nottingham (any judge other than Judge Parkes).

12. I make the following directions:-

      1) The appeal should be listed for three hours.

      2) An Amharic interpreter shall be required.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 10 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman




