
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/04802/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2017                          |On 21 June 2017                   |
|Prepared on 20 June 2017                 |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    R. H.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, for Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who entered the  UK  illegally.  He
      made an application for  protection  on  10  December  2015,  and  the
      Respondent refused that protection application on 29 April  2016.  The
      Appellant's appeal to the First tier  Tribunal  ["FtT"]  against  that
      decision was heard on 28  November  2016.  It  was  dismissed  on  all
      grounds, in a decision promulgated on 4 January  2017  by  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Bircher.
   2. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal that  decision  on  20
      April 2017 by First tier Tribunal Judge Landes on the  basis  that  it
      was arguable the Judge had either failed  to  follow  current  country
      guidance, or, failed to provide reasons for choosing  not  to  do  so,
      and, had arguably erred in her approach to credibility to  the  extent
      that her decision was unsafe.
   3. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 Notice dated 4 May 2017 in relation
      to the grant of permission, opposing it. Neither party has made formal
      application to adduce further evidence. Thus the matter  comes  before
      me.


   Error of Law?
   4. The first and second grounds to the challenge are  a  complaint  about
      the Judge's approach to the humanitarian protection appeal. They are a
      complaint about a failure to properly engage  with  and/or  apply  the
      current country guidance decision in relation  to  Iraq;  AA  (Article
      15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544, and, a complaint  that  inadequate  or
      inconsistent findings  of  primary  fact  were  made  about  where  he
      originated from and  whether  he  could  physically  travel  there  in
      safety. The third ground is more general,  and  a  complaint  under  a
      number of headings as to the manner in which the Judge approached  the
      task of assessing the weight to be given to the Appellant's  evidence,
      asserting that viewed holistically the Judge's approach was such as to
      render the decision unsafe.
   5. The Appellant claimed that his home area was Kirkuk, and that  he  was
      an ethnic Kurd; which the Judge appears to  have  accepted  [30].  The
      Judge then appears however to have either directed  herself,  wrongly,
      that Kirkuk lay within the KRG, describing this  as  his  "home  area"
      [35], or to have made an inconsistent finding that his "home area" was
      in an unspecified location within the KRG.  Both  parties  are  agreed
      that this was a material error of fact, and that it  may  explain  why
      there was no analysis of the evidence relating to the issue of whether
      this individual might travel from Baghdad airport to Kirkuk in safety.
   6. In any event, it is agreed, that the decision  does  not  disclose  an
      analysis of whether the  Appellant's  "home  area"  was  the  city  of
      Kirkuk, or some rural village in the vicinity within the  areas  still
      subject to armed conflict.
   7. The Judge went  on  to  conclude  that  Kirkuk  did  not  satisfy  the
      threshold for Article 15 (c), referring simply  to  the  "respondent's
      country guidance" to justify that  finding.  Both  parties  before  me
      accept that it is unclear what she intended by that.
   8. Both parties were also agreed that the Judge's  assumption  [35]  that
      the Appellant would be allowed to settle in the KRG, or had family who
      were settled there, was  itself  unexplained.  Neither  were  able  to
      identify any evidence before her that  would  have  led  her  to  that
      conclusion,  although  Ms  Petterson  understandably  felt  unable  to
      concede that there was none.
   9. The Judge went on to find that the Appellant could relocate to the KRG
      [34]. In so doing she made no finding  that  the  Appellant  had  ever
      lived in the KRG previously, and appeared to accept that  the  members
      of his immediate family he had identified were living in  Kirkuk.  She
      then went on to find "he has family ties who will be in a position  to
      provide accommodation and act as a sponsor or guarantor". Both parties
      before me accept that there is no obvious evidential basis for such  a
      finding, if it is meant to relate to individuals living in the KRG. Ms
      Cleghorn suggests that this is  an  indication  the  Judge  mistakenly
      believed Kirkuk to lie within the KRG, and there is support  for  this
      in the following paragraph when the Judge finds "I am  satisfied  that
      he can return to his home area in the KRI..." [35]. Such a finding  is
      otherwise obviously inconsistent with the  earlier  finding  that  his
      home area was Kirkuk [30].
  10. Finally both parties were agreed that  there  were  real  grounds  for
      concern  as  to  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  assessment  of   the
      Appellant's credibility. I agree. There is  in  my  judgement  nothing
      obviously incredible about a young man living in a rural  area  taking
      his first employment in agriculture with a relative, and  then  moving
      on to another job, particularly when that second  employment  is  with
      the armed forces. It is not an obviously available first employment if
      all the family lived in acity, but that was  not  the  Judge's  point.
      Moreover in her analysis  of  the  evidence  concerning  his  military
      service the Judge concluded that all  personnel  would  have  a  rank,
      whatever their job description. That is a finding that leaves me  with
      considerable unease. That might be a conclusion that could properly be
      reached in the light of relevant evidence, but it is  far  from  clear
      that there was any evidence on the armed forces  in  Iraq  before  her
      that  would  permit  it.  Tackling  the  issue  of  rank  through   an
      interpreter who may have no knowledge of military life is also  in  my
      experience fraught with difficulty,  and  something  that  needs  very
      careful handling to ensure that there is no  misunderstanding.  "Rank"
      can mean different things  in  context  even  in  English,  and  these
      conclusions  strike  me  as  particularly  weak  foundations   for   a
      conclusion that the Appellant's evidence about his experiences in Iraq
      was entirely untrue.
  11. In the circumstances the decision discloses a material  error  of  law
      that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe, and the decision must
      in the circumstances  be  set  aside  and  remade.  I  have  in  these
      circumstances considered whether or not to remit  the  appeal  to  the
      First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard, or  whether  to  proceed  to
      remake it in the Upper  Tribunal.  In  circumstances  where  it  would
      appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered  by
      the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has  been  to
      deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case to  be  properly
      considered by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(a)  of  the
      Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the
      judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard to the over-
      riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted
      to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement
      of 25 September 2012.
  12. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The appeal is not to be listed  before
        Judge Bircher.
    ii) A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required for  the  hearing  of  the
        appeal.
   iii) There is presently anticipated to be the  Appellant  and  no  other
        witness, and the time estimate is as a result, 3 hours.
    iv) It is not anticipated by the Respondent that she  has  any  further
        evidence to be filed. The Appellant anticipates that  a  review  of
        the evidence is required and that a short further witness statement
        may be filed. The Appellant is therefore  to  file  and  serve  any
        further evidence to be relied upon at his appeal  by  5pm  11  July
        2017
     v) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
        available date at the North Shields hearing centre  after  18  July
        2017.
    vi) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
   vii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

  13. The decision promulgated on 4 January 2017 did involve the  making  of
      an error of law sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and
      reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal
      with the directions set out above.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 20 June 2017
