

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/04993/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 August 2018                         |On 1 October 2018                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                             MR SHAKHAWAN HAIDER
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Barnfield   (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which was issued to the  parties
on 18 July 2017.  In  making  its  decision  the  tribunal  dismissed  the
claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's  decision  of  11 May 2017
refusing to grant  him  international  protection.   However,  the  claimant
secured permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and, after a hearing  of
16 February 2018,  I  decided  to  set  aside  the  tribunal's  decision,
preserving none of the findings, and I also decided that the decision  would
be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  I directed a  further  hearing  to  deal
with  matters  relevant  to  remaking  and  that  hearing  took   place   on
6 August 2018.  Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I
would wish to place on record my gratitude to each representative.



The appellant, his immigration and his adjudication history

2.    The appellant is a national of Iraq and he was born on 27 March 1990.
 It does not appear to have  ever  been  disputed  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
ethnicity.  Indeed, he speaks Kurdish Sorani  and  gave  evidence  in  that
language before me.  He says that he is a Sunni Muslim.  He entered the UK,
in a clandestine manner, on 15 June 2010.  It is recorded that he  claimed
asylum on 18 June 2010.  The basis of his claim, at that time, was that he
had been a serving Iraqi police officer, that he  had  received  threatening
letters  from  terrorists  who  disapproved  of  his  work  and  that  those
terrorists had subsequently  blown  up  his  home  causing  him  injury  and
killing members of his family.  He also asserted that he is from  Kirkuk  in
Iraq and that it was there that he had experienced those  claimed  problems.


3.    The Secretary of State did not believe the  claimant's  account.   So,
on 6 July 2010, his asylum claim was refused. The claimant  then  appealed
and his appeal was heard by Judge Baker on 10 September 2010.  He was not
represented at that hearing.  The Secretary of State was  represented  by  a
Presenting Officer.  Judge Baker dismissed the  claimant's  appeal  having
found him not to be credible.  He did not believe that he was  from  Kirkuk,
nor that he had been a serving police officer in Iraq, nor that he had come
to the adverse attention  of  any  terrorists.   Judge Baker's  credibility
assessment runs from paragraph 24 to paragraph 37 of the  written  reasons
which he produced on 15 September 2010.  I do not propose to set out  what
he had to say about all of that in full.  But the  question  of  whether  or
not the claimant is from Kirkuk has loomed large in the  proceedings  before
me and so it may be helpful for me to set out the  Judge's  findings  as  to
that.  The Judge said this:

      "     25.  He accepted that he  had  given  the  answers  recorded  in
      interview.  I find that they demonstrate such ignorance of Kirkuk that
      I do not accept his claims he has lived there since at least 16 years
      old.

            26.  He was unable to name either the Zab or  Sarwan  Rivers  in
      Kirkuk or any of the biggest Mosques.  As a policeman and as a  person
      who had lived there since between  14 to  16 years  old  it  is  not
      credible  that  he  could  not  name  these  famous  geographical  and
      religious sites.

            27.  When asked to name the famous  buildings  or  landmarks  in
      Kirkuk he could name a telephone tower and a roundabout called  Ikhwan
      and an old school called Azadi.  That was challenged  in  the  refusal
      letter on the basis that extensive research has been  unable  to  find
      either of those.

            28.  He  was  unable  I  find  to  name  the  football  stadium,
      Kirkuk Football Club player the Kirkuk Olympic  Stadium  which  is  a
      building built in 1989 and a capacity to hold 30,000.  I find that had
      he been resident in Kirkuk and operated as a policeman since 2008,  he
      having moved there between 14 and 16 years old  whether  or  not  he
      played football he would have been able to  identify  the  stadium  by
      name.

            29.  I find he has not established that  he  comes  from  Kirkuk
      despite his claims."

4.     Judge Baker's  decision  was  not  challenged  or,  at  least,  not
successfully so.  Nevertheless, the claimant did not leave the UK.   Indeed,
a series of further representations were made to the Secretary of  State  on
his behalf.  Essentially, it was argued  that  as  an  Iraqi  national  from
Kirkuk, a "contested area", he could not safely  return  because,  following
relevant Country Guidance decisions, he would be  at  risk  in  his  claimed
home area of Kirkuk in consequence of the test set out in Article 15(c)  of
the Qualification Directive being met.  He would not be able  to  internally
relocate, it was contended, because he was not properly documented  and,  in
particular, would be returning without what is known as a CSID document  and
without an ability to obtain one.  The  practical  consequence  of  his  not
having a CSID document would  be  destitution.   Those  arguments,  however,
were rejected by the Secretary of State in a decision of 11 May 2017.   It
was that decision which led to the decision of the tribunal which  was  sent
to the parties on 18 July 2007 and then  my  decision  to  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision.

The issues for me in remaking the decision

5.    The claimant has not, in these proceedings, sought  to  resurrect  his
claim to have been at risk due to his incurring the wrath of  terrorists  in
consequence of his work as a police officer.  That had been  comprehensively
rejected by  Judge Baker.  But  he  has  sought  to  pursue  the  arguments
summarised above which he had relied upon in his further representations  to
the Secretary of State prior to the decision of  11 May 2017  having  been
made.  He also asserts, for similar reasons, that he  should  succeed  under
Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)  because  he
would face "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his  reintegration  in  Iraq.
Paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules is relied upon here.   Further,
he says that he should have been granted discretionary leave in  the  UK  on
the basis of what are considered to be his "exceptional  circumstances"  and
he refers to a document described in Mr Barnfield's  skeleton  argument  of
6 August 2018 as "Chapter 53 of EIG".  In a nutshell, the  claimant  says
that he is from Kirkuk; Kirkuk is and remains a contested area so  he  can't
go back there; he has no family in Iraq or, if he  has,  he  no  longer  has
contact with them; and he is undocumented.

6.    It is for the claimant to  make  out  his  claim  to  be  entitled  to
international protection be that under the 1951 Refugee Convention,  or  on
Humanitarian Protection grounds or on Human Rights grounds with respect  to
Article 3 of the ECHR.  The standard of proof is what is sometimes referred
to as "the lower standard" or the "real risk" standard.  I have to  consider
whether  he  has  succeeded  in  making  out  his  claim  to   international
protection.  I must then, additionally, consider what the position might  be
with respect to Article 8 of the ECHR  and  with  respect  to  Home Office
policy and discretionary leave.

The hearing for the purposes of the remaking of the decision

7.     As  indicated,  the  hearing   took   place   on   6 August 2018.
Representation was as stated above.  The  claimant  had  the  benefit  of  a
Kurdish Sorani speaking interpreter  and  he  gave  his  evidence  in  that
language.  His evidence in chief was brief but  he  was  cross-examined,  at
some length,  by  Mr Mills.   I  then  heard  oral  submissions  from  each
representative.

8.    In addition to the documentation which  was  already  before  me  (see
below) Mr Mills introduced a copy of the written record of  the  claimant's
screening interview which had taken place on 18 June 2010.  I note that, in
fact, a copy of that screening interview had been  before  Judge Baker  and
the claimant had, at that stage,  invited  him  to  take  its  content  into
consideration.  Mr Barnfield did not resist the admission of the  screening
interview record but he was granted a short adjournment  to  enable  him  to
read it and to take instructions after which he indicated he was content  to
proceed.

9.    I shall refer to certain of  what  was  said  at  the  hearing,  where
necessary or appropriate, below, when I seek to explain how I  have  re-made
the decision.

The documentary evidence

10.   Given the somewhat lengthy previous  adjudication  history  there  was
much documentation before me.   But  the  key  documents  consisted  of  the
respondent's bundle; a consolidated bundle filed on behalf of  the  claimant
which  included,  amongst  other   things,   his   witness   statements   of
16 June 2017 and 1 August 2018 and a witness statement of one  Omar Ali
Omar; Mr Barnfield's skeleton argument  and  the  aforementioned  screening
interview record.

11.    I  confirm  that  I  have  given   careful   consideration   to   the
documentation before me prior to remaking the decision in this case.

Credibility

12.   This is a case  where,  in  remaking  the  decision,  I  have  had  to
undertake my own assessment as to the credibility of the  claimant.   In  so
doing I  have  taken  account  of  his  oral  evidence  before  me  and  the
documentation.   I  have  borne  in  mind  that  I  should  be  cautious  in
rejecting, as incredible, an account or part of an  account  offered  by  an
inexperienced and anxious asylum seeker.   I  have  considered  all  of  the
evidence as a composite whole prior to reaching a view  as  to  credibility.
I have reminded myself of the lower standard of proof  applicable  in  cases
where international protection is sought.

13.    There  are,  of  course,  previous  unchallenged  or   unsuccessfully
challenged findings made by Judge Baker.  As to those,  Mr Barnfield  does
not dispute that, following the very well-known case of  Devaseelan  (Second
Appeals - ECHR - Extra - Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702,
Judge Baker's findings must represent my starting point.  But as  explained
in that decision, those findings will not  necessarily  be  the  end  point.
Where there has been an earlier judicial decision and then  a  later  appeal
made by the same  claimant,  there  might,  for  example,  be  new  evidence
available which had not been available when the previous decision  had  been
made and matters might have been  altered  by  the  passage  of  time.   But
Mr Barnfield did not seek to argue  either  in  his  skeleton  argument  or
otherwise that Judge Baker had been wrong to reject the claimant's  account
of having been persecuted  by  terrorists  in  consequence  of  his  claimed
employment  (it  was  found  he  never  had  any  such  employment)   as   a
police officer.  So, there is no basis  upon  which  I  could  sensibly  or
rationally depart from those findings.  So, I proceed on the basis that  the
claimant had sought to mislead with respect to that pivotal  aspect  of  his
asylum claim and that he is a person, or at least was a person in 2010,  who
would be prepared to deliberately mislead if he saw advantage in  so  doing.


14.   As indicated, Judge Baker also found, for the reasons set out  above,
that the  claimant  was  not  from  Kirkuk.   Mr Barnfield  does,  however,
notwithstanding Devaseelan, urge me to  make  a  different  finding  and  to
conclude that he is,  indeed,  from  Kirkuk.   Whilst  no  new  evidence  is
offered as to that Mr Barnfield points out that the claimant  has  remained
consistent as to that aspect of his case over  a  number  of  years  and  on
every  occasion  that  he  has  presented  his  claim.   He  says  that  the
consistency over a long  period  is,  in  essence,  a  new  and  substantial
consideration for me  and  sufficient  to  cause  me  to  make  a  different
finding.  It might also be said, I suppose, that whilst the  claimant  might
be thought to have a specific reason to mislead and to claim to  be  from  a
"contested area" now, there  was  not  the  obvious  similar  motivation  to
mislead  about  his  home  area  in  2010  when  he  gave  his  evidence  to
Judge Baker.

15.   Judge Baker though, conducted what was a quite detailed  and  careful
analysis as to what  the  claimant  was  saying  regarding  his  home  area.
Judge Baker gave detailed and specific reasons why he did not  believe  the
claimant was from Kirkuk.  On the face of it, those reasons are  persuasive.
 The claimant has not dealt with them.  He has not, for example,  either  in
his oral evidence to me or in the  witness  statements  referred  to  above,
explained why he could not name the rivers running through Kirkuk or why  he
did not know the name of the football stadium in Kirkuk.  If  there  was  an
explanation as to that he could have offered it at the  hearing  before  me.
I do not find Mr Barnfield's "passage of time" argument to  be  persuasive.
It is right to say that if the claimant was telling the  truth  about  being
from Kirkuk he would very probably, as he has been, be consistent about  it.
 But, on the other hand, it is also the  case  that  if  he  had  chosen  to
deliberately mislead about being from Kirkuk  when  giving  his  account  to
Judge Baker, he might  be  reluctant  to  subsequently  concede  the  point,
thereby exposing himself as a dishonest witness.  In any event,  even  if  I
were to attach weight to his consistency over time, it would  be  outweighed
by his inability to address before  me  the  concerns  identified  by  Judge
Baker. In the circumstances I have concluded that  there  is  nothing  of  a
persuasive nature to cause me to  depart  from  Judge Baker's  careful  and
reasoned findings on the point.  The consequence of  that  is  that  I  must
conclude  the  claimant  was  prepared  to  maintain  a  misleading  account
regarding  his  home  area  before  me  and  has,  therefore,  persisted  in
dishonesty with respect to that aspect of his case.

16.   The claimant has consistently said that he is not in contact with  any
family members in Iraq and that he does not have any documentation.   It  is
argued that, if such is true, notwithstanding any dishonesty  on  his  part,
he is entitled to international  protection  because  without  documentation
and without family assistance either to obtain documentation or  to  provide
support to him which he will need in the absence of documentation,  he  will
be at risk.  That is why his evidence, and in particular  cross-examination,
focused upon such issues.

17.   The claimant  was  not  an  impressive  witness  before  me.   He  had
indicated at paragraphs 10 of his witness statement of 16 June 2017 that he
had "never had Iraqi passport".  Mr Mills asked him if that was correct and
he said that it was.   It  was  then  put  to  him  that  in  his  screening
interview he had indicated that he had previously held  an  Iraqi  passport.
Pausing there, at question 6.1 of the interview record it is recorded  that
he was asked if he had ever had his own  national  passport.   His  recorded
reply reads "used to have one, lost.  Can't remember the number but  it  was
'S' type".  The claimant asserted before me, in  effect,  that  he  had  not
said that.  He did not know how such had  come  to  be  recorded.   So,  the
claimant's oral evidence and the evidence contained in a  witness  statement
was not consistent with what it is  recorded  he  had  had  to  say  in  his
screening interview.

18.   The claimant says he is no longer in contact with any  family  members
in Iraq.  At paragraph 4 of his witness  statement  of  16 June 2017,  he
referred  to  his  parents  and  his  sister  and  his  brother  (with   the
implication that he had one male and one female sibling only) but said  that
his father, his sister and his brother had been killed in an explosion.   He
said that he had had no contact with his mother since coming to the UK.   He
was asked about what  family  members  he  had  in  Iraq  in  his  screening
interview and in cross-examination by Mr Mills.  At questions 4.3  and  4.4
of the screening interview he was asked about his family and,  according  to
the record, he indicated that, in terms of siblings, he had  a  brother  and
three sisters.  In cross-examination he said that he had only ever  had  one
sister.  He mentioned having two brothers,  though  he  said  that  one  had
passed  away,  but  only  one  brother  is  referred  to  in  the  screening
interview.  So, again, there is inconsistency.

19.   I appreciate that, as Mr Barnfield points out, it is  appropriate  to
exercise caution in taking credibility points which stem  from  the  content
of a  screening  interview  record.   That  is  so,  not  least,  because  a
screening interview is not the forum for a claimant  to  do  anything  other
than  provide  basic  details.   But  here,  the  inconsistencies  Mr Mills
identifies do relate to very basic matters.  In particular, with respect  to
the passport, the claimant gave some specific detail as to the  passport  he
was saying, at screening, that he had  previously  had.   That  detail  (the
point about an "S" type passport), to my mind, makes it more likely that  he
did say what he was recorded as having said about the  passport.   So,  that
is  an  inconsistency  which  I  take  into  account  and  give  weight   to
notwithstanding my acceptance that, generally speaking,  caution  concerning
the content of screening interview records is appropriate.

20.   As to any contact with his mother,  the  claimant  addressed  that  at
paragraph 5 of his witness statement of 16 June 2017.  He said that he had
not been in contact with his mother since coming to the UK.  He  added  "she
did not have a telephone so that I could not contact her".  He said that  he
had contacted the British Red Cross on 7 June 2017  and  asked  for  their
assistance in tracing her but they had not been  able  to  provide  any.  In
cross-examination before me, the claimant said  that  he  had  lost  contact
with his mother and his brother in Iraq  because  he  had  lost  his  mobile
telephone in the UK and "the number was stored in my  phone".   He  said  he
had not written the number down even though telephoning them on  the  number
he had was the only means he had of contacting them.  I do not  believe  the
claimant.  First of all, what he said in oral  evidence  about  how  he  had
come to lose touch with his mother was slightly different  to  what  he  had
said in his witness statement.  But even  leaving  that  aside,  it  is  not
credible that if dialling a specific number which he now  says  he  had  for
his mother and brother was the only means of contacting them, he  would  not
have kept a separate record of the number and would not have  simply  relied
upon its being saved in his mobile phone which  he  claims  he  subsequently
lost.  The importance of keeping  such  a  number,  as  the  only  means  of
contacting his family, is obvious and would, in  my  judgment,  have  caused
him to have kept a separate record despite his contention that  he  did  not
do so. So,  this  aspect  of  his  account  causes  further  damage  to  his
credibility.

21.   The appellant said that he had lost contact  with  his  family  either
immediately upon his arrival in the UK or shortly afterwards.   But,  whilst
he says he did contact the British Red Cross to ask for their assistance  in
tracing and getting into touch with his mother,  he  did  not,  on  his  own
account, do so until 2017.  I do not find that to be credible.   If  he  had
lost touch as soon as he claims  I  believe  he  would  have  contacted  the
British Red Cross significantly earlier.  Further, at the  hearing,  he  did
not offer any explanation for that delay.

22.   I have concluded, in light of the above and in light of  what  I  have
found to  have  been  a  history  of  seeking  to  mislead  the  immigration
authorities in order to  secure  advantage,  that  the  claimant  is  not  a
credible witness.  I conclude that he  has  misled  about  his  reasons  for
leaving Iraq, about the identity documentation  which  he  has  had  in  the
past, about his having lost touch with his family  in  Iraq  and  about  his
being from Kirkuk.  It is in light  of  my  adverse  credibility  conclusion
that I go on to make my relevant findings of fact.

Findings of Fact

23.   I find the following:

      A.    The claimant is from Iraq and is Kurdish.   Such  has  not  been
placed in issue.

      B.    The claimant is a Sunni Muslim.  I have some doubts about  that
           but since that particular aspect  of  his  claim  has  not  been
           placed in issue before me or at an earlier stage, I have decided
           to give him the benefit of the doubt.

      C.    I find that the claimant is not from Kirkuk.   I  am  unable  to
           make a clear finding as to what is his genuine home area in Iraq
           because there is insufficient material before me to enable me to
           properly do that.  That is a consequence of his dishonesty.  But
           I find, wherever his home area is, it is not an area  which  has
           been characterised or specified as being a "contested  area"  in
           previous Country Guidance decisions. I say that because I think
           if he really was from any other contested  area  he  would  have
           said  so  and  because  of  the  general  unreliability  of  his
           evidence.

      D.    I find that the claimant has family in Iraq with whom he  is  in
           contact.  I so find because  he  has  provided  an  inconsistent
           account as to what close family he had in Iraq when he  came  to
           the UK,  because  of  his  general  and  persistent  dishonesty,
           because  he  has  provided  an  implausible   and   unpersuasive
           explanation as to how he came to lose contact  with  his  family
           and because if he had genuinely lost touch with  his  family  in
           Iraq in 2010 which is what he claims, he would  have  approached
           the British Red Cross to  secure  their  assistance  at  a  much
           earlier stage than he did.

      E.    I find that the claimant has not demonstrated that he is not  in
           possession of identity documentation including a CSID, an  Iraqi
           passport and any other form of identity  card  which  the  Iraqi
           authorities may issue.  I  make  that  finding  because  of  the
           claimant's general persistent  dishonesty  and  because  he  has
           sought  to  mislead  concerning  the  position   regarding   his
           passport.  So, what he has to say about documentation can simply
           not be  relied  upon.   It  is  possible  that  certain  of  the
           documentation  has  expired  but  that  does  not  prevent  such
           documentation being persuasive as to his  identity  upon  return
           or, of itself, prevent him from renewing his documentation.

Decision and Reasons

24.    In  deciding  this  appeal  I  was  invited  to  consider,  and  have
considered, what was said in AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ 944,  AA
(Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)) and BA (returns  to  Bagdad:
Iraq:  CG) [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC).

25.   The claimant is not at real  risk  of  persecution,  serious  harm  or
Article 3 ill-treatment upon return to the Iraq on the basis that he is  of
adverse interest to terrorists  based  upon  his  claimed  employment  as  a
police officer.  Such had been pursued in the past, as noted, and had  been
rejected, but no attempt to revive those arguments was made before me.

26.   It is a major  plank  of  the  claimant's  case  that  he  is  from  a
contested area such  that  paragraph 15c  of  the  Qualification  Directive
applies to him.  However, I have found, as  had  been  found  previously  by
Judge Baker, that he is not from Kirkuk.  So, he has failed to  demonstrate
that he is from a contested area in  Iraq  at  all.   To  my  mind  that  is
utterly destructive of  his  case  and,  quite  simply,  he  has  failed  to
demonstrate that he will have any problems within his  home  area  (whatever
that area might be) in Iraq upon return.

27.   Additionally and in any event, whilst the claimant says  he  does  not
possess  and  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  appropriate   documentation,
specifically a CSID card, I have rejected his contentions  in  that  regard.
He has not shown he does not possess such documentation and, in  any  event,
has not shown that he  could  not  successfully  obtain  such  documentation
quickly upon return to Iraq.

28.   As to the  arguments  under  Article 8  and  the  Article 8  related
Immigration Rules, it was contended that  the  claimant  would  face  "very
significant  obstacles"  to  his  reintegration  in  Iraq.   However,   that
argument depended upon the contentions  he  had  made  regarding  his  being
undocumented and his being without family connections or  support.   I  have
rejected those contentions so the Article 8 argument falls away.  As to the
discretionary  leave  argument,  Mr Barnfield  realistically  acknowledged
before me that if  I  were  to  make  a  comprehensive  adverse  credibility
finding the argument could not succeed.  I have done that.

29.   In the circumstances the claimant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was sent to  the  parties  on
18 July 2017 has already been set aside.

In remaking the  decision,  I  dismissed  the  claimant's  appeal  from  the
Secretary of State's decision of 11 May 2017.

I have not directed anonymity.  I was not invited to do so and it  does  not
seem to me that there is any obvious basis for my doing so.


Signed:                      Date:  27 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.


Signed:                      Date:  27 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

