
 [pic]



The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/04117/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 24th April 2017                 |On 9th June 2017                        |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                    A F O
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Devlin, Counsel, instructed by Quinn, Martin and
Langan.
For the Respondent:  Mr.Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer.









                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. In a decision promulgated on 16 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal
      Judge D H Clapham dismissed the appellant's appeal on the basis of
      credibility. Permission to appeal the decision has been granted.


   2. The appellant is from the independent Kurdish region of Iraq. Her
      husband came to the United Kingdom in 2011 in order to study for a
      Ph.D. He was sponsored by the Kurdish Ministry of the Interior and had
      been employed in the police laboratories in Erbil as a DNA expert. The
      appellant and their two children came with him and the children have
      been enrolled in local schools. The family made several visits back to
      Iraq.

   3. Her husband was granted a visa in June 2011. His last visa was issued
      in September 2012, valid until February 2016. He was due to have
      completed his studies by October 2015. The appellant's passport
      confirmed that she had entered the United Kingdom in September 2012,
      August 2013, May 2014 and August 2015. Five days after her last
      arrival she approached the respondent and made a claim for protection.



   4.   Her claim was that in July 2015 she and her husband were driving in
      Iraq when a telephone call came through the car speakerphone. The
      caller threatened her husband. Afterwards her husband explained the
      caller, OB, was an influential member of the PUK who had asked him to
      falsify DNA results which he refused to do. He told her that caller's
      son allegedly raped his wife's sister who then had a child. The DNA
      results were relevant to the paternity of the child and a case started
      in 2011 involving OB's son and the husband of the child's mother's.
      The case was being reopened because of the DNA evidence.

   5.  They immediately went home, collected their children, and then drove
      to a farm outside the city. The family flew to Scotland a few days
      later. They passed through immigration control and then took legal
      advice. The advice was that rather than interrupt her husband studies
      the appellant should became the lead claimant for protection.

   6. When the claim was made she produced evidence which she said a family
      member had obtained for them when on holiday in Iraq. This included a
      paternity DNA report and a letter dated July 2015 from her husband and
      a colleague to the director of the laboratory saying they had been
      threatened.

   7. The respondent accepted the appellant's nationality and that her
      husband had been employed by the police in Erbil as a forensic
      scientist. The country information confirmed the person alleged to
      have threatened them had been involved with the PUK party but his
      present position was not known. No evidence could be found identifying
      his son.

   8. The respondent questioned why her husband did not immediately seek
      protection from the police in Erbil rather than writing a letter to
      the director of the laboratory. It was suggested this letter was not
      genuine but was an attempt to bolster the claim. The respondent also
      highlighted that although the appellant's husband was the one alleged
      to have been threatened he had not made the claim to protection. The
      appellant had not identified the legal firm she claimed advised her
      that she could claim rather than him. Furthermore, the family did not
      claim when they were at the airport in Scotland. The appellant had not
      produced the passport of the friend she claimed obtained the documents
      from Iraq to show their presence. It was also unclear how he could
      have obtained sensitive official documents or why her husband could
      not have obtained these before leaving or sent for them from the
      United Kingdom.

The First tier Tribunal

   9. There was no presenting officer in the First-tier tribunal. The
      appellant was represented. First-tier Tribunal Judge D H Clapham heard
      from the appellant and her husband and his sister. She was also
      provided with the documents the appellant claimed were brought from
      Iraq. The judge asked some questions directed towards the possibility
      of the family living in Baghdad. At paragraph 58 the judge made
      general comments about the assessment of credibility. Thereafter she
      set out her findings and the reasons for doing so. Her view was that
      the appeal turned on the credibility of the appellant and witnesses
      and concluded they were not credible.


  10. The judge accepted there was some truth to the claim about earlier
      proceedings in 2011 involving the paternity of a child. She accepted
      that the appellant's husband was in Iraq in 2015.  At paragraph 63 she
      questioned why in 2015 her husband would be approached. She also
      questioned why, if OB was so influential, he could not otherwise have
      altered the results without involving the appellant's husband. The
      judge went on to indicate in the next paragraph she did not find it
      credible her husband would refuse to change the results given that he
      would have been aware of the influence of OB from his earlier
      involvement. Furthermore, she comments on the fact he did not
      immediately report the threat and the steps he took were limited.
      Regarding the letter allegedly written by the appellant's husband and
      a colleague to their employer the judge reiterated the respondent's
      point that there were more direct sources of protection. She concluded
      the letter were self-serving and had been written for the purposes of
      claiming asylum rather than seeking help.

  11. She questioned how the caller could have known her husband's mobile
      telephone number. The judge also commented that it was just too
      convenient that the call came through the car speakerphone so the
      appellant could say she heard it. The judge then commented that the
      claim of collecting the children and then driving to a remote farm as
      being implausible.

  12. The judge commented on the failure to claim on arrival in the United
      Kingdom and the fact the claim was being made by the appellant rather
      than her husband. The judge did not accept as credible that as the
      principal person involved he would not claim because he wanted to
      continue his studies. The judge also commented adversely on the
      failure of the appellant's husband to obtain documentation before he
      left to support the claim and then claiming he got his sister to bring
      documents when she visited on holiday. The judge pointed out the
      appellant has close family members still in Iraq who have not come to
      any harm.

The Upper Tribunal

  13. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
      judge had made her decision based on the plausibility of the account
      rather than determining its truth.

  14. At hearing the appellant's representative adopted his written grounds
      of appeal. He argued that aspects of the reasoning were flawed to such
      an extent that they contaminated the entire decision and the good
      could not be extricated from the bad.

  15. The judge had queried at paragraph 63 of the decision why, if the PUK
      member was such an important a person, he would need to involve the
      appellant's husband.Mr Devlin contended there was no basis for
      suggesting OB was in a position to prevent an enquiry and made a
      distinction between legitimate inferences which can be deduced from
      the evidence and conjecture.

  16. He then referred me to paragraph 64 of the decision where the judge
      commented on the credibility of the appellant simply refusing the
      demands of a powerful individual and the limited steps he took in
      reporting the threat. Mr Devlin suggested that the judge in
      questioning why he had not coalesced was assumed he would act as the
      judge might have done. With regard to the steps taken by the
      appellant's husband about the threat he submitted that the judge
      misunderstood what was being said. Her husband in his statement said
      when first approached he was approached he was not threatened and on
      the second occasion he immediately contacted his superior. His
      superior said he could not help because it was a weekend so he went to
      a friend who told him to go back to the superior.

  17. I was referred to paragraph 62 where the judge questioned why the
      appellant's husband would have been approached given he had been out
      of Iraq and was only back for a short period. Mr Devlin referred to
      the statement of the appellant's husband at page 7 where he said he
      had returned to Iraq in July 2015 to complete fieldwork on DNA for his
      thesis. Mr Devlin suggested that her husband had an ongoing
      involvement with cases in Iraq despite his physical absence. It was
      submitted that the First-tier judge had not taken this into account.

  18. Mr Devlin then referred me to paragraph 65 of the decision where the
      judge questions how the mobile telephone number of the appellant
      husband would be known. The judge also felt it was implausibly
      convenient that the appellant could hear the call because of the car
      loudspeaker. Mr Devlin submitted that it could not be so far-fetched
      or contrary to reason or belief that her husband's telephone number
      would not be known, particularly on the part of an influential
      individual.

  19. Paragraph 66 was highlighted. There, the judge recorded as implausible
      the claim that after receiving the telephone call they then drove to
      her father's house, collected the children, and then went away to the
      unoccupied farm of her father's cousin. He submitted this was a bare
      assertion on the part of the judge.

  20. I was referred to paragraph 67 and 68 of the decision where the judge
      commented on the apparent delay in claiming asylum. In particular, the
      judge commented on the fact the appellant husband has not made a claim
      on behalf of the family. Reference is made by Mr Devlin to the
      statement of the appellant's husband where he said he felt if he
      claimed would prejudice his ability to complete his studies. He argued
      that the judge failed to have regard to this explanation.

  21. I was then referred to paragraph 69 of the decision where the judge
      said it was not credible that the appellant's husband would have left
      Iraq without bringing documentation simply on the basis he was under
      stress and given he was an intelligent man. However, Mr Devlin argued
      that no reasoning had been advanced for this proposition.

  22. The final ground of appeal relates to paragraph 71 where the judge
      commented on the evidence of a family member who claim to have brought
      documentation over.

  23. Mr Devlin concluded by saying that the findings made by the judge
      highlighted above where flawed and infected the outcome. As they were
      bad findings they could not be disentangled from the unchallenged
      findings.

  24. Mr Mullen opposed the appeal. He acknowledged some of the points made
      in the grounds were valid but overall they did not amount to showing a
      material error of law. The case put forward amounted to a general
      disagreement with the conclusion made by the judge and did not
      indicate genuine error.

  25. At paragraph 63 he submitted that the judge's reasoning could have
      been clearer but the motivation and means open to OB could only be
      determined from the information provided by the appellant's husband.
      He accepted that at paragraph 64 the comment about the appellant
      husband refusing suggested the judge was, as Mr Devlin suggested,
      reflecting on how they might act. He referred me to the case papers
      where there was reference to DNA evidence from another provider based
      in the United Kingdom. There was reference to an inability to change
      the results even had he wished.

  26. He submitted that the judge's comment that the appellant's husband
      took little action after receiving the threat was open to the judge.

  27. Even if OB where influential it was open to the judge to question how
      he could have obtained the private mobile number for the appellant's
      husband.

  28.  He submitted that the comments made at paragraph 66 about
      plausibility of collecting the children and going to a farm were not
      determinative of the appeal.

  29. He submitted there was weight in the judge's commenting on the failure
      of the appellant's husband to claim in person.

  30. Whilst he may have been stressed there was no medical evidence that
      his cognitive ability was affected.Consequently, the judge's comment
      is about his failing to bring evidence were legitimate. Regarding
      paragraph 71 it was a matter for the judge to weigh up whether the
      appellant's husband would endanger his sister.

  31. Both representatives were in agreement that if a material error of law
      established the most appropriate course would be for the appeal to be
      remitted for a rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal. This was
      because of the fact-finding involved.


   Consideration


  32. Mr Devlin has carefully carried out a forensic examination of the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge D H Clapham and has highlighted
      particular paragraphs of the decision which he submits indicate errors
      of approach. He contends that these amount to material errors of law
      which infect the decision to such an extent that is not possible to
      disentangle the unchallenged aspect. To this end he has provided me
      with various authorities supporting the points he has made.


  33. In considering the appeal I have considered the points made in respect
      of individual paragraphs but I have also sought to step back and look
      at the decision as a whole. I start by considering the general
      background that the judge was faced with. The appellant and her family
      came to the United Kingdom in 2011 and have sought to make their life
      here. It is stated her husband now considers himself to be Scottish.
      The children are enrolled in a local school. He came to study for a
      doctorate and his leave is due to expire in October 2015. He was
      sponsored by the authorities in Iraq because of his work in the police
      laboratories in Erbil. The family returned to Iraq in July 2015 and
      then returned to the United Kingdom in August 2015. They pass through
      immigration control in Edinburgh and five days later the appellant
      rather than her husband makes a claim for protection. The reasons
      advanced are that she has taken legal advice and the reason she was
      claiming was so that her husband studies would not be disrupted. She
      subsequently produces documentation said to be obtained through her
      husband's sister on a visit to Iraq. It includes a letter apparently
      written by her husband and a colleague to his employer about being
      threatened.


  34. The refusal letter rejects the claim on credibility grounds and a
      number of issues are highlighted. These include questioning why her
      husband would write a letter to his employer rather than seeking help
      from the police. It was also unclear how he was able to meet his
      colleague and do this. Furthermore reference was made to the fact
      protection was not claimed on arrival in Edinburgh as well as the fact
      that her husband was not the claimant.

  35. The judge did not find the appellant or her husband and his sister
      credible. She has set out a number of reasons. I acknowledge that when
      those reasons are dissected some aspects are open to legitimate
      challenge. For instance, the comments about how the mobile number
      could be obtained or the family immediately collecting the children
      and then going to an isolated farm. The comment that OB could have
      other means of changing the results is arguably speculation.

  36. However, the decision has to be read as a whole and in context. I note
      in paragraph 24 of the decision of Y -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA 1223 Lord
      Justice Keene, commenting on adjudicators decision, said particular
      passages should not be analysed as though they emanated from a
      parliamentary draughtsman. Although this is not an answer for all of
      the points made on behalf of the appellant that spirit should be born
      in mind

  37. The judge refers to the failure to claim immediately on arrival in
      Edinburgh. The judge also comments on the appellant's husband not
      wanting to be the claimant because it would interfere was his studies.
      Given the claimed fear I find the judge was entitled to draw adverse
      inferences from these features. I find these were significant
      features. The judge also commented on the fact the appellant has
      family members in Iraq who experienced no problems. There were other
      issues going to credibility which have not been raised. For instance,
      at paragraph 75 the judge found the appellant was evasive,
      particularly in suggesting her children only spoke English. The judge
      is entitled to bring in peripheral matters in the overall evaluation
      of credibility. Credibility factors can feed into each other in this
      way. I do not find that the specific features highlighted by Mr Devlin
       so contaminate the decision that it cannot stand. The judge clearly
      appreciated the issues arising and correctly summarised the issues
      from the refusal letter. When the decision is looked at as a whole and
      in context it is sound.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of First-
tier Judge. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.



 Deputy Judge Farrelly

8th June 2017

