
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04106/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 September 2017                  |On 15 September 2017            |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                     E P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms J Sachdev   of Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnyz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 6 February 1981 and is a national of Iran.  The
   Appellants daughter P F date of birth 22.9.2005 is her dependant  in  the
   appeal.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. The Appellant appealed a refusal of a  protection  claim  dated  3  April
   2016 and her appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Somal who dismissed her claim on all  grounds.  That  decision  was
   challenged and at a hearing before me dated 16 June 2017 I set aside  the
   decision in so  far  as  it  related  to  the  Appellants  conversion  to
   Christianity and adjourned the matter for a rehearing before me.

The Law

Asylum

5. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that the Applicant will  be
   granted asylum if the provisions of that paragraph apply. The  burden  of
   proof rests on an Appellant to satisfy me that he or she falls within the
   definition of refugee in Regulation 2 of the Refugee or person in need of
   International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (which I  shall
   refer to as the Qualification Regulations) as read with Article 1 (A)  of
   the refugee Convention. In essence, an Appellant will have to  show  that
   there are substantial grounds for believing that the Appellant is outside
   his or her country of nationality or, if applicable, his or  her  country
   of habitual residence, by reason of a well founded  fear  of  persecution
   for Refugee Convention reason and is unable or unwilling, owing  to  such
   fear, to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country.


The ECHR

6. The burden of proof rests of an Appellant to satisfy me  that  there  are
   substantial grounds for believing that, as a result of  the  Respondent's
   decision, he or she will be exposed to a real risk of torture, or inhuman
   or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  contrary  to  Article  3.  Where
   applicable, it is for the Appellant to satisfy me that he or she  has  an
   Article 8 private and/or family  life  in  this  country  which  will  be
   interfered with by the decision under  appeal.  If  that  is  shown,  the
   Respondent must establish that  the  decision  is  legitimate,  taken  in
   pursuit of  a  legitimate  aim  and  necessary  and  proportionate  in  a
   democratic society.

7. The Immigration Rules and case law assists  the  court  when  considering
   the position facing a person who claims to have engaged in activities  in
   the United Kingdom which  would  bring  them  to  the  attention  of  the
   authorities in their country of return. Paragraph 339P of HC 395 states:


      "A person may have a well-founded fear of being persecuted or  a  real
      risk of suffering serious harm based on events which have taken  place
      since the person left the country  of  origin  or  country  of  return
      and/or activates which have been engaged in by a person since he  left
      the country of origin or country of return, in particular where it  is
      established that the activities relied upon constitute the  expression
      and continuation of convictions or orientations held in the country of
      origin or country of return."


8. I must also consider Paragraph 339J(iv) which  states that the  Secretary
   of State must take into account, inter alia ,


       "whether the person's activities since leaving the country of  return
      were engaged in for the sole or main purpose of creating the necessary
      conditions for making an asylum claim or establishing  that  he  is  a
      person eligible for humanitarian protection or a human  rights  claim,
      so as to assess whether these activities will  expose  the  person  to
      persecution or serious harm if he returned to that country"


The Proceedings

9. The Respondent's bundle consisted of: Asylum appeal  bundle;  Country  of
   Origin Information  passages;  Refusal  letter;  Notice  and  Grounds  of
   Appeal.

10. The Appellant's bundle consisted of: A bundle numbered 1-272 (AB1)  that
   was before the First-tier Tribunal; A Bundle  under  cover  of  a  letter
   dated 5 September 2017 number 1-56; Skeleton argument.







The Proceedings - Evidence


11. The Appellant had provided witness statements which were found in  AB  1
   at pages 3-15 and AB2 at pages 1-2. The Appellant gave oral evidence  and
   was asked two questions in cross examination.


The Appellant's Case


12. The Appellant's claim in relation to her  religious  conversion  was  in
   essence that


    a) She was born a Muslim but had not been an  observant  one  while  in
       Iran.


    b) She arrived in the UK on 31  December  2015  and  lived  briefly  in
       London, then Manchester then Liverpool and  then  Manchester  again.
       She was lonely and met other Iranians at the solicitors  office  who
       told her that she could meet other Iranians at Church  and  she  was
       given the telephone number of an Iranian who took her to the  Gorton
       Evangelical Church. She met other Iranians there and  initially  her
       interest was just in making  friends  not  in  converting.  She  did
       attend classes but more for social reasons.


    c) At the time of her  substantive  interview  she  had  only  attended
       Church on two occasions. By March 2016 after  continuing  to  attend
       Church and the classes she had come to believe in the  teachings  of
       Christianity.


    d) The Appellant met an Iranian who told her about a  Church  that  was
       nearer to where she lived in Radcliffe, St Johns, St Philips and  St
       Thomas as the one in Gorton was two bus rides away.  She started  to
       attend there with her daughter, attending on a Sunday and classes on
       a Friday.


    e) They also attended a Church in Stockport occasionally  as  they  had
       Farsi books and Farsi interpreter.


    f)      On 27 May 2016 the Appellant and her daughter were baptised and
       on 1 June 2016 they were both confirmed.


    g) The Appellant and her daughter continue  to  attend  the  Church  in
       Radcliffe regularly on both Sundays and any other special days  they
       are notified of and no longer attend the other Churches because  her
       English has improved. The Church has put on English classes and  her
       English  has  improved  to  the  extent  that  she  can  assist   in
       interpreting for others whose English is not so good. The  Appellant
       and her daughter  both  help  in  the  Friday  Pilgrim  Course.  Her
       daughter's English is perfect.


    h) She confirmed in cross examination that if she were returned to Iran
       she would continue as a Christian and if asked  would  confirm  that
       she was a Christian.


13. I also heard evidence from the Appellants daughter P F  who  is  now  11
   years old. She gave evidence in English which was, as he  mother  stated,
   perfect. I  was  satisfied  when  listening  to  her  evidence  that  she
   understood the importance of telling the truth in these proceedings.  She
   confirmed that she had written the letter at AB2 page 3.


14. She stated that in Iran everyone has to be a Muslim and  she  likes  the
   fact that no one makes her be a Christian, it is her choice. She is happy
   to be allowed to wear her hair the way she chooses because  in  Iran  she
   had to wear a scarf. She has found Christians to be kind and stated  that
   Muslims 'just shout.' She confirmed that  she  made  the  choice  of  her
   secondary school herself because it was a Church of England School.


15. In cross examination she stated that he enjoyed going to  Church  better
   than to a Mosque.


16. In answer to questions by me she confirmed that people cried in  Mosques
   but not in Church. She said that she did not go to Sunday  School  as  it
   was for really young children. She confirmed that if she were asked  what
   religion she was she would say that she was a Christian.


17. I also heard evidence from the Reverend Elizabeth Binns who adopted  the
   contents of her statement at AB1 22-23 and AB2 page 5. I have also  heard
   Reverent Binns give evidence in relation to other Iranian converts.


18. She confirmed that she was absolutely sure  that  the  Appellant  was  a
   genuine convert to Christianity.


19. In cross examination she was asked  whether  there  was  'the  slightest
   possibility that the adult Appellant was pretending ' and stated that she
   really did not believe that was the case but it was  unrealistic  to  say
   that no one can be fooled . She 100% believed that both the Appellant and
   her daughter were genuine converts.


20. I asked her what made her believe that  their  conversion  was  genuine.
   She talked of their growth in faith and that it was  clear  how  much  it
   meant to them. She felt she knew them well as she saw them in Church  and
   had dined at their home. The Appellant was enthusiastic about her  faith.
   She had guided other young woman which was important  as  their  role  as
   Christians was different to that in Islam.


21. She confirmed that about  a  fifth,  25/30.  Of  her  congregation  were
   Iranian converts. She confirmed that no one who had joined her Church  as
   a convert had returned to Islam.  A  number  of  the  Iranians  had  been
   granted status, some had been to  court  other  had  been  granted  leave
   immediately and all had continued to attend.


22. She judged when people were ready to take communion by their  growth  in
   faith based on her experience. She confirmed that it was not a matter  of
   '20 questions', a test of their biblical knowledge. The other members  of
   the congregation were part of the safeguards she relied on. No one within
   the congregation had said anything negative about the  Appellant  or  her
   daughter indeed they were loved and admired by the whole congregation.


23. I also heard evidence from Alistair Finneron who  adopted  the  contents
   of his letter in AB1 at page 24 and AB2 7-9. He confirmed  that  he  also
   believed the Appellants were genuine converts based  on  conversation  he
   had with them, their attendance at Church  and  their  understanding  and
   devotion to Jesus Christ.


24. In cross examination he stated that he had no reason to believe that  he
   was having the wool pulled over his eyes.


Submissions


25. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Diwnycz made the following submissions:


26. The issue was whether the  Appellant  and  her  daughter  had  genuinely
   converted to Christianity. He conceded that if I accepted that  they  had
   then the appeal  must  succeed  given  the  circumstances  for  Christian
   converts in Iran.


27. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Sachdev made the following submissions:


28. She relied on her skeleton argument.


29. The Appellant had given a detailed history of her conversion.


30. She was clear that she had  first  attended  church  in  order  to  make
   friends but was now a committed Christian. Her  daughter  had  chosen  to
   attend a Church of England School.


31. She had the support  of  the  Church  in  her  claim  and  both  of  the
   witnesses who had given evidence believed the Appellant and her  daughter
   were genuine.


32. She asked that I should give weight to evidence of  both  the  Appellant
   and her daughter and that all  of  the  evidence  points  to  them  being
   genuine converts.


Case Law and background material


33. The issue in  this  case  is  whether  the  Appellant  has  undergone  a
   religious conversion and therefore I have  taken  into  account  Dorodian
   01/TH 01537 where it was suggested that a statement or letter giving  the
   full designation of the minister supporting a claimed  conversion  should
   be sent to the Home Office at least a fortnight before the hearing of any
   appeal, which should give the Home Office time to make a basic  check  on
   the minister's existence and standing.  Unless the Home  Office  accepted
   that an appellant was a committed church member, in writing  in  advance,
   the minister should invariably be called to give evidence. In  Shirazi  v
   SSHD (2003) EWCA Civ 1562 the Court  of  Appeal  generally  approved  the
   guidance.


Findings


34. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round  before  reaching
   any findings.  I  have  done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
   compartmentalised my findings in some respects below,  I  must  emphasise
   the findings have only been made having taken account of the evidence  as
   a whole.
35. The issue in this case is whether the Appellant has genuinely  converted
   to Christianity because the Respondent accepts that if she has she is  at
   risk on return to Iran, without more, given the deteriorating  conditions
   for Christian converts Iran  as  set  out  in  the  most  recent  Country
   Guidance and relied on by Ms Sachdev in  her  bundles  and  her  skeleton
   argument. I am satisfied however that I am also  entitled  to  take  into
   account whether the Appellants daughter, albeit only a dependent in  this
   appeal, has genuinely converted as I am satisfied that her behaviour  and
   beliefs on return could also expose her and her mother to  risk  whatever
   views I formed of the mother.
36. I take into account that  the  background  of  this  case  is  that  the
   Appellant asserts that she fled from Iran not because  of  her  religious
   beliefs, as those arose after her arrival in the UK, but because she  had
   embarked on a relationship with another  man  while  in  the  process  of
   divorcing her first husband. Her estranged husband found  out  about  the
   relationship and this put her at  risk  and  caused  her  to  flee.  This
   account was rejected by a previous Judge. However, I am satisfied that  a
   finding that she did not meet the evidential burden of establishing  that
   this account was true is not determinative of the issue of her conversion
   to Christianity albeit it may be a factor that I take into account in the
   overall assessment of her credibility.
37.   I am satisfied that the identification of  genuine  religious  beliefs
   is a very difficult matter for any Judge as was recognised in the case of
   SA referred to above as religious beliefs are rarely amenable to rational
   explanation. I am therefore satisfied that I am  entitled  to  take  into
   account as helpful in determining the issue the  context  and  motivation
   behind her conversion and how she manifests her faith.
38. In relation to the context  and  motivation  for  her  conversion  I  am
   satisfied that the Appellant has given a consistent and plausible account
   throughout the process. While I note that it is recorded in her Screening
   Interview (SI) at 1.12 that she is Shia Muslim I note that this  part  of
   the record  has  been  typed  whereas  other  parts  of  the  record  are
   handwritten,  which  may  suggest  that   the   handwritten   parts   are
   contemporaneous records of what the Appellant said at the time of the  SI
   but it is less clear where the typewritten information has come  from.  I
   note that at the substantive interview (AI) she sought  to  correct  this
   response at Q6 stating that she had no religion which is consistent  with
   her account subsequently that she was not an observant Muslim.
39. I find her account that as an unobservant Muslim she  first  attended  a
   Church because she was lonely and seeking the company of  other  Iranians
   is also plausible and it is easy to see that, for example, the  offer  of
   free food, English lessons and a welcoming attitude especially  to  women
   might be the initial attraction of the Christian Church  but  this  could
   develop into an  interest  in  the  religion  which  underpinned  such  a
   welcoming attitude. The fact that a fifth of Reverend Binns  congregation
   are Iranians suggests that the Appellant was right to seek out her fellow
   Iranians there.
40. The account that she gives in relation to her  first  attendances  at  a
   Church and how that came about are confirmed in  statements  in  the  AB1
   including statements from the Iranian she met in Jackson and  Cantor  who
   provided her with further contact information, the leader of  the  Gorton
   Pentecostal Church and from the Father at St Aphrahat Church.
41. The bulk of the evidence about the Appellant and her daughter's  outward
   manifestation of faith comes from the Reverend Binns and Mr  Finneron.  I
   find that they both gave powerful and persuasive evidence.  The  Reverend
   Binns strikes me as a very compassionate and engaging lady, very sensible
   yet with a ready sense of humour and  I  can  see  that  a  lonely  woman
   separated from her family and home and struggling to cope would be  drawn
   in by the Reverends kindly attitude.
42. The Reverend Binns who has now known and had regular dealings  with  the
   Appellant since March 2016 readily acknowledges of course that vicars are
   not infallible but I nevertheless note that her congregation  of  Iranian
   Christians  includes  both  those  who  were   recognised   as   refugees
   immediately and those who have had appeal hearings and  all  continue  to
   attend and that no one who has been recognised by her as  a  convert  has
   reverted to Islam. This suggests to me that her opinion on the  issue  of
   the genuineness of the Appellants conversion is one to which I can attach
   weight.
43. I find that in attempting to articulate the  behaviours  that  convinced
   her of the Appellants genuine  conversion  both  Reverend  Binns  and  Mr
   Finneron used terms that may sound unfamiliar to those of us who  do  not
   share her faith but clearly they were powerfully persuasive  for  her.  I
   also remind myself of what was said in the  House  of  Lords  case  of  R
   (Williamson  and  Others)  v.  Secretary  of  State  for  Education   and
   Employment [2005] UKHL 15 where Lord Nicholls  addressed  the  issue   of
   religious beliefs very well, warning judges that great care must be taken
   assessing the  value  of  faith  and  beliefs  to  another  human  being:
   Typically, religion involves belief in the supernatural. It is not always
   susceptible to lucid exposition or, still less,  rational  justification.
   The language used is often the language of allegory, symbol and metaphor.
   Depending on the subject matter, individuals cannot always be expected to
   express themselves with cogency or precision. The facts relied on both by
   the Reverend Binns and Mr Finneron clearly persuaded both  of  them  that
   the Appellant is a genuine Christian and that there was nothing about the
   Appellants manifestation of her faith  that  caused  them  to  doubt  her
   sincerity.
44. I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  attended  Church
   regularly with her daughter since March 2016. I am satisfied that as  her
   English has improved she has focused on attending St Johns and is a  very
   popular and well respected member of the congregation and that no one has
   any doubts that she is a genuine convert.
45. Moreover I am also satisfied  that  the  Appellants  daughter  who  gave
   evidence before me now regards herself as a Christian and gave, what  for
   her, were logical and articulate  reasons  why  she  preferred  attending
   Church to attending a Mosque. I have absolutely no doubt that  she  would
   prefer to continue attending a Church.
46. While I take into account the background to  the  Appellants  conversion
   as set out above I am satisfied that both the Appellant and her  daughter
   are genuine converts to Christianity and would be at risk  on  return  to
   Iran where both would profess their faith if asked.

Conclusions on Asylum


47. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on  her  to
   show that she has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  reason
   recognised by the Geneva Convention. Accordingly, the Appellant's removal
   would cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations  under  the  Geneva
   Convention.


Conclusions on ECHR


48. On the facts as  established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
   grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.


Decision


49. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


50. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


51.  Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  rules  2008
   9as amended) the Appellant can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.
Signed                                                              Date
15.9.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

