
                                    [pic]
 Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number:
PA/04731/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 April 2018                  |       On 11 May 2018             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     ACI
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:      Ms J Sane, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Burnett in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen of
    Nigeria, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum and
    issue removal directions.


 2. The application under appeal was refused on 8 May 2017.  The  Appellant
    exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  the
    appeal which came  before  Judge  Burnett  on  19  July  2017  and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J
    M Hollingworth on 27 November 2017 in the following terms

        1. At paragraph 50 of the decision the Judge noted  at  the  outset
           that the Appellant was a vulnerable individual as she had health
           concerns. At paragraph 52 the  Judge  referred  to  keeping  the
           guidance in mind when assessing the Appellant's claim. A  report
           had been provided concerning the Appellant's medical conditions.
           The medical report was from Dr E  Clark.  Psychological  systems
           had been referred to. They were not solely due to her historical
           account according to the  doctor.  The  doctor  commented  about
           inconsistencies in the Appellant's  account.  The  doctor  noted
           that the Appellant was feeling unwell at the start  and  end  of
           her interview which might  explain  some  discrepancies  in  the
           Appellant's account which was given to  the  doctor.  The  Judge
           refers to discrepancies. The Judge has referred to the extent of
           those discrepancies. The Judge concluded that the Appellant  has
           now changed her account following the issue being raised by  the
           Home Office as referred to at paragraph 58 of the decision.  The
           Judge found this damaged the Appellant's credibility.


        2. At paragraph 61 the Judge states that  the  Appellant's  account
           lacked credibility.


        3. At paragraph 62 the Judge turned to the question of whether  the
           Appellant's son  would  receive  tribal  marks  (scarring).  The
           Appellant had tribal marking. The Judge states  that  the  Judge
           found the other aspects of the Appellant's account not credible.


        4. At paragraph 64 the Judge has stated that the  Judge  took  into
           account  the  expert  reports  in  assessing   the   Appellant's
           credibility.  It  is  arguable  the  Judge  has   set   out   an
           insufficient analysis of the medical evidence in relation to the
           degree of consistency shown by the  Appellant.  It  is  arguable
           that the Judge should have considered the factors  bearing  upon
           normal autobiographical  memory  being  subject  to  error.  The
           attention of the Judge was specifically directed to that portion
           of the medical report. It  is  pointed  out  in  the  permission
           application that the medico-legal report was not challenged.


   In a rule 24 response dated 19 December 2017 the Respondent opposed  the
   Appellant's  appeal  submitting  that   the   Judge   directed   himself
   appropriately. The Judge is said to have taken account of  all  relevant
   evidence and to have reach a conclusion that is fully reasoned.




Background

 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria born on 1 August 1993. She  came  to  the  UK  as  a
    student arriving on 15 September 2013. Her student visa  was  curtailed
    as she failed continue her studies and gain appropriate grades and  she
    was suspended from her  course.  The  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  7
    November 2016. The basis of her claim was that she was a single  parent
    who had a child out of wedlock and had been threatened  by  her  father
    and as a result feared forced marriage on a return and further that her
    child would be subjected to tribal scarring. The Respondent refused her
    claim finding that her account was not  credible  and  that  she  could
    return to Nigeria either to live with her sister or to  live  elsewhere
    in the country.


 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal finding, after  hearing  oral  evidence,
    that the Appellant's account lacked credibility, that she had failed to
    show any real risk that her child would be subjected to tribal  marking
    and that she had family in Nigeria to whom she could return.




Submissions


 5. For the Appellant Ms Sane said that the Judge had failed to attach  due
    weight to the medical report or to give  good  reasons  to  reject  the
    findings of the experts. She referred to page 11 of the report from  Dr
    Elizabeth  Clark  at  paragraph  6.6  where  the  expert   deals   with
    inconsistencies. This report is not challenged by the  Respondent.  The
    circumstances  of  the  interview   may   have   contributed   to   the
    inconsistencies in her  account.  She  was  not  feeling  well  at  the
    beginning or at the end of her interview. The  inconsistencies  may  be
    capable of reasonable explanation. Ms  Sane  accepted  that  the  Judge
    deals with this at paragraph 58 of his decision but said that  he  does
    not  deal  specifically  with  the  expert's  report  even  though  his
    attention was drawn to the  relevant  paragraph.  The  Judge  does  not
    explain why he does not accept the expert's evidence. The expert had  a
    copy of the interview record. He does not deal with the fact  that  the
    expert evidence is supportive of the account given. 6.8 onwards of  the
    report  shows  that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  own  scarring
    reinforces her credibility. The doctor also notes at paragraph 6.7 that
    her answers are detailed and not feigned. Although it is  not  for  the
    expert to replace the Tribunal as a fact finder  there  is  nothing  to
    show that the expert's view has been taken into account. I was referred
    again to the asylum interview  showing  that  when  asked  if  she  was
    feeling well both at the beginning and the end  of  her  interview  she
    said that she was not. Limited weight should have been attached to  the
    discrepancies at interview  especially  in  the  light  of  the  expert
    evidence.


 6. For the Respondent Mr Mills said that the role of the expert is to give
    opinion and the Judge's duty was to give consideration  and  to  attach
    due weight to the medical report. The doctor at 6.6 refers to  research
    saying discrepancies may be  to  do  with  various  things.  The  Judge
    acknowledges this and gives reasons why  he  takes  a  different  view.
    Unless he was irrational in his reasoning there is no error of law. The
    Judge considers the health concerns of the Appellant  and  accepts  her
    vulnerability.




Decision


 7. The issue in this  appeal  is  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  expert
    evidence in particular the evidence of Dr Elizabeth Clark. It  was  the
    Appellant's case that she was born into the Eso Odo  tribe  and  as  an
    infant was subjected to tribal facial scarring. Her father was a  local
    politician and was a violent man who beat the Appellant and her sister.
    The Appellant has scars from  these  beatings.  She  claimed  that  her
    father did not take financial responsibility for her. Nevertheless  her
    father made all the important decisions in her life. Although he helped
    her with her scholarship it was only after her mother begged him to  do
    so. Having  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  15  September  2013  the
    Appellant began a relationship with a  fellow  student.  The  Appellant
    became pregnant,  but  her  partner  did  not  want  a  child  and  the
    relationship ended. The Appellant's child  was  born  on  29  September
    2016.


 8. The Appellant claimed that if she returned to Nigeria with her  son  he
    would be subject to beatings in the same way that she  was  and,  as  a
    boy, he would be subjected to tribal scarring. The Appellant would have
    to return to her father or mother as she would not be able  to  support
    her son on her own and they would initiate the mutilation of  her  son.
    The Appellant also claimed that as a single  woman  with  a  child  she
    would be targeted for sexual harassment and with  no  income  would  be
    liable to sexual exploitation.


 9. The Appellant submitted two experts reports in support of her claim the
    one from Professor Aguilar and  the  other  from  Dr  Elizabeth  Clark.
    Professor Aguilar confirmed that scarification amongst the  Appellant's
    tribe took place. He also confirmed that the practice had been outlawed
    but said that it was his opinion that  the  Nigerian  police  will  not
    enforce the prohibition. He also supported  the  Appellant's  fears  of
    forced marriage and said that the Nigerian police were unlikely  to  be
    able to protect her. Dr Clark confirmed that the  Appellant  has  scars
    consistent with her claim to have been subject to  tribal  marking  and
    beatings. She also comments on inconsistencies noted by the  Respondent
    in her statement of evidence and her account  and  considers  that  the
    circumstances of her asylum interview, being unwell and  beginning  and
    end, may have contributed to the inconsistencies.


10. In dealing with the appeal the Judge clearly sets out the basis of  the
    Appellants  claim  and  the  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusing   her
    application. He notes the  documentation  submitted  by  the  Appellant
    prior to the hearing including the report from Professor Aguilar  (para
    31) and the additional documentation including the report from Dr Clark
    (para 27). In making his findings the Judge notes that  credibility  is
    an important factor at the  outset  and  also  that  the  Appellant  is
    vulnerable. He self-directs to the Joint Presidential Guidance.



11. The Judge goes on to again refer to the two experts' reports (para  53)
    and then analyses each one in turn. In  respect  of  Professor  Aguilar
    this occupies paragraphs 54 to 56 of the decision and in respect of  Dr
    Clark paragraphs 57 to 58. At paragraph 58 the Judge specifically deals
    with Dr Clark's  comments  about  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
    account. The assertion in the grounds of  appeal  that  the  Judge  has
    failed to address the medico-legal report in detail cannot be made out.
    Equally the assertion that the Judge has failed to take the entirety of
    the report into account cannot be made out. Judges cannot  be  expected
    to give a written analysis of each and every sentence  of  an  expert's
    report and where is it apparent, as it plainly is in  this  case,  that
    the Judge has carefully considered the  expert's  report  submitted  an
    error of law could only be  demonstrated  if  the  Judge's  conclusions
    could be said to be irrational. This is consistent with  the  authority
    of JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT (IAC)  quoted  in
    paragraph 3 of the grounds of appeal



       33... it is clear that the status that a medical report has as
       independent evidence is entirely a matter of weight and assessment.
       As stated in SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 at [21]:


       "Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert (or
       indeed any) evidence is a matter for the trial judge...A judge's
       decision not to accept expert evidence does not involve an error of
       law on his part, provided he approaches that evidence with
       appropriate care and gives good reasons for his decision." (see to
       similar effect Y and another (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362).




    Irrationality is not mentioned in the grounds of  appeal  and  was  not
    mentioned by Ms Sane in submissions. It was in  fact  mentioned  by  Mr
    Mills who submitted, correctly in my judgement, that unless  the  Judge
    was irrational in his reasoning there is no error of law.


12. In my judgement the Judge clearly considers the  reports  submitted  by
    both experts.  He  analyses  those  reports  carefully  and  reaches  a
    reasoned decision that was open to him. There  is  nothing  to  suggest
    that the Judge failed to take into account material evidence, there  is
    certainly no inadequacy of reasoning  and  there  is  no  irrationality
    apparent. There is no error of law. This appeal is dismissed.



 Summary

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal. The decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.




Signed:                                 Date: 4 May 2018

[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
