
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04482/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2020                  |On 7 September 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                RM (jAMAICA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This appeal was to be heard on 5  March  2020,  at  the  Civil  Justice
    Centre in Cardiff.  For reasons I need not explain,  it  could  not  be
    heard on that date.  The appeal was adjourned and transferred to  Field
    House in London.

 2. The global pandemic then set in and, on 23 March  2020,  the  Principal
    Resident Judge issued directions to the parties  by  email.   By  those
    directions, he sought to ascertain whether the appeal might properly be
    determined on the papers and whether the parties wished to make further
    submissions on the merits of the appeal.  Those directions were sent to
    the parties by post and email.

 3. Written submissions were duly filed  by  counsel,  Mr  Jones,  who  has
    represented the appellant on a Direct Access basis from  the  inception
    of this case.  In compliance with the PRJ's directions, Mr Jones copied
    his submissions to the Home Office email address which  has  been  used
    throughout the pandemic for service of such documents.

 4. The papers were passed to me in July.  On 29 July  2020,  I  asked  the
    administrative staff at Field House to ascertain whether there had been
    any  response  from  the  respondent,  whether  to  the  PRJ's  initial
    directions or to the written submissions which were filed and served by
    Mr Jones in April.  I was informed later than day that there  had  been
    nothing received from the respondent.

 5. By rule 34(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
    the Upper Tribunal may make any decision without a  hearing.   By  rule
    34(2), it is obliged, in deciding how to proceed, to take into  account
    the views of the parties.  I have  done  so.   The  PRJ  expressed  the
    provisional view that the appeal might fairly and justly be  determined
    on the papers.  On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jones  urged  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed in that way.  The respondent voiced no objection to
    that course of action.

 6. The views of the parties are not determinative.  I have also considered
    the over-riding objective of dealing  with  cases  fairly  and  justly,
    alongside all that was said by the Supreme Court  in  Osborn  v  Parole
    Board [2014] 1 AC 1115.  There are no disputed issues of fact  in  this
    case.  The credibility of a party or witness is not in issue before me.
     My focus, at this stage, is on the decision of the FtT and whether  it
    should be set aside as containing  an  error  or  error  of  law.   The
    parties have had  a  full  opportunity  to  make  submissions  on  that
    question.  The appellant has taken that opportunity, the respondent has
    chosen not to do so.  I consider that I am able to determine the appeal
    fairly and justly without a hearing and that it is appropriate, in  the
    exercise of my discretion under rule 34(1), to proceed in that way.

Background

 7. The appellant is a Jamaican national who was born on 22  January  1995.
    He last entered the UK in 2002 and  was  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain ("ILR") as the dependent of his father, NM, on 9 February  2002.



 8. The appellant received a caution for drugs possession in  2014.   On  3
    November 2015, he was convicted by a jury in the Crown Court at Bristol
    of causing grievous bodily harm with intent.  He had previously pleaded
    guilty to possession of an offensive weapon  (a  hammer)  on  the  same
    occasion.  These offences were committed by the appellant alongside his
    father, who had returned with his son to the scene of  an  argument  in
    pub.  His father was armed  with  a  wrench,  the  appellant  with  the
    hammer.  The appellant's father  used  the  wrench  so  extensively  in
    attacking the two victims that the sentencing judge described the video
    footage as 'chilling'.  For his part, the appellant  did  not  use  the
    hammer.  He held it whilst he attacked the victims and stamped on them.
     He was sentenced by HHJ Picton to a term of seven years' detention  in
    a Young Offenders Institution.  On 3 November 2016, that  sentence  was
    reduced by order of the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division, to  one  of
    six years' detention.

 9.  The  respondent  initiated  deportation  proceedings.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  His appeal was  heard  by
    Judge Lever on 14  June  2018.   It  is  apparent  that  the  case  was
    presented on Article 8 ECHR grounds only.   The  judge  heard  evidence
    from the appellant and his partner, CA, and his aunt.  In his  reserved
    decision of 4 July 2018, he concluded that the appellant was unable  to
    demonstrate that there were  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those in the statutory exceptions to deportation  which  sufficed
    to outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation.   In  reaching  that
    decision, he made the following findings of fact. He accepted that  the
    appellant and his partner had a genuine and subsisting relationship but
    he did not accept that the relationship could not continue in  Jamaica:
    [18]-[20].  He accepted that the appellant had been  lawfully  resident
    in the UK for most of his life and that he is socially  and  culturally
    integrated but not that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    his  integration  to  Jamaica:  [25]-[26].   Considering  all  relevant
    matters holistically, Judge Lever did not accept that there  were  very
    compelling circumstances over and  above  those  statutory  exceptions,
    although he accepted that the appellant would  encounter  a  degree  of
    hardship on return to Jamaica [24] and  that  the  appellant  presented
    only a low risk to society in the future.  Judge Lever then said  this,
    at [27]:

         "However, taking all matters in the round and applying the Rules as
         I  must  do,  I  do  not  find  that  there  are  very   compelling
         circumstances over and above the factors  that  I  am  entitled  to
         consider and have considered that demonstrate that it overturns the
         finding that the deportation of the Appellant is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest."

10. Permission to appeal against Judge Lever's decision was refused by  the
    FtT (Judge Haria) and the Upper Tribunal (Judge Frances).   The  latter
    decision was served on 1 August 2018.

11. In early 2019 - whilst the appellant was still detained - Mr Jones  was
    instructed for the first time.  He made detailed further submissions on
    3 February 2019.  Those submissions included a protection  claim  which
    was based, in summary, on events  which  had  taken  place  in  Jamaica
    before the appellant and his father came to the UK.  It was  said  that
    his father had been a  police  officer  in  Jamaica  and  that  he  had
    lawfully killed a notorious criminal named known as 'Biga  Prince'  and
    that the family had been in danger from associates  of  this  man  ever
    since.  Further submissions were also made in  reliance  on  Article  8
    ECHR, detailing additional matters which had not been explored fully or
    at all in the earlier appeal.  It was explained that a complaint was to
    be made about the failure of the appellant's  previous  representatives
    to pursue the protection claim previously or to develop various aspects
    of the Article 8 ECHR case before Judge Lever.

12. The appellant was interviewed by the respondent in connection with  his
    asylum claim.  Further evidence was submitted by his family and  by  an
    expert witness, Luke de Noronha.  Further submissions were made  by  Mr
    Jones.   On  25  April  2019,  however,  the  respondent  refused   the
    protection  and  human  rights  claims.   In  essential  outline,   the
    respondent concluded  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  rebut  the
    statutory presumptions in section 72 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") [11]-[24]; failed in any event  to
    establish that he was at risk  on  return  to  Jamaica  [25]-[81];  and
    failed to establish that his deportation would be contrary to Article 8
    ECHR [82]-[178].

The Appeal to the FtT

13. The appellant appealed to the FtT for a second time.   His  appeal  was
    heard  by  Judge  Roblin  on  21  October  2019.   The  appellant   was
    represented by Mr Jones, the respondent by a Presenting Officer.  There
    was extensive documentary evidence before the judge,  including  expert
    evidence from Dr de Noronha and  an  Independent  Social  Worker  named
    Peter Horrocks.  Unusually, there was also  an  'Investigation  Report'
    from a Jamaican firm of attorneys, Danielle S  Archer  and  Associates,
    dealing with the killing of Biga Prince by the appellant's  father  and
    the current circumstances of people relevant to the appellant's fear of
    reprisals.  There was also extensive oral evidence from  the  appellant
    and  five  family  witnesses.   Oral  submissions  were  made  by   the
    respondent in amplification of the  decision  letter.   Mr  Jones  made
    detailed oral submissions in amplification of the  written  submissions
    he had filed and served in advance of the hearing.

14.  The  judge's  reserved  decision  of  15  November  is  carefully  and
    methodically structured.  She set out the appellant's  immigration  and
    criminal history at [2]-[14].  She summarised the issues at  [15]-[16].
    She summarised the thrust of the  respondent's  decision  at  [17]  and
    listed the documentary evidence which was before her at [19].  She then
    provided a summary of the evidence she had received from the  appellant
    and the  witnesses,  at  [20]-[39].   The  representatives  submissions
    appear at [40]-[63] and there is a summary of the relevant law at [64]-
    [81].  At [81]-[126], the judge set out the reasons why she had decided
    to dismiss the appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

15. The judge recorded at [86] that the starting point for her decision was
    that of Judge Lever.  She recalled the principles of Devaseelan  [2003]
    Imm AR 1 in that regard.  At [87], she considered the  submission  that
    the appellant had been disadvantaged by  his  previous  representatives
    and concluded as follows:

         "It is suggested on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  his  previous
         solicitors failed to put forward an application for asylum.  I have
         in the bundle a letter of complaint of February 2019,  but  I  have
         not seen any response from the Appellant's previous solicitors  nor
         further documentation indicating whether or not that complaint  was
         upheld.  It is now eight months since the  letter  was  written  in
         February.  Without that clarification I am not persuaded that  they
         were at fault or in that regard that I can safely depart  from  the
         findings of FTTJ Lever as suggested."

16. The judge then turned to consider s72 of the 2002 Act, under  the  sub-
    heading 'Rebuttable presumption of 'dangerousness'.  She made reference
    to the index offence.  She noted that  Mr  Jones  had  (unsurprisingly)
    made no submission in relation  to  the  first  limb  of  s72  (namely,
    whether the offence was a particularly serious one) and that the  focus
    had been on whether he had rebutted the statutory presumption  that  he
    was a danger to the community of the United  Kingdom.   She  considered
    the relevant section of HHJ  Picton's  sentencing  remarks.   She  made
    reference to Peter Horrocks' report.  She noted what had been  said  on
    the appellant's behalf but she considered that he  had  'supported  his
    father in a vicious and  lengthy  and  savage  attack'  and  that  'the
    offence is such a serious one that it would leave the public vulnerable
    to the appellant reoffending'.  The judge noted the evidence which  had
    been  adduced  of  the  appellant's  conduct  post-conviction  but  she
    observed that much of it would have been  available  when  Judge  Lever
    made his decision in 2018.  She had considered the  decision  of  Judge
    Lever and noted what he had said at [27] of his decision, which I  have
    reproduced above.  She also  turned  to  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    conduct following his release from immigration detention, including the
    supporting letters  from  a  number  of  friends  and  family  members.
    Drawing these threads together, at [98], the judge found:

         "While I accept the appellant has not  committed  further  offences
         since his release on bail in April 2019, having considered all  the
         evidence in the round, I find on balance  that  the  appellant  has
         failed to rebut the presumption that his continued presence in  the
         United Kingdom would constitute  'danger  to  the  community'.   He
         committed  an  offence  which  had  serious  consequences  for  his
         victims.  I find that the appellant has not been rehabilitated  and
         has not rebutted the presumption  of  dangerousness  under  section
         72."

17. At [99], the next sub-heading  in  the  judge's  decision  is  'Asylum'
    although, as she noted, she had upheld the certificate  under  s72  and
    the appellant could not  therefore  succeed  on  asylum  grounds.   She
    proceeded to  consider  the  appellant's  entitlement  to  Humanitarian
    Protection.  She made reference  to  the  gravamen  of  the  protection
    claim.  She noted that the respondent had submitted that the  appellant
    could obtain a sufficiency of protection in Jamaica, and had relied  on
    AB (Jamaica) CG [2007] UKAIT 18 and the CPIN of August 2019 on criminal
    gangs.  She set out the two paragraphs of the headnote to AB (Jamaica).
     She made reference to the reports of Dr  de  Noronha  and  Danielle[1]
    Archer before stating as follows:

         "[108] I have had the opportunity to read both reports  in  detail.
         The appellant was not born when the incident in  1993  took  place.
         The appellant left Jamaica in 2000 but a year later  the  appellant
         returned.  I do not find it credible that  the  appellant's  family
         would allow him to return to Jamaica one year after leaving  if  he
         was in danger.  The appellant's family members  who  gave  evidence
         gave no indication that they were unaware as to why the appellant's
         father left Jamaica.  Further the incident took place 26 years ago.
          There is no evidence of any ongoing interest or contact in Jamaica
         given the length of time that has passed I find that the likelihood
         is that there would be no interest.  The reports from  the  experts
         talk in generalised terms but did not  address  specific  concerns.
         There is only a possibility of being killed by gang culture.

         [109] It appears incredible that after 26 years a man the appellant
         had never met and had nothing to with  the  killing  of  a  brother
         would look to the appellant as  he  was  not  even  born  when  the
         incident took place.  I am not  persuaded  if  the  appellant  were
         returned to Jamaica he would face treatment contrary to Articles  2
         and 3 of the Human Rights Act.  The appellant's claim  that  a  man
         named Corporal Stuart the brother  of  the  criminal  shot  by  his
         father would kil him I find is not objectively well  founded.   The
         appellant speaks English which is the official language of Jamaica.
          I do not accept that the appellant has demonstrated that a  family
         member of the man his father shot has the influence to  locate  the
         appellant."

18. At [110], the judge turned to her assessment of the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.  She stated  that  she  had  been
    assisted by the decision of the Court of Appeal in Mwesezi [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1104 and that she had taken account of Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR
    47 'as  guidance  and  nothing  higher'.   She  recalled  the  relevant
    statutory provisions in s117C of the 2002 Act, the UK Borders Act  2007
    and the relevant paragraphs of the Immigration Rules.   At  [115],  she
    reminded herself again that she was to take the decision of Judge Lever
    as her starting point  and  concluded  that  'there  were  insufficient
    reasons to depart from the findings  of  Judge  Lever.'   She  set  out
    various aspects of Judge Lever's findings  and  the  evidence  she  had
    heard from the appellant and his partner which bore on  his  conclusion
    that she  could  settle  in  Jamaica  without  undue  hardship.  Having
    considered that evidence, she did not accept that it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for her to relocate: 'the severance to family life would  not  be
    profound and is not sufficient to cause compelling circumstances'.

19. The judge stated that she had taken into account the  evidence  of  the
    appellant  and  his  family  members  concerning  the  impact  on   the
    appellant's partner and other members of the family  if  the  appellant
    were to be deported.  She had also considered what  had  been  said  by
    Peter Horrocks in that connection.  She found that  the  appellant  had
    significant ties to the UK and that his relationship with his  brothers
    was his strongest argument.  Even if their behaviour was to worsen as a
    result of his deportation, however, she did not accept that 'this would
    be sufficient to amount to unduly harsh'.  Her  final  two  substantive
    paragraphs were in the following terms:

         "[124] Looking cumulatively at the difficulties of  relocating  the
         impact on the appellants partner and  the  families  they  are  not
         compelling circumstances and above the factors that I  am  entitled
         to consider and have considered that demonstrate it  overturns  the
         finding the deportation of the appellant is conducive to the public
         good and in the public interest.

         [125] Pursuant to the judgement in Hesham Ali  [2016]  UKSC  16   I
         have conducted the above structured approach to proportionality  on
         the basis of the facts as I have found them to be on  the  evidence
         in this particular appeal, the law is established by  statute,  and
         case law. Ultimately, I  have  to  decide  whether  deportation  is
         proportionate in  this  particular  appeal.  I  have  balanced  the
         strength of the public interest in the deportation of the appellant
         against the impact upon the private and family life not only of the
         appellant but of his partner and members of his immediate family. I
         have given appropriate weight to Parliament's and the Secretary  of
         State's assessments of the strength of the general public  interest
         in deportation of foreign offenders. Having given due weight to the
         strength  of  the  public  interest  and  the  deportation  of  the
         appellant in this appeal I find that the Article 8 appeal is not so
         sufficiently  strong  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   his
         deportation."

20. Mr Jones advanced four grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    complaints may be distilled as follows

      i) The judge had erred in her application of  Devaseelan,  failing  in
         particular to acknowledge the impact of further  evidence  and  new
         issues on the continued application of Judge Lever's findings;

     ii) The judge had erred in her consideration of dangerousness under s72
         of the 2002 Act, focusing on the severity of the index offence  and
         failing to appraise  rationally  or  at  all  the  more  up-to-date
         evidence;

    iii) The judge's assessment of risk was flawed in that she had failed to
         deal at all with one aspect of the protection claim and had failed,
         when assessing  the  risk  from  associates  of  Bigga  Prince,  to
         consider material matters; and

     iv) The judge assessment of s117C(7) was flawed  due  misdirections  in
         law and a failure to take material matters into account.

21. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Fisher  on  each  of  these
    grounds.

22. Judge Fisher was also critical of the length  of  the  grounds,  noting
    that 'experienced counsel ought to be able to crystallise  grounds  far
    more concisely.'  I agree with that sentiment, echoing as it does  what
    was said by Hickinbottom LJ in Harverye [2018] EWCA Civ 2848.  I do not
    agree with the criticism, however.  The judge's decision is lengthy and
    closely reasoned.  The grounds themselves are  formulated  tightly  but
    the particulars of each ground are set out in rather greater detail.  I
    do not consider the extent of that particularisation to be excessive on
    the facts of this case; it was plainly necessary to put  flesh  on  the
    bones of these particular complaints and the Upper Tribunal, unlike the
    Court of Appeal, does not require a skeleton argument in  amplification
    of the grounds of appeal.  I have been assisted by the grounds, and  by
    the concise written  submissions  which  were  filed  by  Mr  Jones  in
    compliance with the Upper Tribunal's directions.

Discussion

23. Despite the care which the judge evidently  invested  in  the  decision
    under appeal, I find that each of the grounds I have  summarised  above
    is made out.  In  certain  respects,  the  judge  failed  to  give  any
    consideration to arguments advanced by the appellant.  In  others,  she
    failed to consider  evidence  which  bore  on  arguments  made  by  the
    appellant, or she failed to  give  any  or  any  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting those arguments.

24. The clearest error is to be found in the judge's analysis of  the  risk
    posed by the appellant to the community of  the  United  Kingdom,  with
    reference to s72 of the 2002 Act  and  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention. In undertaking that analysis, the judge took the wrong part
    of Judge Lever's 2018 decision as her starting point. At  [95],  having
    set out the details of the index offence and the relevant parts of  the
    Crown Court judge's sentencing remarks, she recalled that  Judge  Lever
    had found that deportation was conducive to the public good.   (I  have
    set out the entirety of the relevant part  of  Judge  Lever's  decision
    above.)  She then set out, at [96], a list of the  evidence  which  was
    said to support the submission that the appellant presented no risk  to
    the community of the United Kingdom, before finding at  [97]-[98]  that
    the appellant had failed to rebut the  statutory  presumption  that  he
    presented such a risk.

25. As contended in Mr Jones's grounds of  appeal,  however,  the  relevant
    finding made by Judge Lever was that the appellant presented a low risk
    of reoffending.  That was the view of the Probation Service at the time
    of Judge Lever's decision and it was a view that Judge  Lever  adopted,
    at [26].  It was that conclusion which was relevant to  Judge  Roblin's
    subsequent assessment of whether the appellant presented a risk to  the
    community of the United Kingdom.  Judge Lever's  subsequent  conclusion
    that the appellant's deportation was conducive to the public good was a
    wider finding, expressed in terms of the statutory language  which  was
    relevant to the holistic assessment which he was  undertaking  at  that
    time.  In considering the altogether narrower question of  whether  the
    appellant presented a risk to the United Kingdom, the relevant  section
    of the earlier analysis was the part  which  confronted  that  specific
    question.  The judge erred in  failing  to  have  any  regard  to  that
    earlier conclusion on the part of Judge Lever and she erred in  failing
    to have any regard to the  conclusion  in  the  OASys  report  that  he
    represented a low risk of reoffending.   Because  she  took  the  wrong
    starting point in her analysis of s72 and because she failed to analyse
    the evidence most  relevant  to  that  analysis,  this  aspect  of  her
    decision cannot stand.

26. An equally clear error is apparent  in  the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    substance of the appellant's  protection  claim.   At  [99]-[109],  she
    analysed the appellant's fear of return to Jamaica on  account  of  his
    fear of harm at the hands  of  Bigga  Prince's  associates.   That  was
    doubtlessly the principal focus of Mr Jones's submissions but it was by
    no means the only limb of the protection claim.  It is clear  from  his
    written submissions that he also submitted that the appellant would  be
    positively at risk on return to Jamaica as a deportee from  the  United
    Kingdom. That submission was founded in large part on Dr  de  Noronha's
    report.  The judge failed to consider that submission, or the  evidence
    which bore upon it, at all.

27. A third clear omission is to be found in the judge's assessment of  the
    Article 8 ECHR claim.  That assessment was  to  be  undertaken  in  the
    structured  manner  explained   in   NA   (Pakistan)   and   subsequent
    authorities.  Although the appellant falls into  the  serious  offender
    category, what the judge  was  required  to  do  was  to  consider  the
    statutory exceptions to deportation in  s117C(4)  and  s117C(5)  before
    moving on to consider whether there were very compelling  circumstances
    over and above those exceptions  which  outweighed  the  strong  public
    interest in deportation.

28. The judge certainly considered the  second  statutory  exception.   She
    understood that it was Mr Jones's submission that  the  effect  on  the
    appellant's family would not only be unduly harsh but that it would  be
    so  harsh  or  compelling  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest   in
    deportation.  But that was to focus on only  half  of  the  appellant's
    argument under section 117C(6).  The other half, based again  in  large
    part on Judge Lever's analysis, was as follows.

29. Judge Lever had accepted that the appellant had resided lawfully in the
    UK for most of his life.  He had also accepted that the  appellant  was
    socially and culturally integrated to the United Kingdom.  He  had  not
    accepted that the appellant  met  the  third  limb  of  s117C(4);  very
    significant obstacles to his re-integration  to  Jamaica.   It  was  Mr
    Jones' submission, made clearly in writing, that the  further  evidence
    adduced by the appellant sufficed to justify the  opposite  conclusion.
    Mr Jones sought to support that submission in a number of ways.  It was
    said, for example, that the appellant was particularly  vulnerable  and
    that  he  had  suffered  from  particular  mental  health  problems  in
    detention when it was thought that he was at risk  of  removal.   There
    was a degree of evidential support for each of those submissions in the
    appellant's medical records and in the report of  Mr  Horrocks.   Those
    personal characteristics were said to be relevant to the appellant's re-
    integration, as was the background situation into  which  he  would  be
    expected to re-integrate.  The background situation for  deportees  was
    described, as I have already stated, in Dr de  Noronha's  report.   The
    judge failed to grapple with this submission at  all.   She  failed  to
    consider, or to express any conclusion upon, the submission that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into
    Jamaica.  That failure tainted the judge's subsequent assessment  under
    s117C(6) because, as explained in cases such as JZ (Zambia) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 116 and NA (Pakistan), the assessment of  whether  there  are  very
    compelling  circumstances   must   take   account   of   all   relevant
    circumstances, including those set out in the statutory  exceptions  to
    deportation.

30. The errors particularised above reflect the judge's failure to consider
    aspects of the case advanced by the appellant.   I  also  accept  other
    criticisms made  in  Mr  Jones's  grounds  of  appeal,  concerning  the
    adequacy of the judge's evaluation of those submissions  to  which  she
    did turn her mind.

31. I am particularly concerned by the adequacy of the judge's  reasons  in
    respect of the risk to the appellant from associates  of  Biga  Prince.
    As I have noted above, this was a somewhat unusual case, in which there
    was not only evidence from an expert in the UK (Dr de Noronha) speaking
    to the likely risk to the appellant.  Dr de Noronha concluded that  the
    appellant would be at 'profound risk' of murderous reprisals' on return
    to Jamaica.  There was also evidence from Danielle Archer,  a  Jamaican
    attorney, who had carried out an investigative report into  the  actual
    dramatis personae in this case.  Her report featured profiles  of  Biga
    Prince and set out his connections to organised crime, the  police  and
    politicians.  There were also profiles of his relatives, an account  of
    their current situation, and an evaluation of the level of risk to  the
    appellant's father based on the investigations conducted around Spanish
    Town, which was Biga Prince's  local  area.   It  was  said  that  Biga
    Prince's brothers (Anthony and Kevin Stuart) had  both  stated  at  the
    time of the killing that they were 'willing to stand up for  the  death
    of their brother, no matter the cost'.  Ms Archer's  opinion  was  that
    the appellant's father would be 'wiped out' shortly after  arriving  in
    Jamaica and she noted that 'men of questionable aura' were said to have
    called at NM's house on a number of occasions after  he  had  left  the
    country.  This report - and the report of  Dr  de  Noronha  -  was  put
    forward by Mr Jones as shedding light on the risk to the  appellant  on
    return to Jamaica notwithstanding the passage of time.

32. The judge summarised the contents of these reports in  five  sentences,
    at [106]-[107].  At [108]-[109], she set out why she did  not  consider
    the appellant to  be  at  risk  from  Biga  Prince's  associates.   The
    gravamen of the reasoning was that the appellant was not  born  at  the
    time of the killing  and  that  it  'appears  incredible'  that  anyone
    associated with Biga Prince would seek to harm the appellant  26  years
    after he was shot.  In reaching that  conclusion,  however,  the  judge
    failed to engage with the reasoned conclusions reached  in  the  Archer
    and de Noronha reports.  The judge stated that  the  experts  'talk  in
    general terms but did not address specific concerns'.  With respect,  I
    do not understand that observation.  The de Noronha report  was  indeed
    focused on the general risk of reprisals but the Archer report was very
    specific.  Neither considered that the risk would have evaporated  over
    time.  The judge also noted that the appellant had returned to  Jamaica
    in 2001 and that nothing had happened upon his return  at  that  point.
    But that was not to compare like with  like.   The  appellant  was  six
    years old when he returned to Jamaica  with  family  members  in  2001.
    Were he to return now, he would be a man seeking to make his own way in
    Jamaica which is, as noted by Dr de Noronha, a  small  island.   It  is
    evidently more likely that his connection to his father would  come  to
    light now, compared to the situation which would have obtained when  he
    returned with family members as a young child who would not  have  been
    required to give any account of himself.

33. A judge is obviously not required to  accept  expert  evidence  adduced
    before her, even where (as here) the written opinion of the  expert  is
    unchallenged by the opposing representative.  It is for  the  judge  to
    reach conclusions on matters such as risk, and  her  decision  on  such
    matters will not be erroneous in law in the event that she has  engaged
    with the expert evidence and provided legally sustainable  reasons  for
    reaching a contrary conclusion to the expert: SI (Iraq) CG [2008] UKAIT
    94, at [56], and Detamu [2006] EWCA Civ 604, at [27]-[28].

34. I do not consider the judge to have engaged adequately with the  expert
    evidence and I do not consider her to have provided legally sustainable
    reasons for  reaching  a  contrary  conclusion  to  the  experts.   The
    appellant's return to Jamaica as a child did not  necessarily  militate
    against a finding that he was at risk on return to Jamaica as a man and
    both experts concluded that the risk which had existed in the  wake  of
    Biga  Prince's  death  continued  to  exist   at   the   present   time
    notwithstanding the passage of time.  It  did  not  suffice,  in  those
    circumstances,  for  the  judge  simply  to   conclude   (echoing   the
    conclusions in the refusal letter) that it  'appears  incredible'  that
    the appellant would still be at risk 26 years later.  That was to reach
    a conclusion at odds with the expert evidence for a  reason  which  was
    grounded in nothing more than speculation.  It  was  also  to  fail  to
    consider  the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's  fear   through   the
    spectacles provided by the country information before her, as Keene  LJ
    put it in Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.

35. There are further errors in the judge's assessment  of  the  Article  8
    ECHR claim, in addition to her failure to consider whether there  would
    be very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  re-integration  to
    Jamaica.  I do not understand, with respect, the way in which the judge
    approached the decision of the Grand Chamber in Maslov v  Austria.   At
    [110], she stated that the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Mwesezi
    required her to  treat  Maslov  v  Austria  as  'guidance  and  nothing
    higher'.  She then made no further reference to Maslov or to  the  fact
    that the appellant had been granted ILR at the age  of  seven  and  had
    therefore been lawfully present in the UK for most of his life.   I  do
    not think that Mwesezi or the other authorities considered at  [18]  of
    Sales LJ's judgment in that case warranted such an approach.

36. The judge did not  have  the  benefit  of  Leggatt  LJ's  comprehensive
    analysis at [103]-[114] of CI (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA  Civ  2027;  [2020]
    Imm AR 503.  That decision was handed down a few days after  the  judge
    issued her reserved decision in this case.  Had it  been  available  to
    the judge, she would no doubt have seen that the appellant fell  within
    the category of individuals to whom Maslov applies and  that,  although
    the decision of the Grand Chamber 'is not to be read as laying  down  a
    new rule of law' it does  indicate  the  way  in  which  the  balancing
    exercise is to  be  conducted  in  such  a  case.   In  this  case,  in
    considering whether there were very compelling reasons under  s117C(6),
    the judge gave no demonstrable  consideration  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had lived lawfully in the UK for most of his life.  That  was
    necessarily a relevant part of the assessment, as were the difficulties
    which the appellant would encounter on return to  Jamaica.   As  in  CI
    (Nigeria), the judge failed to consider either adequately or at all.

37. Finally, I consider that the judge fell into error  when  she  came  to
    assess  the  possibility  of  the  appellant's  partner  relocating  to
    Jamaica.  Judge Lever had obviously found that this was a proportionate
    course but Mr Jones made a number of submissions  which  were  said  to
    justify or necessitate a departure from that starting point.    Amongst
    other points, he relied on the report of Dr de Noronha, which suggested
    that the appellant's partner would be unlikely to  receive  appropriate
    mental health support in Jamaica and that she would potentially  be  at
    risk as the British partner of a Jamaican deportee.  Whilst  the  judge
    bore various strands of Mr Jones' argument in mind  in  the  assessment
    which she undertook at [115]-[122], she did not consider or  reach  any
    clear conclusions on these important submissions.

38. It follows that the decision as a whole cannot stand.  Each section  of
    the decision is vitiated by legal error.  The judge erred in law in her
    assessment of dangerousness, risk and Article 8 ECHR.  Mr Jones submits
    in writing that the appropriate course is remission to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.  Given the scope of the fact-finding which
    is necessary, I also consider that to be the proper course and will  so
    order.

39. I add two  concluding  remarks.   Firstly,  the  parties  may  wish  to
    consider whether  the  analysis  of  Dr  de  Noronha's  report  in  AXB
    (Jamaica) [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC) is of any relevance.  Secondly, this is
    a complex case, with a number of witnesses and a number of  issues.  It
    has not been necessary for me to consider the issue raised at [45]-[46]
    of  Mr  Jones'  grounds  of  appeal,  which  concern  the   appellant's
    (asserted) entitlement to British citizenship at material points in his
    history.  That submission is made with reference to what  was  said  by
    the Court of Appeal in Akinyemi [2019] EWCA  Civ  2098;  [2020]  1  WLR
    1843.  It was not considered by the judge (although it was relied upon)
    and it clearly adds a further level of complexity to this case.  It  is
    obviously a matter for the Resident  Judge  at  Newport  but  it  might
    legitimately be thought that a full day's listing before an experienced
    judge is appropriate.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law.  The decision of the FtT is set aside in its  entirety.   The
appeal is remitted to the FtT to be heard  afresh  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Roblin.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                            2 September 2020





















-----------------------
[1] Ms Archer's first name was misspelled in the judge's decision.  It is
clear from p121 of the appellant's bundle that this is the correct
spelling.

