
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04978/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 21 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Boyle, Solicitor, Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, who originated from  the  KRG.  He
    entered the UK illegally, and then claimed asylum on 27 November  2015.
    That protection claim was refused on 29 April 2016.  His appeal against
    that refusal came before the First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 24
    August 2017, when it was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands.  The
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds in a  decision  promulgated  on  13
    September 2017.

 2. The Appellant's out of time application for permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by First tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell on 16  October  2017.  The
    application was renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  lengthy  grounds
    drafted by Counsel who had represented the  Appellant  at  the  hearing
    before Judge Hands. Those grounds were not  supported  by  any  witness
    statement from either the Appellant, or Counsel who had appeared below,
    in order to provide evidential support for either the  assertions  made
    therein as to what had occurred on the  day  of  the  hearing,  or,  to
    explain what  it  was  said  would  have  happened  differently  had  a
    different course been  adopted  by  the  Judge.  Nor  was  the  renewed
    application for permission  to  appeal  that  was  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal supported by such evidence, although  this  too  was  made  on
    lengthy grounds drafted by Counsel who had represented the Appellant at
    the hearing before Judge Hands.

 3. When the hearing of this appeal was called on before me, Mr Boyle  (who
    did not appear  below)  confirmed  that  no  application  to  introduce
    evidence under Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  had
    ever been made on behalf of the Appellant. Nor was such an  application
    to be advanced, late.

 4. It is not disputed before me that the grounds to  the  application  for
    permission to appeal raised the three broad complaints  identified  and
    summarised by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith.

 5. Firstly, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith refused  permission  to  appeal  in
    relation to the complaint that the appeal should  have  been  adjourned
    because of Counsel's concerns about the  Appellant's  fitness  to  give
    evidence. She noted that it was "unarguably open to the Judge  to  find
    that the medical evidence did not make out  any  difficulties  in  that
    regard and to reject a request for further time on that account."  That
    complaint was not renewed before me.

 6. Secondly, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith refused permission  to  appeal  in
    relation to the complaint that the Judge's summary of  the  psychiatric
    evidence contained within the decision was erroneous. However  she  did
    grant permission to  argue  that  having  found  that  the  Appellant's
    condition would worsen if treatment were discontinued [44],  the  Judge
    might have erred because in the light of that finding  her  conclusions
    in relation to the Appellant's prospects upon return to  the  KRG  were
    not open to her [73]. That complaint was not pursued before  me  by  Mr
    Boyle, and in my judgement he was correct not to do so. I note that the
    Appellant accepted that  he  originated  from,  and  had  always  lived
    within, the KRG. Judge Hands concluded that  it  was  open  to  him  to
    return to the KRG in safety, and that he would be reunited  there  with
    his family and friends, who could provide him with  such  economic  and
    emotional support as he might need. She rejected the Appellant's  claim
    that he would be unable to  access  treatment  for  any  mental  health
    condition he may genuinely suffer within the KRG. In the  circumstances
    there was no room for the inference that there was a real risk that any
    necessary medical treatment would  be  discontinued  in  the  event  of
    return to the KRG. Subject to the other complaints for which permission
    to appeal was granted there  is  in  my  judgement  no  error  in  that
    approach, and that was no doubt  why  the  complaint  was  not  pursued
    further before me.

 7. The third area of complaint concerned the Judge's refusal to accede  to
    the second request for an adjournment of the  hearing,  an  application
    that  was  made  once  the  hearing  had  begun,   in   the   following
    circumstances. The Appellant when called by Counsel to give evidence in
    his own appeal declined to adopt the witness statement  that  had  been
    prepared for him by his solicitors, (although I am  told  that  he  did
    accept that he had previously signed a declaration of truth at its foot
    when asked to do so by his  solicitors).  The  Judge  recorded  in  her
    decision the explanation that she was offered by the Appellant for this
    stance [19]. The Appellant told her  that  he  had  not  been  able  to
    understand his solicitor, and that she had not been able to  understand
    him, because he could not properly understand the interpreter booked by
    his solicitor for the occasion upon which his instructions  were  taken
    for that statement. He went so far as to deny having ever said some  of
    the  things  that  were  contained  within  the  statement.  The  Judge
    concluded, accurately in my  judgement,  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    saying to her that he had any  problem  in  understanding  her  or  the
    representatives, or, in understanding what he was saying at the hearing
    to them, or, indeed any problem in  understanding  what  was  contained
    within the written statement. On the contrary he was saying to her that
    he did understand the content of the witness  statement,  and  that  he
    believed that it was inaccurate, and did not represent the instructions
    that he had tried to give to his solicitors,  and  thus,  the  evidence
    that he wished to give in support of his appeal [20].

 8. The Judge's solution to  the  situation  she  was  presented  with  was
    twofold. First, she declined to accept into his  evidence  the  witness
    statement that the Appellant had disowned; no complaint is made  before
    me on the Appellant's behalf in relation to this. Second,  she  invited
    Counsel to undertake a full oral examination in chief of the  Appellant
    - a practice that used to be commonplace in  civil  litigation  of  all
    types, and which is of course still in use in the criminal  courts.  It
    is this decision which was the subject of argument in the course of the
    hearing before me, Upper Tribunal Smith having  granted  permission  to
    appeal in the following terms; "the second reason was  the  Appellant's
    lack of understanding of the written statement he had given. Whilst the
    Judge took measures no doubt designed to overcome the difficulties,  it
    is arguable that proceeding immediately with the hearing and  requiring
    Counsel to deal with the Appellant's  evidence  in  chief  without  the
    benefit of any written statement and without the  opportunity  to  take
    instructions was unfair to the Appellant".

 9. It is of course far from unusual for a witness (whether they be a party
    to litigation or not) to question from the witness box the accuracy  of
    the witness statement prepared for them,  or,  to  diverge  from  it  -
    sometimes dramatically. I would venture to  suggest  that  by  far  the
    majority of those with experience in litigation will have enjoyed  such
    an experience from time to time. There is  no  automatic  right  to  an
    adjournment of the hearing in such circumstances to consult with  those
    who prepared the  original  statement,  or,  in  order  to  prepare  an
    alternative. One of the skills required of  a  litigator  is  to  judge
    either how best to take advantage of such an occurrence, or,  how  best
    to deal with  it  without  sustaining  undue  damage  to  the  disputed
    point(s) in issue, depending upon their role within that litigation.

10. Moreover there is nothing inherently unfair in taking  an  individual's
    evidence by way of a full examination in chief. To be fair to Mr  Boyle
    he did not suggest that there was.  As  he  accepted,  absent  inherent
    fundamental unfairness, it would be  difficult  if  not  impossible  to
    identify unfairness in a process, in the absence of any evidence as  to
    what the different outcome would have been, had  the  different  course
    contended for been followed.

11. It is not suggested that there is any evidence before me to suggest the
    Judge unfairly truncated the exercise she required Counsel to undertake
    of eliciting the Appellant's evidence in chief in full by question  and
    answer. The manner in which that exercise was undertaken, and the scope
    and content of the questions asked to elicit the  Appellant's  evidence
    in chief, was left to Counsel's professional judgement. One option that
    was open to Counsel was therefore to go through the  witness  statement
    asking the Appellant to identify and correct the passage(s) with  which
    he disagreed. Another was to  use  the  statement  merely  as  her  own
    prompt, and then by asking open questions to lead the Appellant through
    his account by stages, thereby allowing him to give his evidence in his
    own words. There is no evidence to suggest the Judge sought  either  to
    direct how Counsel should approach her task, or, to  interfere  in  the
    process she chose to adopt.

12. Counsel was of course well aware of the content of the  record  of  the
    Appellant's interview by the Respondent - and  thus  knew  how  he  had
    presented his own case when interviewed by the Respondent. Counsel also
    knew the credibility points that had to date been taken against him  by
    the Respondent, because they were set out in the reasons given for  the
    refusal  of  the  protection  claim.  Counsel  had   the   benefit   of
    instructions from her solicitor, which included  the  detailed  witness
    statement the Appellant had declined to rely upon, to explain  how  her
    instructing solicitors  anticipated  the  Appellant's  case  should  be
    advanced at the hearing. Counsel did not at any stage  suggest  to  the
    Judge in the course of the hearing that the  Appellant  had  sought  to
    advance a new claim of which she, or her  instructing  solicitors  were
    previously unaware.

13. Moreover, as the Judge recorded  [7]  neither  the  Appellant  nor  his
    Counsel raised any concern at any stage of the hearing over the quality
    of  the  interpretation  services  provided  by  the  Tribunal  to  the
    Appellant.

14. When Counsel had concluded the Appellant's examination in chief  it  is
    common ground that the  Judge  was  left  with  a  radically  different
    factual account  to  that  which  the  Appellant  had  offered  to  the
    Respondent at interview. The Appellant did not return  to  the  account
    given at interview when subject to cross-examination. The task for  the
    Judge was thus to assess the weight that could be given to his evidence
    in the light of the medical evidence concerning him. That is  what  she
    did, and her conclusion was that the Appellant's inability  to  give  a
    consistent account was the result of his seeking to advance a series of
    fictitious accounts, rather than a feature of any illness [43-]. It  is
    extremely difficult to see how the grant of a short  adjournment  prior
    to taking the Appellant's evidence in chief would have led the Judge to
    any different outcome.

15. In the circumstances I invited Mr Boyle to address what  precisely  was
    said to have been unfair about the Judge's approach. He  accepted  that
    there might well be nothing wrong with  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
    exercise of taking the Appellant's evidence, but that in the  light  of
    the  medical  evidence  this  process  was  inherently  unfair  to  the
    Appellant because Counsel  was  expected  to  undertake  that  exercise
    without being given time to take his  detailed  instructions  upon  his
    evidence prior to its commencement. Thus he argued that having  decided
    to take the Appellant's evidence in this way, the Judge  was  bound  to
    grant to Counsel as much time as she might desire in order to  talk  to
    the Appellant. In reality therefore  the  criticism  advanced  is  that
    Counsel was not  given  the  opportunity  to  undertake  a  full  dress
    rehearsal with the Appellant of his evidence in chief,  before  he  was
    required to give his oral evidence to the Judge. In my judgement  there
    is no merit in  such  a  criticism.  There  is  no  evidence  from  the
    Appellant to suggest that he was denied the opportunity to say anything
    he  wished  to  say,  or,  that  the  process  adopted   led   to   any
    misunderstanding of the terms of his oral evidence by the  Judge.  This
    was an individual who had  attended  the  hearing  of  his  own  appeal
    expecting to be able to give evidence in support of his own appeal, and
    he did not suggest at any stage that he was  not  ready,  willing,  and
    able to do so. He was  of  course  uniquely  positioned  to  give  that
    evidence since it required him only to recount his recollections of his
    own  experiences.  It  is  extremely  difficult   to   see   in   these
    circumstances how it could sensibly be argued that he was  in  any  way
    disadvantaged by the denial of  the  opportunity  to  conduct  a  dress
    rehearsal of that process with Counsel on the day of  the  hearing.  On
    the  contrary  the  process  adopted  by  the  Judge  gave  him   every
    opportunity to give his evidence at his  own  speed,  and  in  his  own
    words. Indeed in my judgement the absence of any explanation  from  the
    Appellant as to how he was in  practice  disadvantaged  by  the  course
    adopted speaks for itself.

16. Mr Boyle's argument also failed to engage with the practical difficulty
    inherent in the course he suggested the Judge should have adopted  once
    the Appellant had disowned his witness statement. Even if there  is  no
    evidence from Counsel as to what  occurred,  or  what  she  would  have
    wished to have done, or what it is claimed would have flowed from  that
    alternative, paragraph  14  of  the  grounds  of  the  application  for
    permission that she drafted makes it clear  that  she  felt  unable  to
    communicate with the Appellant directly because she did not speak Dari,
    and the Appellant admitted to no  fluency  in  English.  Assuming  that
    proposition  to  be  correct,  I  am  satisfied  that  she  could  only
    communicate with him within the courtroom as part of the appeal hearing
    using the Tribunal's interpreter,  unless  her  instructing  solicitors
    were willing, and able, to arrange a telephone  interpretation  service
    for her to use at the hearing centre during any short  adjournment  the
    Judge granted her. It is accepted  before  me  that  no  interpretation
    service had been arranged for Counsel to use to  communicate  with  the
    Appellant in advance of the hearing. Indeed Mr Boyle accepted  that  he
    could offer no evidence to suggest that such a service  could  in  fact
    have been arranged at short notice for  Counsel  to  adopt  the  course
    argued  for.  Given  the  Appellant's  claims  about  the  quality   of
    interpretation provided to him in the past, by both the Respondent  and
    his own solicitor, it is very far from clear that the process for which
    Mr Boyle argues could actually have taken place, or that it could  have
    led to anything other than further confusion between the Appellant  and
    his lawyers over precisely what he  wished  to  say  in  evidence.  The
    reality of course, as noted above, is that the course  adopted  by  the
    Judge has not led to any complaint from the  Appellant  that  his  oral
    evidence omitted any material fact or detail, or, that it  was  in  any
    way misunderstood by the  Judge.  The  Judge  was  clearly  careful  to
    confirm throughout the hearing that the Appellant  did  understand  the
    interpreter.

17. Mr Boyle advanced the argument that the process adopted  by  the  Judge
    failed to comply with the terms of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note
    No  2  of  2010  "Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive   appellant
    guidance". Asked to identify the passage relied upon he referred me  to
    paragraph 7; "Enable the appellant to have adequate time prior  to  the
    commencement of the hearing to familiarise him/herself with the hearing
    room and give instructions to  his/her  representative."  There  is  no
    suggestion that any effort was made by those representing the Appellant
    to introduce him to the hearing room in advance  of  the  appeal  being
    called on, and in my judgement nothing turns on that passage.  Moreover
    the need to provide adequate time to take instructions does not  permit
    a representative to demand  from  a  Judge  whatever  time  they  might
    choose. If it did it would be possible to defer a hearing indefinitely.
    Had  those  representing  the  Appellant  considered  it  necessary  or
    desirable there had always existed the opportunity for Counsel to  meet
    the Appellant in advance of the hearing date,  and  then  to  take  any
    instructions he wished to deliver with the luxury of time. There is  no
    suggestion  that  this  course  was  ever  considered   necessary,   or
    desirable.

18. Ultimately Mr Boyle accepted that the decision had to be assessed as  a
    whole, in the light of the Presidential Guidance, in  order  to  decide
    whether the Appellant had a fair hearing. He then accepted  that  there
    was nothing within the text of the  decision  that  gave  rise  to  any
    realistic ground for concern  that  the  Judge  had  misunderstood  any
    aspect of the Appellant's evidence. It is not open to me to infer  that
    Counsel was unable to advance the Appellant's case properly because she
    misunderstood any aspect of the  Appellant's  evidence.  There  was  no
    renewal by Counsel of the application for an adjournment as a result of
    problems experienced with the course adopted to taking the  Appellant's
    evidence. In the  circumstances  since  there  was  nothing  inherently
    unfair in the process by which the Appellant's evidence was  taken,  Mr
    Boyle accepted that the complaint advanced  could  be  reduced  to  the
    question; was the Judge's decision to  take  the  Appellant's  evidence
    when she did, as opposed to later in the day, sufficient  to  deny  the
    Appellant a fair hearing of his appeal? For the reasons set out  above,
    I am not satisfied that it was.

19. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission
    to appeal was granted, I therefore dismiss the  Appellant's  challenge,
    and confirm the decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

20. The anonymity direction previously made is continued.







Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 13 September 2017 did not involve the making  of
an error of law sufficient to require the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

