
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/04738/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 18th October 2017                 |            On: 25th October 2017    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     NN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms Wilkins, Counsel instructed by Greater
Manchester
                       Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  in  1979.  On  the  30th
    November 2016 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Herwald)  dismissed  her
    protection appeal. The Appellant now has permission to  appeal  against
    that decision, granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on the 15th
    February 2017.








    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



      Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 13th  December  2015,  almost  five
    years after she had arrived in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student Migrant. The basis of her claim was that she was gay.  She said
    that a cousin of hers, with whom she had had a relationship,  had  been
    killed by her family for what they perceived to be  her  transgressions
    of their moral code, viz refusing to enter into a  marriage  that  they
    had arranged.  The Appellant herself had been forced into marriage.  It
    came to the attention of the Appellant's  husband  that  something  had
    happened between her and her cousin. He beat her and told  her  family.
    The Appellant's father was very angry and she was afraid. She  went  to
    live with a friend  for  a  period.   In  January  2010  the  Appellant
    returned to the family home and reconciled with her family. Her  father
    agreed to let her come and study in the United Kingdom. In 2015 it came
    to her family's attention that she was having  a  relationship  with  a
    woman in the UK.     Her father threatened that if she were  to  return
    to Pakistan he would kill her.  The Appellant averred  that  as  a  gay
    woman she would not be able to live freely, even away from her  family,
    in Pakistan. There would be an ever-present risk of persecution. Whilst
    in the  UK  she  has  joined  a  number  of  LGBT  groups,  has  had  a
    relationship and has been able to live openly as a gay woman.


 4. The Respondent found there  to  be  discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence such that it could not be accepted. Protection was refused.

 5. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal.   The Appellant herself
    gave evidence, as did a Ms Karen McCarthy of  the  Lesbian  Immigration
    Support Group. I am told that a good number of other  women  from  this
    group attended the hearing but were not called to testify. The Tribunal
    was asked to consider letters of support from two other individuals. Mr
    Shahid Khan of the Queer Muslim Support Group, and a Mr Uddin who knows
    the Appellant because she attends a monthly  group  supporting  Muslims
    who identify as gay.

 6. The findings of the Tribunal are set out at paragraph 13  (a)-(hh).  In
    sum the Tribunal gives numerous reasons for rejecting  the  Appellant's
    account of events in Pakistan. It is not accepted that she ever  had  a
    relationship with her cousin, that her husband believed her to be  gay,
    that she had ever been forced into hiding whilst in Pakistan,  that her
    family were as strict as she claims,  or  that  they  want  to  inflict
    'honour' based violence upon her. The Tribunal was unable to place much
    weight on the evidence of Mr Uddin, because it found that he appears to
    assume that the Appellant is gay.  Mr  Khan's  evidence  could  attract
    limited weight because it was untested and because he had made a remark
    about the  Appellant  being  resistant  to  "free  gender  mixing".  Ms
    McCarthy's evidence is considered at paragraph 13(bb):

         "Ms McCarthy gave evidence on behalf of the Appellant, and although
         I found her  evidence  helpful,  the  issues  really  damaging  the
         Appellant's credibility are simply so great  that  I  cannot  place
         such weight on Mr McCarthy's evidence, as one would have wished".

    The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.


    The Challenge


 7. The grounds fall into two  parts.  First,  it  is  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal made a number of errors in its approach  to  the  question  of
    credibility. I set out the particulars below.


 8. Second, it is submitted that in its focus on  that  historical  account
    the Tribunal lost sight of the central question to  be  determined:  is
    the Appellant in fact gay? The Appellant had produced powerful evidence
    of her long-term involvement with various LGBT groups  and  association
    with other gay women. The Tribunal apparently  rejected  that  evidence
    because it had already rejected her account  in  respect  of  Pakistan.
    Negative credibility findings were obviously relevant to  the  question
    of whether she was telling the truth about her sexuality, but could not
    be determinative of it.   The evidence of her life in the  UK  required
    its own evaluation.



    The Response

 9. The Respondent accepts that there may be some errors in the  assessment
    of credibility, such as mistakes as  to  fact.  It  is  submitted  that
    overall the Tribunal gave sufficient reasons  as  to  why  it  did  not
    accept the account in respect of Pakistan to be true.


10. In respect of the second ground Mr  Harrison  emphasises  how  negative
    credibility findings - particularly where they are swingeing as this  -
    could  reasonably  be  thought  to  carry  significant  weight  in  the
    evaluation of whether the Appellant was in  fact  gay.    Some  of  the
    credibility findings did go to the wider issue. He did  however  accept
    that the determination showed little consideration of the  evidence  of
    the supporting witnesses.  Whether that was material was a  matter  for
    me.



    Discussion and Findings

      Credibility

11. The first point taken against the Appellant [at 13(e)] is the  apparent
    contradiction between her assertion that she still considers herself  a
    Muslim, and her acceptance of her own sexuality:


         "On the one hand, the Appellant would have me believe that  she  is
         religious, and considers it would be a sin if  she  were  indeed  a
         lesbian....yet despite having found out she was a  lesbian  by  the
         age of 13, she felt, she said "happy in myself" but could not share
         this with anyone".


    Ms Wilkins submits that this finding overlooked, or misrepresented, the
    totality of the evidence. The Appellant  explained  that  although  she
    felt happy as a child she had been aware that she could not  share  her
    feelings with anyone [at Q54]; she stated that her society  had  viewed
    her sexuality as shameful [Q99]; that  in  Pakistan  it  is  considered
    sinful to even talk about it [Q199]; that she had  also  suffered  from
    depression [Q149] and [at paragraph 44 of the witness statement]:

         "I also continued to go to Imaan [a Muslim support group]. This  is
         a very different group as it  is  very  male  dominated,  but  it's
         important for me to go there, as I am a Muslim,  and  consolidating
         my faith with my sexuality is something that is very  important  to
         me, especially because of the way that I  was  brought  up.  I  was
         brought up to think that homosexuality is wrong and not allowed, so
         the group helps me to understand that  being  a  homosexual  and  a
         Muslim is compatible. This has helped me  to  gain  self-acceptance
         and it helps me to understand that I am not  alone  and  there  are
         other people in my position, who are also Muslim...."


    Mr Harrison conceded that this evidence does not appear to be reflected
    in the determination. Nor does the comment at 13(e) appear to  actually
    amount to a finding. If the  Tribunal  meant  to  indicate  that  being
    homosexual was fundamentally incompatible  with  being  a  Muslim  this
    would certainly appear contrary to the evidence  before  it,  not  just
    that of the Appellant herself but of the various 'Queer Muslim'  groups
    that she had attached herself to.


12. The second point  made  in  the  determination  is  that  it  would  be
    implausible for the Appellant to have managed to hide the fact that she
    and her cousin were having an illicit relationship if they were  living
    in a joint family system.  Ms Wilkins submits that this was an error of
    fact: there was no evidence that the girls lived together in the family
    home. This error is established. The evidence was that the girls  lived
    together at school. In the asylum interview (Q62)  the  Appellant  says
    that they were in the same hostel at school, and that the  relationship
    had become physical when they were away  on  a  college  trip.  In  her
    witness statement the Appellant explains that she boarded, and that she
    would meet her cousin only at school. They did not  live  in  the  same
    village at all: see paragraph 10 WS.


13. In respect of the third credibility finding the Appellant submits  that
    the Tribunal failed to take relevant matters into account. At paragraph
    13 (h) the determination rejects  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  her
    husband was angry with her and had beaten her, on the grounds that this
    was inconsistent with the evidence that he had agreed  to  give  her  a
    financial settlement upon divorce. Ms Wilkins  submits  that  one  fact
    could not logically rule out the other. The  Tribunal  had  omitted  to
    consider the evidence that there had  been  a  'pre-nuptual  agreement'
    that such a settlement would be paid. It is correct that this  evidence
    was not considered. I  would  add  that  there  is  nothing  inherently
    implausible in the Appellant having received  a  financial  settlement,
    even in an acrimonious divorce. Whilst there may have been stipulations
    in this nikah,  payment by the husband of the deferred dower upon talaq
    is standard practice, and a fundamental  principle  of  Islamic  family
    law.

14. The Appellant submits that the Tribunal went on to make  an  irrational
    finding at paragraph 13(j). There the determination describes it  as  a
    "mystery" how the Appellant could be in hiding if she were living  with
    a friend. Like Ms Wilkins, I am unable to understand what  the  mystery
    might be - the point was that the Appellant was hiding from her  family
    by living with her friend.   I would not go so far as to describe  this
    finding as irrational - it could for instance be a valid point  if  the
    friend was a good one well known to the family, and her house the first
    place they would look -  that  was  not,  however,  the  evidence,  and
    clarification was not sought from the Appellant.


15. It is  further  argued  that  the  Tribunal  gave  undue  weight  to  a
    grammatical error in the evidence and in so  doing  took  into  account
    matters that were not relevant. It had been the consistent evidence  of
    the Appellant  that  whilst  living  in  the  UK  she  had  been  in  a
    relationship with a British woman of  African  origin,  but  that  this
    relationship had ended.  In her oral evidence (given, not ideally, in a
    mixture of Urdu and English) the Appellant is recorded as  having  said
    that she is "in" a relationship. Of this evidence the Tribunal said [at
     13(y)] : "this took me by surprise, for it was clear from all  of  the
    documents before me that although the Appellant claimed to have been in
    a relationship....that relationship had come to  an  end".  Ms  Wilkins
    strongly objected to the adverse inference  drawn.  It  was  the  clear
    evidence of both Appellant and Ms McCarthy  (who  had  been  supporting
    her) that the relationship was over. Ms Wilkins had not  addressed  the
    "grammatical error" in the Appellant's evidence in re-examination since
    neither the HOPO or Tribunal had appeared to regard it as  significant.
    No follow up questions, or questions in clarification, were put.  It is
    perhaps unfortunate that  this  was  not  a  matter  clarified  in  re-
    examination. Counsel should be able to deal with  any  matters  arising
    from a witness's evidence without prompting from a Tribunal.  I  accept
    however that in the particular facts of  this  case  Counsel  could  be
    forgiven for not appreciating that it was  an  'issue'.  The  Appellant
    very shortly thereafter in her oral evidence  had  confirmed  that  the
    relationship had finished in 2016.  She  had  given  detailed  evidence
    about why it had broken down and that evidence was corroborated  by  Ms
    McCarthy (insofar as she was  able).  In  those  circumstances  it  was
    unfair to take the point against the Appellant without it being put  to
    her that a discrepancy had arisen.


16. Another matter troubled the Tribunal about that relationship. That  was
    that the woman  had  been  consistently  described  as  black  African,
    whereas in a communication from Pakistan the Appellant's sister is said
    to have written "we know you are with a white woman". The Appellant was
    specifically asked about this matter and she explained  that  this  had
    been an assumption on her sister's part, since she knew that the  woman
    was British.  That explanation is nowhere considered.

17. These credibility findings are all set aside for error of law:  failure
    to take relevant evidence into account, failure to make clear findings,
    procedural unfairness,  irrationality,  material  error  of  fact.  The
    question is whether the cumulative errors in approach are such that the
    entire decision must be set aside.   There are two points remaining  in
    the reasoning which, Ms Wilkins concedes, were open to the Tribunal  on
    the evidence before it. These were first, that the  family  history  in
    the  past  few  years  is  inconsistent  with  the  account  given,  in
    particular  the  plausibility  of  a  'strict'  family  allowing  their
    daughter to come to the UK to study, and her  returning  to  visit  her
    sick father even after suspicions  were  raised  about  her  sexuality.
    Second,  there  was  an  apparent  discrepancy  arising  from  a   visa
    application form completed by the Appellant (or on her behalf) in 2007,
    wherein she stated that she was being sponsored to come to  the  UK  by
    her "husband"; the Appellant's explanation that this should  have  read
    "sister's husband" is rejected by the  Tribunal.    Whilst  Ms  Wilkins
    accepts that the Tribunal was entitled to draw adverse  inference  from
    these matters, she submits that  there  were  alternative  and  equally
    reasonable conclusions that could have been drawn, and that the overall
    findings could not stand in light of  the  multiple  errors  identified
    above.

18. In order to make that assessment I must deal with ground two. I have no
    hesitation in finding this ground to be made out. The evidence  of  the
    three  witnesses  was  to  the  effect  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    participating in LGBT discussion and support groups on  a  regular  and
    frequent basis for well over  a  year.  Their  evidence  spoke  to  her
    struggle to come to terms with her sexuality, to her "terror" of  being
    returned to her family, to her enjoyment of being with other gay women,
    to her involvement with Pride and her growing confidence.  Ms  McCarthy
    confirmed that the Appellant had  attended  12  specialist  counselling
    sessions at her organisation during her breakup  with  her  girlfriend,
    and was able to corroborate the Appellant's  own  evidence  about  that
    period.  None of that evidence is considered in the determination.

19. Paragraph 13(bb) of the determination (set out above) reveals an  error
    in approach. The weight to  be  attached  to  Ms  McCarthy's  "helpful"
    evidence cannot logically be diminished by that  of  the  Appellant;  a
    negative assessment of the Appellant's evidence might outweigh that  of
    Ms McCarthy, but that is not what is said.    The  Tribunal  in  effect
    rejects all of what is said by Ms McCarthy without giving reason  other
    than that the Appellant's evidence has already been  found  to  be  not
    credible.

20. In respect of Mr Khan the determination focuses on the comment that the
    Appellant has a "natural resistance to free gender mixing". Of this the
    Tribunal says: "[Mr Khan] does not explanation  (sic)  how  he  reaches
    this conclusion, and I am not able to place such weight on his evidence
    as the Appellant may wish, given his absence and inability  to  explain
    that remark". The comment is extracted, entirely out of context, from a
    long letter  setting  out  Mr  Khan's  personal  involvement  with  the
    Appellant and well as his  wider  knowledge  about  Muslim  homosexuals
    coming to terms with their orientation. I find there to be an error  in
    the omission to consider his very pertinent evidence, and irrationality
    in the negative inference apparently drawn from the comment. The  point
    that  Mr  Khan  is  making  is  that  the  Appellant,  because  of  her
    upbringing, still finds it awkward to sit in a room with  men  who  are
    not members of her family. He notes that in Pakistan there is a "strong
    sense of gender segregation" and that this  has  been  something  of  a
    barrier to her opening up in the mixed sessions run by the Queer Muslim
    Support  group.    Set  in  its  context   the   comment   is   plainly
    understandable and not at all cryptic as the determination suggests.


21.  Similarly,  Mr  Uddin's  evidence  is  not   given   any   substantive
    consideration. At the date that he wrote his letter he  had  known  the
    Appellant for well over a year. She  was  a  regular  attendee  at  his
    support group. In common with Ms McCarthy and Mr Khan, he noted that it
    had taken some time for the Appellant to feel comfortable in opening up
    but once she had established that this was a 'safe space' she had  done
    so and was now actively contributing to that community.   The  Tribunal
    dispenses with this evidence on the grounds that Mr Uddin  "appears  to
    assume that the Appellant is a  lesbian".  I  am  unsure  why  such  an
    assumption on his part could logically detract from his  evidence.  His
    evidence was that for some 14 months he  had  had  regular  interaction
    with this woman who presented as  gay,  and  spent  her  free  time  in
    support groups discussing that matter in the context of her culture and
    religion.  If he "assumed" that the Appellant was gay after being  able
    to observe her relating that matter over a prolonged period that  could
    only add weight to her case.

22. Having considered all of the submissions and evidence I  am  unable  to
    accept the Respondent's submission  that  the  surviving  findings  are
    sufficient to uphold the determination. Considered globally I cannot be
    satisfied that the errors I have found  are  immaterial.  The  decision
    must be set aside in its entirety.


    The Re-made Decision

23. In remaking this claim I am required to answer three questions:


              i) Has the Appellant proven, to the lower standard  of  proof,
                 that the events she described in Pakistan took place?


             ii) Has the Appellant shown, to the lower  standard  of  proof,
                 that she is gay?


            iii) Would an affirmative answer to either or both of the  above
                 place her at a real risk of serious harm in Pakistan today?




    The Evidence: Pakistan


24. The Appellant's evidence is set out in the following documents:


              i) The Screening Interview Record dated 13th December 2015;


             ii) Asylum interview record dated 14th April 2016;

            iii) Witness statement dated 10th November 2016.


25. In respect of her childhood the Appellant has described how, at the age
    of 13, she began to realise that she had no interest in boys  -  unlike
    her classmates.   She was particularly close to her  first  cousin,  A,
    who lived in another village but attended the same boarding  school  as
    her. They were best friends.  In 2001 A confided in the Appellant  that
    she did not like boys either. The Appellant  described  her  relief  at
    hearing that  A  felt  the  same  way  as  her.  She  states  that  the
    relationship developed into a sexual one whilst the girls were away  on
    a college trip. They were able to conduct  their  relationship  without
    any suspicion at all: the other students knew them to  be  cousins  and
    best friends so it was natural that they were  close  and  would  spend
    time together whenever possible.  It was inconceivable  to  A  and  the
    Appellant that they would ever actually be able  to  live  together  or
    conduct their relationship openly. They made a pact that when they were
    both married they would continue to see each other secretly.


26. For a number of years the Appellant  managed  to  avoid  marriage.  She
    received several proposals but managed  to  stall  by  making  excuses.
    However when she reached thirty years of age the Appellant  was  unable
    to delay the inevitable. She was told about her marriage  to  a  cousin
    the day before it occurred.  This was in August  2009.  In  her  asylum
    interview she describes her desperate sadness: how she was looking  for
    something to end her life [at Q79]. Her mother advised her to "keep her
    mouth shut" and said that if she refused to go  through  with  it,  her
    father would kill her.  She was therefore married and went to live with
    her husband in his village, also in Gujrat.  The  Appellant  was  never
    happy in her marriage, and her husband knew it. He  started  to  accuse
    her of loving someone else, of having an affair. He would beat her  and
    rape her on a regular basis.

27. Not long after the Appellant  was  forced  into  marriage,  A's  family
    started putting pressure on her to also marry. She refused to go  along
    with it.   Her father was angry.  The  Appellant  does  not  know  what
    happened, or any of the details. All that she knows is that  A  refused
    to get married, and then she was killed. The Appellant believes that  A
    was killed by her father.  As far as she is aware the authorities  took
    no steps to investigate the killing: the police will not intervene in a
    matter of "honour".

28. A's funeral was attended  by  various  family  members,  including  the
    Appellant and her husband.  The  Appellant  was  distraught  -  it  was
    obvious to everyone how upset she was and how close she and A had been.
    At the funeral her husband came to her and told that  they  were  going
    home. When they got back to their house the Appellant was confronted by
    her husband. He said "now I have found out that why  you  do  not  live
    like a good wife with me, why you misbehave, why you do not like me, it
    is because you are lesbian". He beat the Appellant until  she  admitted
    that she had loved A. He took her  back  to  her  family's  house.  Her
    mother was there - he told her mother that he  was  divorcing  her  and
    why. The Appellant's mother cried and  begged  her  to  behave  like  a
    proper wife; she said that her father would want to kill her.   Because
    of the situation the Appellant left home and went to stay with a friend
    of hers, about half an hour away from her family home.   Whilst she was
    living with this friend the Appellant applied for a visa to come to the
    UK.

29. After some weeks the Appellant was  reconciled  with  her  family.  She
    promised that she would "leave all this"  and  asked  for  forgiveness.
    She said that her relationship with A had been  a  "childhood  mistake"
    and assured them that she  would  get  married  again  in  the  future.
    After some time of living at home her parents were reassured about  her
    conduct. They had all 'put it behind them' when the Appellant  broached
    the subject of her  coming  to  complete  her  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom. She promised her father that she would return as soon  as  her
    degree was finished, and that she would marry as soon as she got  back.
     She would be living with her sister and brother-in-law in  Manchester,
    and attending college, so her father was  content  that  she  would  be
    supervised.  The Appellant  opines  that  her  father  agreed  in  part
    because it would mean a lot to him to have a child with a UK university
    degree, but also because he did not believe that she would disobey him.
    After the Appellant came to the United Kingdom  her  family  set  about
    organising her second marriage.

30. At the Appellant's interview it was put to her that  the  evidence  she
    had given about her husband was inconsistent with her visa  application
    form, in which she had named a different man said to be her  'husband'.
    The Appellant explained that the form had been completed  by  an  agent
    and that the error was not hers. The man named as her sponsor  on  that
    trip is in fact her sister's husband, who lives in the  UK.  On  appeal
    the Appellant has produced a copy of her sister's marriage certificate,
    her sister's passport,  and  her  sister's  husband's  passport,  which
    confirm that the man named in  the  visa  application  was  indeed  her
    brother-in-law.



    The Evidence: UK

31. The Appellant arrived in the UK on the 4th April 2011.   She  moved  in
    with her sister and started  studying.   In  August  2015  she  started
    attending the discussion groups run by 'Imaan'. It was  at  this  group
    that she met  'M',  the  woman  who  was  to  become  her  partner  for
    approximately six months.   After she met M she  started  spending  the
    occasional night away from the house.  Her  sister  started  to  become
    suspicious, particularly when she saw an expensive bottle of perfume in
    the Appellant's room.   In October 2015 matters came to a head when her
    sister confronted her: the Appellant admitted that  she  was  having  a
    relationship. Her sister was angry and told her that she  was  bringing
    shame on the family and that she had betrayed their  trust  after  they
    had supported her.  The Appellant's sister told their father  that  she
    believed that the Appellant was having a  relationship.  The  Appellant
    spoke to her father on the telephone. He was angry and swearing at  her
    and said that she had no respect. He told her to come home  immediately
    and that he had got her engaged to another cousin;  he  said  that  the
    wedding will take place immediately  upon  her  return.  The  Appellant
    herself states that she is in no doubt that her  father  will  in  fact
    kill her when she gets home.  It was this series of events that led her
    to claim asylum in December 2015.


32. The Appellant's relationship with M ended shortly thereafter. M  wanted
    the Appellant to move in with her but the Appellant was  worried  about
    her uncertain immigration status and felt that she  would  be  bringing
    problems into M's life. They argued and broke up. They continue to  see
    each other at the support group where they met. They are civil to  each
    other but are no longer close.


33. I have been shown three letters from 'Imaan', a LGBTQI  Muslim  support
    group and its successor organisation 'Queer Muslim Support Group'.  The
    first is dated 7th November 2015. The author, Mr Shahid  Khan  confirms
    that the Appellant has been attending  monthly  meetings  since  August
    2015, and that although she has found it difficult because most of  the
    other attendees are men, she has persevered  and  has  attended  events
    such as 'Pride' in Manchester.  The second letter from Mr Khan is dated
    the 1st November 2016. It is in this letter that he makes  the  comment
    that  caused  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concern.  In  the  context  of
    explaining the Appellant's involvement in the predominantly male  group
    he says this: "she still  has  a  natural  resistance  to  free  gender
    mixing". He goes on to explain that this "is an attitude that has  been
    instilled in her by her culture. She has always expressed a desire  for
    there to be more female members just so  that  she  can  feel  more  at
    ease".   Mr Khan  confirms  that  the  Appellant  continues  to  attend
    meetings of the group. In his final communication, in the  form  of  an
    email dated 17th October 2017, Mr Khan explains that he is now able  to
    confirm the Appellant's claims about her relationship with  M.  He  had
    personally observed the rapport between the two women at  meetings  but
    had not mentioned it in his previous letters because the personal lives
    of attendees are not the  business  of  facilitators.  Furthermore  the
    Appellant had not disclosed to anyone at the group that she had been in
    a relationship with M. More recently M herself told one  of  the  other
    facilitators that she had had a relationship  with  the  Appellant.  Mr
    Khan therefore considered  it  appropriate  that  this  information  be
    passed on, with the Appellant's consent.

34. In her statement the Appellant explains that it has been  important  to
    her to spend time with other gay Muslims, people who have come to terms
    with their sexuality in the context of their religion. She was  brought
    up to believe that homosexuality is wrong, but the people at Imaan have
    made her understand that it is compatible with being a Muslim.

35. The Lesbian Immigration Support Group have also written to  the  court.
    In a letter dated 9th April  2016  Ms  Nina  Held,  on  behalf  of  the
    organisation, stated  that  the  Appellant  was  referred  to  them  in
    November 2015 by Imaan. The Appellant was  initially  vetted  and  then
    permitted to attend their monthly meetings. Ms Held saw  the  Appellant
    at these meetings and at the 2015 LISG Christmas party  where  she  saw
    her relaxed and happy in the  presence  of  other  lesbians.  Ms  Karen
    McCarthy from the same organisation has written two letters,  signed  a
    witness statement dated 11th November 2016 and appeared  to  give  oral
    evidence.  She relates how the Appellant has spoken about her family at
    the regular meetings she has  attended  and  how  she  appeared  to  be
    "terrified" of being sent back to Pakistan. Ms McCarthy comments on how
    the Appellant  was  initially  uncomfortable  discussing  her  personal
    matters but has now grown in confidence and clearly values  being  part
    of the group.  Ms McCarthy confirms that to her knowledge the Appellant
    has attended two 'Pride' events in Manchester, one in 2016 and one this
    year. At the first parade she  was  so  terrified  of  being  seen  and
    identified by other members of the Pakistani community that she wore  a
    plastic face mask the entire  day;  this  year  she  was  unmasked  and
    proudly wore her 'LISG' t-shirt.  The Appellant herself  describes  the
    women  she  has  met  through  LISG  as  being  "incredibly  kind   and
    supportive".  She continues to attend the support  group  meetings  and
    has also attended counselling sessions there to help her deal with  the
    stress of her situation.


36. Finally I have been shown  the  letter  from  Shoab  Uddin  dated  30th
    October 2016. Mr Shoab is one of the facilitators of the  monthly  LGBT
    Muslim support group.   His evidence echoes that of LISG and Imaan: the
    Appellant was initially withdrawn and nervous but with the  support  of
    friends that she  has  met  through  these  groups  she  has  grown  in
    confidence as an 'out' gay woman.


37. At the asylum interview the Respondent put it to the Appellant that she
    had not joined any of the LGBT groups  she  now  claims  membership  of
    until after her student visa expired. The Appellant  agreed  that  this
    was true. She said that as long as she had a student visa she wanted to
    rely on that,  rather  than  thinking  about  her  "shameful  sexuality
    matter". Although she does not personally feel shame she knows that her
    society and family do. She was concerned about the impact on her sister
    in Manchester in particular; the thought it might provoke her  brother-
    in-law into divorcing her  in  order  to  distance  himself  from  this
    "shame". He is a respected  and  religious  man.   If  she  could  have
    avoided returning to Pakistan by carrying on  her  studies,  she  would
    have. She was however faced with no choice, because all of the colleges
    were closing down and her family were threatening her.




    My Findings


38. Although I have sought to make clear findings  on  each  of  the  three
    questions posed above I make clear  that  I  have  not  done  so  on  a
    discrete  basis.  I  have  considered  the  evidence  holistically.  In
    particular I  have  weighed  all  of  the  evidence  pertinent  to  the
    questions [at paragraph 23 (i) and (ii)] above in the round in reaching
    the answer to each.


39. I begin by making some general observations about credibility. I  found
    all of the witnesses who appeared before me, Mr Khan, Ms  McCarthy  and
    the Appellant herself to have given their evidence in a straightforward
    and unhesitant  manner.  Although  the  Appellant  obviously  found  it
    difficult giving her evidence (she broke down in tears  after  she  had
    finished her testimony and was comforted by some of the many supporters
    that she had brought with her) I found her evidence  to  be  clear  and
    helpful.    I have read all of her  statements  and  interview  records
    carefully. I found her account to be consistent at its  core.  She  has
    now  given  live  evidence  on  two  occasions,  has  been  extensively
    interviewed and has  sworn  to  a  detailed  witness  statement.  I  am
    satisfied  that  her  evidence  has   remained   generally   consistent
    throughout;  where  there  have  been  discrepancies  these  have  been
    satisfactorily explained.

40. I note that the Respondent's bundle contains what are said  to  be  two
    emails sent to the Appellant from her sister in  Pakistan.  Ms  Wilkins
    placed no reliance on these documents and nor do I. I have no means  of
    knowing whether these messages have actually  emanated  from  an  email
    account in Pakistan, or if they did  whether  they  are  actually  from
    members of the Appellant's family. Self evidently the  author  was  not
    present so that their evidence could be tested. I have therefore placed
    no weight upon them.

41.  The  Respondent  has  centred  her  case  on  what  are  said  to   be
    implausibilities in the account. It has variously been said that it  is
    implausible  that  the  Appellant  could  have  secretly  conducted   a
    relationship with A, that her parents would have  her  back  after  she
    left home to live with a friend in late 2009, or that they  would  have
    allowed her to come to the UK to complete her studies.   I  am  mindful
    that caution should be exercised when assessing whether matters such as
    this - so closely connected to the personal dynamics of the  family  in
    question - are 'implausible'. Individuals are rarely driven  by  single
    motivations, and behaviour can  often  appear  contradictory,  or  even
    hypocritical. It is for instance the case that a great number of  girls
    from "conservative" or "religious" families in Pakistan are educated to
    degree level, even where there is no expectation at all that they would
    embark on a career, and where that suggestion would be frowned upon.  I
    have nevertheless held the Respondent's concerns at the forefront of my
    mind when evaluating the evidence.  Similarly I have given some  weight
    to the chronology. The Appellant arrived in this country in  2011  when
    on her account, her cousin had already been murdered by her family. She
    did not claim asylum then, but  rather  waited  four  years  until  her
    student visa expired and on her own admission she was unable  to  renew
    it. That is a matter that  has  weighed  against  her  in  the  overall
    balancing exercise.




    Question (i): Has the Appellant proven, to the lower standard of proof,
    that the events she described in Pakistan took place?


42. In considering the 'historical' element of the claim I have  considered
    the Appellant's evidence in  the  context  of  the  country  background
    material.   That evidence is not in  contention.  In  the  Respondent's
    Country Information and Guidance Note Pakistan: Sexual orientation  and
    gender identity (Version 2.0 April  2016)  its  states  that  same  sex
    relationships are illegal in Pakistan,  by  virtue  of  the  provisions
    against "carnal intercourse against the order of nature" in section 377
    of the Penal Code, and the Offence  of  Zina  (Enforcement  of  Hudood)
    Ordinance  of  1979  [at  2.3.3  CIG].  There  is  widespread  societal
    discrimination  and  homophobia.   It  is  very  rare  for   homosexual
    relationships to be conducted openly, and virtually unknown outside  of
    a few pockets  of  upper  middle  class,  western-educated  Pakistanis.
    Harassment and violence are most commonly inflicted within  the  family
    [at 2.3.4]. Lesbians  in  Pakistan  are  described  as  "invisible"  by
    sources who contributed to a report prepared for  the  Immigration  and
    Refugee Board of  Canada  (IRBC)  which  concluded  that  lesbians  are
    invariably forced to get married by their  families.    Although  women
    can live together this would not be as  openly  intimate  partners  [at
    7.3.1].


43. There is nothing in that background information  that  is  inconsistent
    with the Appellant's account.  I note further  that  the  Appellant  is
    from the rural Punjab, the province with the highest reported rates  of
    "honour" based violence in the country: see  KA  and  Others  (domestic
    violence - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC),  and  the
    Respondent's February 2016 Country Information Guidance Note  Pakistan:
    Women fearing gender based harm / violence [at 2.4.10 & 8.3.6].   There
    were, for instance, 362  "honour"  killings  in  the  Punjab  in  2014;
    approximately one per day. The Punjab also has  the  highest  rates  of
    sexual violence against women [8.2.4 & 8.2.6]  and  domestic  abuse  is
    prevalent.  This  evidence  too  is  consistent  with  the  Appellant's
    account, in particular that her husband considered  it  appropriate  to
    beat and rape his wife, and that her uncle considered it acceptable  to
    murder his own daughter.

44. In light of that evidence I am unable to say  that  there  is  anything
    inherently incredible in the Appellant's claims  to  have  conducted  a
    secret relationship, to have suffered forced marriage, to have  endured
    harassment and threats by her family when they came to understand  that
    she might be gay, or in the claim that her cousin was murdered  by  her
    own family for a refusal to marry in accordance with their wishes.  All
    of that is plausible.

45. I have attached weight to this, and to the fact that  the  account  has
    remained consistent at its core.  I have further attached weight to the
    Appellant's evidence about her  relationship  in  this  country,  which
    tends to add  weight  to  her  claim  to  have  previously  had  a  gay
    relationship.

46. I have considered whether any of the points raised by  the  Respondent,
    in submissions and in the refusal letter, can outweigh  that  evidence.
    Applying the lower standard of proof I do not consider that to  be  the
    case. I was, in closing submissions, asked to  assess  with  particular
    scrutiny the claim that her father allowed her to come  to  the  UK  to
    study after she had caused scandal - at least within the  family  -  by
    leaving her  husband  and  being  the  subject  of  rumours  about  her
    relationship with her cousin.  It was said to be "not credible" that he
    would have done so: as a controlling and strict  father  he  would  not
    have permitted the Appellant to travel to a western  country.   I  have
    given that submission careful consideration,  but  I  cannot  find  the
    evidence to be "inherently incredible" or  even  implausible.  That  is
    because there are many explanations for it.  He may have been confident
    that she would be  chaperoned  by  her  sister  and  brother-in-law  in
    Manchester; he may, as the Appellant contends, be keen  to  accept  the
    kudos that a British-educated child would bring; he may have wanted the
    Appellant to achieve that qualification as a means  of  mitigating  for
    her very late and failed marriage; he may have wanted her  out  of  the
    way of any further scandal; he may himself have refused to accept  that
    she would disobey him again.  In those circumstances I  do  not  accept
    that this point can outweigh the otherwise cogent evidence advanced  by
    the Appellant.  Accordingly I find the  historical  background  of  the
    case to be proven to the lower standard.




    Question (ii): has the Appellant shown, to the lower standard of proof,
    that she is gay?


47. I accept and find as fact that the Appellant is gay. I do  so  for  the
    following reasons:


              i) The Appellant has given detailed  and  compelling  evidence
                 about her realisation that she was gay, her  struggle  with
                 that fact in the context of her  cultural  background,  and
                 her reconciliation with her faith.  For  instance,  at  her
                 asylum interview she described how depressed she was  until
                 she starting  receiving  support  from  Gay-Muslim  groups:
                 "after talking to them, I feel I am not committing any sin"
                 [Q42].


             ii) The evidence supports her contention that she had a lesbian
                 relationship in the UK with a woman from Djibouti, 'M'. The
                 Appellant names this woman as her partner in her  screening
                 interview  in  December  2015  [at  1.19].  In  her  asylum
                 interview she explains that she met her in August 2015 at a
                 meeting of the support group  'Imaan'.    They  talked  and
                 exchanged numbers, and after a couple of weeks met  outside
                 of the group to have coffee.  Later they  met  for  dinner,
                 and subsequently the relationship became  physical.  M  had
                 suggested that they get married,  have  children  and  live
                 together, but the Appellant was too afraid of her family to
                 agree.  By late 2015/early 2016 they  had  split  up.  This
                 evidence is corroborated by  Mr  Khan,  who  witnessed  the
                 "rapport" between the two women, and  who  attests  that  M
                 spoke with his colleague and confirmed the relationship. It
                 is further confirmed to some  extent  by  Ms  McCarthy  who
                 spoke of how at the time the Appellant's face would  "light
                 up" when she talked about her partner.

            iii) There is significant corroboration  of  her  claims  to  be
                 openly gay from Mr Khan, Ms McCarthy and Mr Uddin,  all  of
                 whom speak to her long  term  and  frequent  attendance  at
                 Muslim support groups and attendance at Manchester's  Pride
                 event.

             iv) There is no  countervailing  evidence  of  any  significant
                 weight. The Appellant claims that she was married to a man,
                 and whilst in another context this might reasonably be held
                 to  raise  questions  as  to  claimed  homosexuality  I  am
                 satisfied that in this case it does not. That is because in
                 common with most girls in Gujrati  villages  the  Appellant
                 was betrothed in an arranged marriage. She had no or little
                 say in the matter, and describes it herself as  a  "forced"
                 marriage. The fact that the  marriage  lasted  so  short  a
                 period would tend to  indicate  that  there  was  something
                 fundamentally wrong with it.   As Mrs Aboni  recognised  in
                 her submissions, she would have been struggling to point to
                 any evidence indicating that the Appellant was not gay, and
                 for that reason it was an assertion that she  was  prepared
                 to accept.




    Question (iii): Would an affirmative answer to either or  both  of  the
    above place her at a real risk of serious harm in Pakistan today?

48. I begin by applying the tests set down  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  HJ
    (Iran) and HJ (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31.


49. The Appellant has established, and the Respondent now accepts, that she
    is gay.

50. I must assess what the position of  gay  women  in  Pakistan  is,  with
    reference to the country background information. Some of that has  been
    set out above and need not be repeated.  In  summary,  the  uncontested
    evidence is that  gay  women  are  "invisible"  in  Pakistani  society,
    because of the overwhelming societal expectation that women will  marry
    men and have children, because  of  religious  and  cultural  hostility
    towards homosexuality, and because "unnatural"  carnal  intercourse  is
    prohibited by law.   One result of this invisibility is that  there  is
    very little specific evidence on the  ill-treatment  of  women  because
    they are gay.  This is,  however,  perhaps  the  paradigm  case  of  an
    absence of evidence not constituting evidence  of  absence.    The  CIG
    (cited above) notes that lesbians are most  likely  to  be  subject  to
    violence from within their own families, and in that context  there  is
    plenty of evidence about the ill-treatment of  women.  The  Appellant's
    family have framed her expression of her sexuality not  as  a  positive
    assertion of her identity, but  as  the  rejection  of  all  acceptable
    social mores.  They  have repeatedly  stressed  the  need  for  her  to
    marry, and so to conform to those  'normal'  expectations.  It  is  her
    failure to do so which brings their perceived "shame"  upon  her.   One
    needs look no further than the facts of this case to see the risks  she
    faces: murder, forced marriage, rape.


51. HJ requires me to consider whether the Appellant would in fact live  as
    an openly gay  woman  should  she  be  returned  to  Pakistan.  I  have
    absolutely no doubt at all that she would  not.   The  Appellant  might
    have a degree but she is not one of the urban elite of Pakistan,  whose
    society is closed and western educated, and for whom escape - should it
    become necessary - is  straightforward.   She  is  from  a  village  in
    Gujrat. There would simply be no space - cultural, political, social  -
    for her to express her identity.

52. I must now ask myself why the Appellant would not be 'out' in Pakistan.
    She has been living an outwardly homosexual life in this country.   She
    has enjoyed a relationship and has for  the  past  two  years  been  an
    active member of a number of gay support groups.  Mr Khan, Mr Uddin and
    Ms McCarthy all spoke of her  increased  confidence  and  happiness  in
    living an out life. When asked in evidence how she  would  act  if  she
    were returned to Pakistan she said that she  would  have  to  hide  her
    sexuality. People there do not accept it; her family  would  kill  her;
    the law prohibits it.  I do not doubt the reasons she gives. She  would
    hide her sexuality because of a  fear  of  persecution.   There  is  no
    country background material before  me  to  indicate  what  fate  might
    befall a Gujrati girl who openly declared that she was gay. In light of
    the country background material on  women,  and  on  Pakistani  society
    generally, I would postulate that it  would  most  likely  be  "honour"
    based violence inflicted by her immediate family, or failing that,  mob
    justice.

53. The coda is this.  This appeal would have been allowed even  if  I  had
    not been satisfied that the ultimate HJ criterion had been met.  If the
    Appellant had told me that she would suppress her  identity  in  order,
    for instance, to save her parents hurt, she would still be  going  home
    to face persecution. That it is because it is extremely likely that she
    would be forced into marriage. Forced marriage is persecution.  In  the
    context of  this  Appellant's  background  it  would  involve  multiple
    violations of the Appellant's core rights as  protected  by  Article  3
    ECHR (a real risk of  rape  and  sexual  assault),  Article  4  (forced
    labour), Article 5  (deprivation  of  liberty),   Article  8  (personal
    integrity) and Article 12 (the right to marry and found a  family,  and
    the choice inherent therein).



    Decisions and Directions

54. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and the decision is set aside.

55. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds"

56. There is a direction for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           23rd October 2017


