

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04330/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 27 October 2017                     |    On 30 October 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                         Appellant


                                    -and-


                                    M B M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                 Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant      Ms P. Hastings, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent      Ms K. McCarthy of counsel, instructed by Quality
Solicitors (A-Z   Law)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The Respondent, who was born on 5 May 1995, is a citizen of Iraq.   He
      was born in Sulaymaniyah but his family moved to Kirkuk shortly  after
      he was born. It is accepted that he is of Kurdish ethnicity.


   2. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 July 2016 and applied for asylum
      on 13 July 2016. His application was refused on 4 January 2017 and  he
      appealed against this decision. His appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum
      grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll in a decision promulgated
      on 20 July 2017. In paragraph 23 of the decision  she  also  dismissed
      the appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds. However,  in  paragraph
      22  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  found  that  "the  security
      situation in the KRG has, of course, deteriorated significantly  since
      2013  and  I  find  that  the  appellant  qualifies  for  humanitarian
      protection, by virtue of Article 15 (c) of the Qualification Directive
      on the basis that he is at risk from  indiscriminate  violence  within
      the KRG".

   3. The Appellant appealed on 7 August 2017 and First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Chohan granted her permission to appeal on 30 August 2017 on the basis
      that First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll had given insufficient  reasons
      for allowing the appeal on this basis after making adverse credibility
      findings against the Appellant.

Error of Law Hearing




   4. At the start of the hearing, counsel for the  Appellant  handed  up  a
      Rule 24 Response and submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Carroll
      also erred in law when dismissing the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal.  I
      granted her permission to file the Rules 24 Response on the basis that
      it was in the interests of justice for all issues  to  be  before  the
      Upper Tribunal. I also found that the manner in which  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge has approached her consideration of the photographs  in
      the Appellant's Bundle gave rise to a Robinson obvious point of law.


   5. The Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the Appellant  then
      made their oral submissions and I have taken these into account, where
      relevant, when reaching my findings below.

Findings

   6. In the substance of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed
      the Appellant's appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds. Her reasons
      for doing so were very sparse. In paragraph 22 of  her  decision,  she
      noted the  deterioration  in  the  situation  in  the  KRG,  which  is
      confirmed in Professor Joffe's report and she referred to this  report
      in paragraph 9 of her decision. But she  did  not  analyse  any  other
      sections of the expert report or any of the objective evidence in  the
      Appellant's Bundle. She also failed  to  remind  herself  that  in  AA
      (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal
      found that the IKR was  virtually  violence  free  and  there  was  no
      Article 15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


   7. As a consequence, her reasoning was clearly insufficient and  amounted
      to an error of law.


   8. In relation to the decision to dismiss the asylum appeal, I also  find
      that the reasons  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  Carroll  for
      finding that the Appellant's father was not a Peshmerga and  that  the
      Appellant was not involved in the conflict,  albeit  in  a  supportive
      role, were insufficient given the wide range of photographic  evidence
      and the objective evidence supporting it.


   9. Furthermore, the credibility of the Appellant's  account  should  have
      been assessed in the light of the totality of  the  objective,  expert
      and country evidence submitted for the appeal.

Decision

1.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  to  allow  the  Appellant's
appeal on     Humanitarian Protection grounds and to dismiss  it  on  asylum
grounds did include     material  errors  of  law  and  I  set    aside  her
decision.

2.   I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  de  novo
before a First-tier    `Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge
Carroll.

Directions


  1. The de novo hearing be listed before the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
  on  the  first  open    date  14  days  after  the  promulgation  of  the
  forthcoming country guidance case on the   current  risk  of  persecution
  for a person of Kurdish ethnicity in Iraq, including the IKR. .
Signed

Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



27 October 2017


















