
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04935/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2019                             |On 01 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                            GLENNA MAHMOOD SMAIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones of Counsel, instructed by UK & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  A
    K Hussain promulgated  on  24  May  2018  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's protection appeal against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 9 April 2018.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 21 February 1993.


3.   The appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal pursuant  to  permission  to
    appeal granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  on  15  October  2018,
    following a refusal of permission  to  appeal  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Adio on 20 June 2018.  The  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  is
    narrow in its scope.  The full  extent  of  the  reasons  for  granting
    permission to appeal are in these terms:

     "I have not been able to find any reference  in  the  determination  to
         the standard of proof this Judge applied and  on  that  basis,  and
         that basis alone, I grant permission".


4.   In preliminary discussions today it was acknowledged  by  both  parties
    that there was a reference to the standard of proof  which  appears  at
    paragraph 3 of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is in these
    terms:

     "The appellant accepts that her  claim  does  not  engage  a  [Refugee]
         convention ground and therefore does not pursue  an  asylum  claim.
         She instead relies on a claim for humanitarian protection and under
         Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.   The  standards  and  burdens  of
         proof involved in these claims are too  familiar  to  all  to  bear
         repeating".

    It then may be seen in the body of the Decision that  the  Judge  deals
    sequentially with Articles 2 and 3 together, and then Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.




5.   Bearing in mind the contents  of  paragraph  3  it  was  common  ground
    before me that the real issue pursuant to the grant  of  permission  to
    appeal was not so much the absence of a reference to  the  standard  of
    proof so much as whether the reference at paragraph 3 was adequate.  In
    this context I remind  myself  of  the  observations  of  Lord  Justice
    Burnett giving the judgement of the Court in EJA v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 10 at paragraph 27:

     "Decisions of tribunals should not become formulaic and rarely  benefit
         from copious citation of authority.  Arguments that reduce  to  the
         proposition that the F-tT has failed to mention dicta from a series
         of cases in the Court of Appeal or elsewhere will  rarely  prosper.
         Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v Piglowski [1999]  1
         WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read  on  the  assumption  that,
         unless he has demonstrated the contrary,  the  judge  knew  how  he
         should perform his functions and which matters he should take  into
         account". He added that  an  "appellate  court  should  resist  the
         temptation to subvert the principle that they should not substitute
         their own discretion for that of the  judge  by  a  narrow  textual
         analysis which enables them to claim that he misdirected himself"'.
           Moreover, some principles are  so  firmly  embedded  in  judicial
         thinking that they do not need to be recited. For example, it would
         be surprising to see in every civil judgment  a  paragraph  dealing
         with the burden and standard of proof; or  in  every  running  down
         action a treatise, however short, on the law of  negligence.   That
         said, the reader of any judicial decision must  be  reassured  from
         its content that the court or  tribunal  has  applied  the  correct
         legal test to any question it is deciding".


6.   Ms Jones makes the observation that the proceedings in the IAC are  not
    inevitably civil in nature, and emphasises that the applicable standard
    of proof is different depending upon the type of case  or  issue  being
    considered.   Such  observations  are  well-made  and  are   inevitably
    correct.


7.   However, the principal matter of note at paragraph 3 is that the  Judge
    plainly recognised that there were indeed different standards of  proof
    in play in the context of  the  issues  before  him.   Accordingly  the
    criticism that is now made before me is that it is  not  clear  exactly
    what the extent of the Judge's recognition of  this  distinction  might
    have been.  The difficulty with that submission is illustrated  by  the
    observations in EJA to the effect that absent  anything  clear  to  the
    contrary, it may be assumed that the Judge knew the  task  before  him;
    having identified that there was a distinction in the standard of proof
    applicable depending upon the type of case, it was to be  assumed  that
    the Judge understood the nature of that distinction - unless  it  could
    be shown from the Decision that he did not.


8.   I accept the substance of Mr Avery's  submissions  that  the  Appellant
    has not otherwise demonstrated that the Judge failed to recognise  that
    it was the lower standard of proof of 'reasonable likelihood' that  was
    applicable so far as Articles 2 and 3 were concerned.  In this  context
    Mr Avery directs my attention to paragraph 7 of the Decision where  the
    following is stated:

      "In  drawing  an  adverse  inference  I  realise  that  there  is   no
         requirement  on  an  applicant  for  international  protection   to
         corroborate her evidence but when that evidence is in the precincts
         of the tribunal building  and  there  is  no  explanation  for  the
         failure of the witnesses to support an  appellant  said  to  be  in
         danger of her life then I am of the view that common sense  demands
         that I take their failure to give evidence into account".


9.   The subject of that passage was the fact that the  Appellant's  brother
    attended the hearing centre but was not called as a witness in  support
    of the Appellant's case, notwithstanding it  was  his  alleged  conduct
    that was at the core of the Appellant's  own  claimed  risk.   However,
    more particularly, what Mr Avery invites me to draw from  that  passage
    is that it was clear that the Judge had in contemplation  that  he  was
    dealing with a protection claim, that there  was  a  recognition  of  a
    claim of risk to life, and that due  allowance  was  to  be  made  with
    regard to the nature and quality of supporting evidence in  considering
    a claim for international surrogate protection.


10.  It also seems to me apparent that the Judge had in mind the  nature  of
    the case and  the  standard  of  proof  applicable  by  reason  of  his
    reference at paragraph 4 of the Decision to the 'reasons  for  refusal'
    letter ('RFRL') dated 9 April 2018. The Judge offers a summary  of  the
    Respondent's decision and reasons as set out in the RFRL, from which it
    is evident that he had had regard to  its  contents.   The  RFRL  makes
    repeated reference to the applicable standard of  proof  in  protection
    claims: see paragraphs 5, 90, 91, and 92.


11.  In all those circumstances it seems to me that when the  Judge  arrived
    at the very clear findings at paragraph  22,  and  then  sets  out  his
    conclusion at paragraph 23, he has done so in  recognition  that  there
    are different standards of proof applicable, depending upon  the  exact
    nature of the issue being considered;  moreover  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that he misunderstood the applicable standard of  proof  -  or
    failed to apply it - in the instant case.  Paragraphs 22 and 23 are  in
    these terms:

         "22. In the circumstances, taking everything  into  account,  I  am
             satisfied that:


              (a) It has not been shown that [F] has a sister or that she is
                  dead or that she died  in  the  care  of  the  appellant's
                  brother;


              (b) It has not been shown that her brother is a Doctor;


              (c) It has not been shown that her brother worked at the  East
                  Emergency Hospital;


              (d) Even if he was a Doctor, he was not involved  in  any  way
                  with the claimed death of [F]'s sister;


              (e) He has not shown that he was kidnapped; and


              (f) That consequently no demand was made of the  appellant  or
                  her family for her  to  be  offered  in  compensation  via
                  marriage to [F].


         23.  I have come to the above conclusion  after  taking  everything
             into account which led me to the conclusion that the appellant
             was simply not credible.  She did not give her evidence  in  a
             straightforward manner, was evasive and  speculative  and  did
             not know the answers to the questions that it  was  reasonable
             for her to know.  I did not  find  her  to  be  a  witness  of
             truth".


12.  Ms Jones has acknowledged the limitations placed on the  scope  of  the
    submissions that she can pursue before the Tribunal by  virtue  of  the
    terms of the grant of permission to appeal; she was duly  cautious  not
    to trespass into the other grounds of appeal presented  in  support  of
    the application for permission to appeal.  Such caution was appropriate
    both by reason of  the  restriction  of  the  terms  of  the  grant  or
    permission, and by reason of the merits of the other grounds.  For  the
    main part those grounds assert  inadequate  reasons  and  cite  various
    cases and provisions relevant to the assessment of credibility, but are
    slight on particularising any specific error.  It was also  pleaded  in
    the  grounds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  heard  the
    Appellant's appeal at the same time as her brother's appeal.   However,
    no specific details were advanced in this regard in the Grounds.  I  am
    given to understand today that in fact the brother's appeal  was  heard
    prior to the Appellant's appeal, albeit that a  decision  had  not  yet
    been promulgated at the time of  the  Appellant's  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In any event, no application was ever made to  the
    Tribunal to link the appeals.  I am also told by Ms Jones that not only
    did the brother not give  evidence  in  the  instant  appeal,  but  the
    Appellant did not give evidence in his appeal.  Those were matters  for
    the Appellant and her brother to make decisions upon,  presumably  with
    the legal advice available to each of them. Absent any  application  to
    link the cases, and where the brother's appeal had already been  heard,
    there is no basis to impugn  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for  not
    hearing the appeals together.


13.  The grounds of appeal also make reference to risk  on  return,  but  it
    seems to me that those  grounds  are  inevitably  contingent  upon  the
    Appellant's narrative account being accepted, which it was  not  -  and
    the challenge to which I reject.


14.  As I say, Ms Jones was cautious  not  to  trespass  into  these  areas.
    Nonetheless she did invite consideration to the absence of any detailed
    reference by the Judge to the country situation, submitting  that  this
    might be indicative of a failure to apply the  applicable  standard  of
    proof. As a 'free standing' ground,  failure  to  have  regard  to  the
    country situation is not in itself a ground of challenge before  me.  I
    am not otherwise persuaded that even if  made  out  it  is  a  reliable
    indicator that the Judge misunderstood the nature  of  the  burden  and
    standard of proof in this appeal. I reject this line of argument.


15.  Accordingly, I find that there is no substance to the limited basis  of
    challenge permitted consideration by the Tribunal pursuant to the grant
    of permission to appeal.


16.  Notwithstanding, I acknowledge that there is something unattractive  in
    the Judge's almost too casual reference to  standard  or  proof.  Given
    that there are different standards of proof 'in play' in  the  work  of
    the IAC, I would suggest best practice advocates a brief sentence  that
    states clearly the standard or  standards  applicable  to  the  instant
    issue.


Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.


18.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


19.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 27 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis








