
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04396/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th September 2018                        |On 17th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    mr AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. In a decision sent on 8 January 2018, I set aside the decision  of  Judge
Coutts of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 20 June  2017  allowing  the
appeal of the respondent (hereafter the claimant) against  the  decision  of
the SSHD refusing to grant asylum and humanitarian protection.


I noted that the appellant (hereafter the SSHD) had accepted before the  FtT
judge that the claimant had given a detailed and  credible  account  of  his
arrest and detention by the Sri Lankan authorities in June 1999.   According
to that account the authorities asked the claimant to identify a man from  a
photograph and he identified him as a lodger living in  the  same  house  as
him. The authorities told the claimant that  this  man  had  been  supplying
arms and electrical goods  to  the  LTTE.   Notwithstanding  the  claimant's
denial that he knew of this, he  was  arrested,  detained,  ill-treated  and
tortured.  His father arranged to secure his release from detention  through
the services of a police officer from  another  police  station  who  was  a
longstanding patient of the claimant's father.  He advised the  claimant  to
leave the country and his father  made  arrangements  for  the  claimant  to
obtain a student visa to come to the UK, which he did (he  left  in  October
2009).

2. I concluded that I was not in a position to re-make the decision  without
a further hearing.  I stated that, there being no challenge to  the  judge's
findings of  past  persecution  in  2009,  only  to  the  claimant's  claims
regarding events since his  detention,  I  did  not  consider  it  would  be
appropriate to remit the case to the FtT.


3. Deciding to retain it in the Upper Tribunal, I  stated  that  "A  primary
focus of the next hearing will be whether or not the claimant  can  be  said
to have given a credible account of  post-2009  events.   To  that  end,  he
should attend ready to be cross-examined."

4. At the resumed hearing before  me  the  claimant  appeared.  He  was  not
represented but confirmed he was prepared to proceed  with  the  hearing.  I
explained to him that as he was not  represented  I  would  do  my  best  to
assist him in presenting his case effectively. He was then  asked  a  number
of questions by Mr Bates.

The appellant's oral testimony

5. The claimant said he stood by his previous interview record  and  witness
statement.  He said he had last had contact with  his  cousin  earlier  this
morning. Asked whether the cousin had told him of any other  visits  by  the
police since one in 2011, the claimant said he had not heard anything  about
that.  He had asked his cousin. His cousin had said they  had  not  searched
for him a second time. Asked whether his  cousin  was  aware  of  any  other
court summons or arrest warrant for him since 2011, the  claimant  said  his
cousin had not mentioned anything.  Asked how  his  cousin  knew  they  were
looking for the claimant in 2011, the claimant said they  had  come  to  his
house but he (the  claimant)  was  not  there;  no  one  was  at  home;  the
authorities asked neighbours.  Asked how his cousin had come  to  hear,  the
claimant said via the neighbours.  Asked had the police told the  neighbours
he was suspected of helping terrorists, the claimant said no  but  they  did
say they were searching for him. Asked why he thought  his  father  had  not
been targeted even though he was the owner of  the  property,  the  claimant
said his father was away for his work.

6.Asked about what medical treatment he  was  receiving  now,  the  claimant
said he was taking tablets for anxiety but he had not mentioned the  reasons
to his GP.  Asked why he had not mentioned these to  his  GP,  the  claimant
said of the problems he faced,  because  the  authorities  were  threatening
him.

7. Asked by me when his cousin had first told him about  the  visit  by  the
authorities in 2011, the claimant said his cousin told him  at  the  end  of
2011, he could not remember the date.  He had first been told by his  cousin
that he was on a list in April 2017. Asked by Mr Bates  when  he  had  found
out that the authorities had arrested Irfan (the man who was in  his  house)
the claimant said he cousin had told him about this. He  then  said  he  and
his cousin both knew about this; the police had told  him  about  this  when
they came to his house in 2009 and arrested him (the claimant).

8. Asked why he  had  made  no  mentioned  of  his  cousin  in  his  witness
statement of  29  May  2017,  the  claimant  said  he  thought  it  was  not
important.

9. Asked if he had anything else he wished to  say,  the  claimant  said  he
feared that the authorities had not made proper documents about his  release
and so he would be arrested once again.

Submissions

10. Mr Bates said he wished to rely on the reasons for  refusal  letter.  It
was accepted that the claimant had been arrested and  detained  in  2009  as
described by the claimant. However, as  regards  the  circumstances  of  his
release and subsequent  events,  the  claimant  had  not  given  a  credible
account. There had been a significant delay in his  claiming  asylum.  There
had never been any suggestion that the authorities had taken out  an  arrest
warrant or court summons despite the claimant saying  the  authorities  must
have regarded him as an absconder since 2009. The authorities had no  reason
not to take such steps in his absence.  As regards the  claimed  visit  paid
to his house by the authorities in 2011, it was not witnessed by his  cousin
and the implication of what  he  said  his  cousin  had  been  told  by  the
neighbours is that the authorities viewed him as a  suspect  for  terrorism,
even though it was inherently unlikely the authorities  would  divulge  such
information. It was far more likely that when the authorities  released  him
in 2011 they had finished their inquiries  and  were  satisfied  he  was  no
longer a person of interest to them. They  already  had  Irfan  in  custody.
That was also consistent with his account of the circumstances  under  which
his father had been able to  secure  his  release.  At  Q91  of  his  asylum
interview he was asked how was it his father who was not  a  police  officer
had been allowed to come to the cell to meet  him,  even  the  claimant  had
said that "I think after questioning for some time they would  have  thought
that I don't know any information and may be that's why they would  let  him
in...". That was a revealing answer and it was probably  the  most  credible
explanation.

11. Mr Bates submitted that  it  was  very  likely  that  the  claimant  had
realised his claim regarding events up to his release in 2009 did  not  make
out his claim, and that he therefore felt the need to  fabricate  the  claim
to a further visit in 2011.  It was a visit that came after  an  unexplained
gap of 18 months and was then not repeated for over  7  and  a  half  years.
The claimant left Sri Lanka on a valid visa and can provide evidence of  the
same on return. He has family members in Sri Lanka: he has  never  suggested
they have been targeted, including his father  who  was  the  owner  of  the
property. There was no evidence of court action. The claimant  did  not  fit
any of the GJ CG [2013] 00319 (IAC) risk categories and he was not a  Tamil.
 In the unlikely event of some interest in  him  on  the  part  of  the  Sri
Lankan authorities, he would not end up on a stop list; at most he would  be
on a watch list and so would not be detained. He had no history of  pro-LTTE
activities. His mental health difficulties were not at all  serious  on  his
own account. He could not succeed on  Article  8  grounds.   There  were  no
public interest considerations in his favour.

12. The claimant's submission was to reiterate that  he  had  been  arrested
and ill-treated and he genuinely feared that the authorities would  continue
to threaten his life.

My assessment

13. I remind myself that the appellant's protection claim has two  principal
bases:

    (i) that he was arrested by the Sri Lankan authorities in 2009  because
    they suspected him of providing lodging for a  man  named  Irfan.  They
    found documents showing Irfan supplied medicine and weapons to the LTTE
    and helped them with money. The claimant claimed that  his  father  was
    able to secure his release after one week with the  help  of  a  police
    officer from another police station who was a longstanding  patient  of
    his father. The claimant said that when he was released he did not sign
    anything and was told his information would be passed to the army; and


    (ii) that the authorities have continued to have an adverse interest in
    him as was demonstrated by their visit to his house in January 2011. He
    had heard about this visit from his cousin. His cousin  also  told  him
    more recently (a week before his asylum interview) that he  had  learnt
    that the authorities have put the claimant on a list.  Given  that  the
    claimant was representing himself and lacked legal skills, I have  paid
    particular attention (in addition to his oral testimony before  me)  to
    his asylum interview, his witness statement and the written grounds  of
    appeal and also to the submissions that were made on his behalf when he
    was represented before the FtT judge by Mr Slatter of Counsel.


14. I have given consideration to whether the claimant should be treated  as
a vulnerable witness in light of his  claimed  mental  health  difficulties.
However, there is a singular  lack  of  medical  evidence  to  support  that
claim. A mental health referral in 2015 appears to have come to nothing.  On
his own account to me, the only treatment he has been taking  were  'anxiety
tablets' and his own concerns about his anxiety were not strong  enough  for
him to mention the reasons  for  wanting  medication  to  his  own  GP.  The
claimant failed to provide any satisfactory explanation for why, if  he  had
significant anxiety linked to his past ill treatment and/or to  his  current
fears, he would not have mentioned this to his GP.

15. As noted earlier, the SSHD has accepted that the claimant  was  arrested
and detained and ill-treated by the authorities before being  released  with
the help of the services of a police officer from another station who was  a
long-standing patient of the claimant's father. That means he  has  suffered
past persecution and by virtue of para 339K of the Immigration Rules I  must
therefore consider whether there are  good  reasons  for  considering  there
will not be a repetition of such ill treatment.

16. Having considered the evidence as a whole, including the oral  testimony
given by the claimant before me and also the submissions of both parties,  I
conclude that he has not established that the circumstances of  his  release
in June 2009 would place him at risk of a repetition or that he has given  a
credible account of post-detention events.

17. The claimant's evidence regarding the circumstances of  his  release  in
2009 suggests that the police officers detaining him would have  decided  to
record his release  as  illegal.   However,  in  my  judgement  it  is  most
unlikely that they would have listed it as an escape  or  as  illegal  since
that would have required that they - the  officers  in  the  police  station
-explain how the escape had occurred and, given the presence of  his  father
there, that would very likely have resulted in some follow up inquiry  being
made of the claimant's father, particularly bearing in mind that it was  the
claimant's father who owned the property where the LTTE suspect, Irfan,  had
been arrested earlier. Yet there is no evidence to suggest any  such  follow
up. In the absence of any credible evidence of subsequent  adverse  interest
in the claimant, I concur  with  Mr  Bates  that  by  far  the  most  likely
situation is that the authorities had closed  their  file  on  the  claimant
following questioning that had  eliminated  him  as  someone  involved  with
Irfan.


18. The principal basis on which the claimant claims he would be at risk  of
a repetition of the persecution he suffered in 2009 is that he was  informed
by his cousin in 2011 that the authorities had  visited  his  house  because
they suspected him of being involved with terrorists. I am unable to  accept
his evidence regarding this for several reasons. First, it is based  on  his
claim to have been informed by his cousin about a visit to his house by  the
Sri Lankan authorities which took place when the  cousin  was  not  present.
Second, the claimant has  not  provided  any  witness  statement  from  this
cousin.  Third, the wider context does not indicate that such a  visit  took
place in that it is wholly unclear why it should occur some 18 months  after
the claimant had been released and had already left Sri  Lanka  on  his  own
passport, giving correct  particulars.  Fourth,  there  is  no  evidence  to
suggest that there was any further visit, which if the  authorities  had  an
interest in the claimant as someone linked to terrorism and  had  found  him
not there, one would have expected them to follow-up.  Fifth,  there  is  no
evidence that the authorities took any prior  action  against  the  claimant
such as would explain a visit of this kind, for example, an  arrest  warrant
or a court summons.  Sixth,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
authorities have any adverse interest in his father or other members of  his
family, even though it was his father who owned  the  property  where  Irfan
had stayed.

19. Also weighing against the credibility of the  claimant's  account  of  a
renewed interest in him in 2011 is the fact that on his own evidence he  has
not been involved in any sur place
activities in the UK carried out by members  of  the  Sri  Lankan  diaspora.
There is also the fact that he is not a Tamil.

20. I am unable to attach any credence to the  claimant's  claim  that  more
recently this same cousin informed him that the  authorities  have  put  him
(the claimant) on a list. There  is  no  affidavit  or  statement  from  the
cousin explaining how he came by this information and on the claimant's  own
evidence it is wholly unclear why his cousin (who was said to  work  in  the
coconut husk industry) would be told by a friend, himself  not  an  official
source, about such a matter.

21. For the above reasons, there are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  the
persecution the claimant suffered in 2009 will not be repeated.  I  conclude
that the claimant has  failed  to  give  a  credible  account  of  being  of
continuing interest to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  since  his  one  week
detention in June 2009.  He has failed to establish  that  he  currently  or
prospectively has a well-founded fear of persecution or serious harm or  ill
treatment.

22.  The  claimant  manifestly  fails  to  meet  the  requirements  of   the
Immigration Rules relating to  family  and  private  life.  As  regards  his
Article 8 circumstances outside the Rules, the claimant has  family  in  Sri
Lanka and lacks any family life ties in the UK  and  little  weight  can  be
attached to his private life in the UK  since  his  immigration  status  has
been precarious: having entered as a student he never  had  any  expectation
that he would be able to remain when he ceased being  a  student.  He  lacks
command of English. He is not financially independent.   Given  his  history
of arrest and community service for stalking,  there  is  an  even  stronger
public interest in his removal than would otherwise be the case.

To summarise:

It has already been found that the FtT judge materially erred in law.

The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the claimant.  Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 13 October 2018
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


