
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04735/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 September 2017                         |On 5 October 2017             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                   MRS S g
                         (anonymity direction MADE )
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. She has family  there  and  is
    married and her children were born in December 2011 and July 2014.  She
    feared the authorities are looking for her and will arrest her and harm
    her on return to her country of origin. Her feared  persecutor  is  the
    government  of  Sri  Lanka.  She  made  application  for  international
    protection which the Respondent refused. She appealed that decision and
    following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated  on  23  June  2017,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Freer  dismissed  her  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Kelly on 21 July 2017. His reasons for so doing
    were: -

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time, against the
             decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Freer,  promulgated  on
             23rd June 2017, to dismiss her appeal against refusal  of  her
             Protection Claim.

         2.   The grounds  plead  that  the  Tribunal  (a)  failed  to  make
             findings upon a critical  aspect  of  the  Appellant's  asylum
             claim (that her uncle was detained for assisting her  escape),
             (b) applied the country guidance case  of  GJ  inappropriately
             given that the appellant is a Sinhalese female rather  than  a
             Tamil male, and (c) failed to consider  the  effect  upon  the
             welfare of the appellant's children of her  enforced  removal.
             Those  grounds  are  arguable  and  permission  to  appeal  is
             accordingly granted."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Mannan relied upon the three grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.
    He firstly submitted that the Judge accepted that the Appellant  was  a
    Sinhalese woman who had had a relationship with a  Tamil  man  who  was
    committed to the break up  of  the  Sri  Lankan  State,  that  she  was
    arrested detained tortured, vaginally and anally raped and had to  have
    an abortion consequently and that it was plausible that the authorities
    would make enquiries about the Appellant's boyfriend thereby triggering
    intelligence gathering. Although the Judge went on to find  that  there
    would be no current risk to this Appellant it is clear that  he  failed
    to take account of the Appellant's evidence in relation to an uncle who
    had been taken into custody because he had made  arrangements  for  the
    Appellant's escape, and  that  such  evidence  undermines  the  Judge's
    finding that the Appellant faces no current risk. Secondly that had the
    Judge properly applied relevant Country Guidance the appeal would  have
    been allowed. Albeit that GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC)  concerns  Tamil  men  who  were  former
    members of the LTTE this is an Appellant who is Sinhalese,  and  female
    and as such a more nuanced consideration was  required.  Finally,  that
    there is a failure by the Judge to  consider  whether  the  Appellant's
    children "are at risk of neglect of their  mother's  mental  health  is
    damaged in the course of enforced removal".

 5. Mr Bramble's submissions were that the Judge  had  made  findings  that
    were open to be made on the evidence including that the  Appellant  had
    formed a relationship with a Tamil person who is committed to the break
    up of the State resulting in detention and torture. The Judge has  gone
    on  to  weigh  other  factors  before  concluding  that  despite   this
    background the Appellant would not be at risk upon return. The  failure
    to deal with the evidence in relation to the  Appellant's  uncle,  when
    looking at the totality of the issues considered by the Judge, does not
    constitute a material error of law. GJ is relevant and  the  Judge  was
    entitled to take it  into  his  consideration  when  dealing  with  the
    appeal.  He  has  further  found  that  this  was  an  Appellant  whose
    dependants were her husband and children and their interests have  been
    set into the conclusion that they would be removed as a family unit.

 6. I find that the  Judge  has  materially  erred.  The  totality  of  the
    evidence has not been considered and particularly in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's uncle and his detention. Findings need to be made  on  this
    issue and then on the full facts  a  decision  should  be  made  as  to
    whether the Appellant will be at risk if returned  to  her  country  of
    origin.

 7. Neither party has challenged the rationality of the Judge's findings at
    paragraph 38 of his decision. It states: -

         "38.     What I am prepared to find it  that,  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities, the Appellant had  an  unsuitable  relationship
             with a Tamil person, who was committed to the break up of  the
             State. That is enough without more  to  explain  why  she  was
             detained twice and tortured, which I accept  she  was.  It  is
             reasonably likely that her parents would want to marry her off
             as she says. Leaving Sri Lanka would ensure she did  not  come
             into contact with him again."

    Accordingly, the findings within paragraph 38 of the  Judge's  decision
    are to be preserved but beyond that there is to be a de novo hearing in
    relation to the balance of the appeal.

 8. I am satisfied that the Judge has  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    totality of the evidence and given inadequate  reasons  for  dismissing
    the appeal.

 9. Having carefully considered whether I can go on to remake the  decision
    in this appeal I conclude that that  would  not  be  possible.  Further
    evidence is required and no  Sinhalese  interpreter  was  provided  for
    today's hearing. In the  circumstances,  it  is  appropriate  for  this
    appeal to be heard again and for all the evidence  to  be  reconsidered
    and all matters decided afresh by the First-tier  Tribunal  subject  to
    the preservation of the findings within paragraph  38  of  the  Judge's
    decision.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside  subject  to  the
above mentioned preserved finding. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Court and Enforcement Act 2007  and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
before any Judge aside from Judge Freer.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 4 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard










