









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04450/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 19 December 2016                 |On: 27 January 2017                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                                     H T
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, counsel (instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of their family. This  direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1 March 1999.


   3. His appeal against the respondent's decision refusing his  application
      for asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights was dismissed  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Dhaliwal in a determination  promulgated  on
      18 October 2016.


   4. The Judge concluded that the appellant is able to return and  relocate
      to Kabul where there will be no risk to him. It would  not  be  unduly
      harsh in any way for him to return to Afghanistan,  in  particular  as
      his family will be there to support him [42].


   5. On 10 November 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. She stated that there is no  merit  in
      the suggestion that the Judge had not addressed the arguments  in  the
      skeleton argument. Reading the decision as a whole, it is  clear  that
      the Judge had the points made by the appellant's counsel in  mind  and
      dealt with them.


   6. However, whilst the Judge had given a well reasoned  decision  overall
      it is arguable that in failing to give adequate reasons for  attaching
      no weight to the updated evidence of Lisa Schuster  (following  Naziri
      and responding to the Upper Tribunal's concerns  about  her  evidence)
      that the Judge may have erred in law.


   7. Ms Easty, who did  not  represent  the  appellant  at  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, referred to [28] and [29] of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
      decision, where the Judge stated that  "....the  appellant  relies  on
      what he states reflects  the  present  situation  in  Afghanistan  and
      Kabul, namely the two reports prepared by Lisa Schuzter (sic). She has
      read these reports but has  also  noted  the  comments  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in R (on the application of Naziri v SSHD (JR Scope Evidence)
      IJR 2 [2015]. The Upper Tribunal was not persuaded to depart from  the
      present country guidance on Afghanistan.


   8. Having this in mind, and considering  the  facts  of  this  particular
      appellant, the Judge saw no reason to depart from the current  country
      guidance, nor did she feel that she needs to  place  reliance  on  the
      reports from Lisa  Schuster  above  and  beyond  the  current  country
      guidance. She therefore did not place weight on the reports from  Lisa
      Schuster.


   9. Ms Easty referred to the report from Lisa Schuster  which  was  before
      the First-tier Tribunal at page 37-61. That report merged and  expands
      the two previous reports dated 4 March 2015, amended on 22 March 2015,
      and supersedes them. She has  stated  that  she  has  concentrated  on
      reports and data from 2014-2015, deleting most of  the  early  reports
      and references.


  10. There is also a report from Ms Schuster dated December  2015  produced
      from page  67-108  which  she  stated  updates  previous  reports  and
      supersedes them. She has incorporated the earlier  reports,  retaining
      material that remains valid and adding in new reports and data.


  11. At page 83-84 of the bundle, Ms Schuster, in her December 2015 update,
      referred to the Home Office argument that  Afghans  were  successfully
      returned to many provinces by charter in March 2015. However, she  saw
      no evidence of how successful these returns were or how success is  to
      be defined. Her research and that of other scholars has found that  it
      is difficult if not  impossible  for  those  without  networks  and/or
      resources in Kabul to settle there. They are at risk  of  destitution,
      exploitation and criminal predation.


  12. Whilst there is no evidence that any of those returned in  March  have
      successfully re-integrated, in the course of her research,  those  she
      met who have made this attempt have inevitably returned to  Kabul  but
      only in order to find a way to leave the country again. In most  cases
      this was because they had been threatened or attacked,  and  in  other
      cases because there was no way for them to survive. She said  that  it
      is important to underline this point. She  has  seen  first  hand  the
      bewilderment, confusion and fear as returnees try  to  work  out  what
      they can and should do. Some in spite of their fears do try to  return
      to their provinces.


  13. Ms Easty submitted that Ms Schuster did not state that  in  her  March
      2015 report. She merely stated that it is  a  deteriorating  situation
      (paragraphs 20-22).  She did  not  say  that  Article  15(c)  will  be
      breached. She  does  not  mention  Article  15(c).   She  changed  her
      position in the December 2015 report.


  14. The conclusions are set out at page  83  of  the  appellant's  bundle.
      There Ms Schuster stated that she believes that a civilian returnee to
      Afghanistan (Kabul or elsewhere)  would,  solely  on  account  of  his
      presence on the territory of that country or region, face a real  risk
      of being subjected to serious threat referred to in Article  15(c)  of
      the Directive. This would not necessarily follow inevitably, but there
      is a real risk that they could be  killed  or  injured  as  collateral
      damage and for the first since 2001, the  risk  is  not  significantly
      diminishing as the winter approaches.


  15. Ms Easty said that Naziri "was fixed in time as at 1 April 2015."  She
      submitted that the Judge did  not  properly  consider  or  assess  the
      updating evidence, but simply decided that the Upper Tribunal was  not
      persuaded to depart from the present country guidance on  Afghanistan.
      Accordingly, the Judge saw no reason to depart from this guidance, nor
      did she feel that she needed to place reliance on the  reports  of  Ms
      Schuster beyond the current guidance.  She  therefore  did  not  place
      weight on the reports from Ms Schuster.


  16. However, Ms Schuster stated  in  terms  that  Article  15(c)  will  be
      breached.  In  the  circumstances,  it  was  submitted  that  it   was
      'incumbent upon her' to have regard to the updating evidence  relating
      to that issue. That is particularly so as evidence was  not  available
      to the Upper Tribunal in Naziri. Her latest report  sought  to  update
      the decision.


  17. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Singh relied on the Rule 24  response.
      The Judge was duty bound to follow  the  country  guidance  except  in
      circumstances where she was persuaded that there was  good  reason  to
      depart from it. The Judge confirmed that she read the reports from  Ms
      Schuster in conjunction with Naziri. She considered that it  would  be
      inappropriate to depart from this guidance.


  18. She was accordingly entitled to reject the evidence  in  the  reports,
      having adequately explained her reasons for doing so.


      Assessment


  19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the appellant relied  on  two
      reports prepared by Ms Schuster. She said she has read the reports but
      also noted the comments of the Upper Tribunal  in  Naziri.  The  Upper
      Tribunal was not persuaded to depart from the present country guidance
      on Afghanistan.


  20. Having this in mind, and considering  the  facts  of  this  particular
      appellant, she saw no reason to depart from that guidance, nor did she
      feel that she needed to place reliance on the reports from Ms Schuster
      beyond the current country guidance. She therefore placed no weight on
      the reports from Ms Schuster.


  21. However it appears from the submissions referred to  in  the  skeleton
      argument placed before the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  which  set  out
      the appellant's case, that he should be granted refugee status  or  at
      the very least, humanitarian protection under Article 15(c).


  22. Dr Schuster had updated her March 2015 report where she has  addressed
      some of the concerns raised by the respondent. She had  also  provided
      evidence  and  "data"  concerning  the   increasing   insecurity,   in
      particular since March 2014 in Afghanistan and especially in Kabul and
      some selected provinces.


  23. She confirmed in her  December  2015  report  that  the  situation  in
      Afghanistan has actually worsened since her last report and that there
      has been political pressure on the Afghan government  to  accept  that
      the situation has improved.


  24. The conclusions of Dr Schuster's December 2015 report are set  out  in
      full in the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal.


  25. Dr Schuster had accordingly considered evidence and information  which
      post- dated the decision in Naziri, including her own  statements  and
      evidence to the Upper Tier Tribunal in that case.


  26. In particular, Dr Schuster has considered the applicability of Article
      15(c) in her recent report. That evidence was  not  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal in Naziri.


  27. The decision in Naziri was appealed. The Court of Appeal dismissed the
      appeal in HN and SA (Afghanistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  123.  It  did  not
      however rule on the security situation.


  28. In refusing to consider departing from the present country guidance on
      Afghanistan, the First-tier Tribunal Judge saw  no  reason  to  depart
      from it. Nor did she feel the need to place reliance  on  the  reports
      from Dr Schuster above and beyond the current  country  guidance.  She
      therefore did not place any weight on those reports.


  29. The Judge did not however set out any proper reasons for  not  placing
      reliance on her reports with regard to the current  country  guidance.
      The Judge did not consider the information and circumstances  referred
      to in her December 2015 report which superseded  Dr  Schuster's  other
      reports.


  30. Even where there may be a relevant country guidance case, the Tribunal
      is obliged to consider and determine the facts of the individual  case
      and to consider any evidence showing a change of  circumstances  since
      the "factual precedent" was decided or showing that a factual  finding
      in the country guidance case was incorrect[1]. The Judge was at  least
      required to consider the  evidence  presented  by  Dr  Schuster  which
      claimed to show a  change  of  circumstances  since  the  decision  in
      Naziri. This was not undertaken.


  31. I accordingly set aside the decision. The parties agreed that in those
      circumstances the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
      (Birmingham) for a fresh decision to be made.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and the decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal (Birmingham) for a fresh decision to be  made.
      The appeal will be heard  by  any  Judge  apart  from  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge whose decision has been appealed.


      Anonymity direction continued.






      Signed                             Date 25 January 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









      -----------------------
[1]  MacDonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 9th Edition, Volume 1,
paragraph 20.119

