
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04157/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 20 October 2016                   |on 24 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                HAIRISH HADI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Jain, Neil &
                    Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bradshaw, dismissing his appeal against refusal of recognition as
    a refugee from Iraq.

 2. The appellant is Kurdish and speaks Sorani.  He says  that  Daesh  took
    over his village and detained him with other  young  men,  23  in  all.
    Daesh killed one each day until  there  were  only  5  survivors.   The
    appellant agreed to infiltrate the Peshmerga  as  a  double  agent  for
    Daesh.  The Peshmerga immediately suspected him, detained  him  for  15
    days and handed him over to the Kurdish police or security service, the
    Asayish.  He escaped when the vehicle in  which  police  officers  were
    taking him to Kirkuk was involved in a  collision.   A  friend  of  his
    father sheltered him for a year, then paid a people smuggler to arrange
    his departure from Iraq.  He claims to  be  at  risk  from  Daesh,  the
    Peshmerga and the Asayish.

 3. The judge found the appellant's account not credible.

 4. The grounds of the appeal to the UT are lengthy and discursive.   Their
    gist is:

    (i)     Error  in  attaching  adverse  significance   to   absence   of
    information provided at the screening interview.

    (ii)   Approaching the case on the basis that  it  was  agreed  removal
    would be to the KRG, when parties had in fact agreed that  any  removal
    would be to Baghdad; failure to consider that on removal  to  the  KRG,
    the appellant would be at risk from the Peshmerga and the Asayish.

    (iii)   The  appellant  said  he  was  fingerprinted  twice.   It   was
    speculative to presume that the second occasion would have been by  the
    Peshmerga or Daesh, so that this might have brought  their  involvement
    to mind at the time of the screening interview.

    (iv)   Applying too high  a  standard  of  proof  when  evaluating  the
    appellant's knowledge of Daesh.

    (v)    Applying too  high  a  standard  of  proof  when  assessing  the
    appellant's claim that he disposed without thinking of the mobile phone
    given to him by Daesh.  His account was credible and it was an error of
    law to find otherwise.

    (vi)   Error in considering the chronology of the claim.  The appellant
    did not enquire about his family during the year he spent  with  Rasoul
    (his father's friend) but it was reasonable for him to assume  that  as
    he had not helped Daesh they would have killed his family.   The  judge
    placed too great a burden on the appellant to establish his claim.  Had
    it been anxiously scrutinised, it would have succeeded.

 5. In a written response to the grant of permission the respondent submits
    thus.  It was open to the judge to conclude that when the appellant was
    asked who he feared in Iraq and responded "only Isis"  that  materially
    damaged credibility. The judge took account  of  the  appellant's  very
    recent arrival in the UK and the possibility of his having had  adverse
    experiences in his country of  origin  (paragraph  90),  and  correctly
    directed himself on issues impacting on the  screening  interview.  The
    appellant's subsequent reliance on an additional and  wholly  different
    risk element was a matter the judge was entitled to take as damaging to
    credibility. The divergence between  the  account  at  interview  which
    lacked detail on Daesh and the  subsequent  statement  which  continued
    contained significant detail was a further matter open  to  the  judge.
    The issue concerning return to the KRG was peripheral. The  judge  took
    the agreed view that  if  not  credible  there  was  available  to  the
    appellant a route from Baghdad to the KRG.

 6. It was identified in course of Mr Caskie's submissions  on  ground  (i)
    that although not with  the  original  respondent's  bundle  there  was
    produced to the judge at the hearing (as he records at paragraph  8)  a
    full copy of the screening interview.  This includes  the  continuation
    of the questions and answers at 4.1, ending with "Q. Who do you fear in
    Iraq? A. Only Isis" (the passage cited by the judge).

 7. Mr Caskie further  to  ground  (i)  emphasised  the  context  in  which
    judgement was to be exercised, including  the  appellant's  account  of
    horrendous experiences, having spent a year in hiding,  having  arrived
    in Europe only 3 or 4 days before, and having been admonished  to  give
    only brief information. He submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  have
    regard  to  the  relevant  background  in  reaching   his   credibility
    assessment  on  this  point,  and  that  his  mind  had  been  coloured
    throughout the rest of  the  determination  by  taking  this  issue  as
    decisively negative.

 8. Mr Caskie (correctly) accepted that ground (ii)  could  not  by  itself
    disclose any material error. It depended on the credibility  assessment
    being found to be wrong in law.

 9. Caskie submitted that ground (iii) disclosed that the judge went  wrong
    on a factual matter. The appellant  would  not  necessarily  have  been
    fingerprinted by the Peshmerga  or  Asayish.  The  judge  left  out  of
    account that he would been fingerprinted by the  UK  authorities,  i.e.
    fingerprinted twice. The matter had not been further explored with  the
    appellant. It should have been considered as  neutral  and  should  not
    have been taken as a further negative point.

10. Mr Caskie (who was not the author of the grounds)  categorised  (iv)  -
    (vi) as showing inadequacy of reasoning, rather than  irrationality  or
    any other target in terms of legal category.

11. On ground (iv), Mr Caskie submitted that it was inconceivable that  the
    appellant as an Iraqi would not have known the  nature  of  Daesh.  His
    apparent  ignorance  was  not  a  factor  which  could  undermine   his
    credibility.  Parting with the mobile  phone  (v)  was  another  factor
    which ought to have been treated as neutral rather than adverse. It was
    at least equally likely that the appellant would naturally wished to be
    rid of materials connecting him to Danish. There had been only  a  very
    brief telephone call at the end of which  the  appellant's  contact  in
    Iraq told him not to call back, but that he would call  if  there  were
    any news (vi). In that context, and  given  the  appellant's  state  of
    knowledge until he left Iraq, there was nothing  adverse  to  be  drawn
    from the fact that he had not enquired further about his family.

12. On the grounds as a whole, Mr Caskie observed that the decision was not
    framed in terms of one crucial point, but based on several.  Sufficient
    of these had been undermined to require the decision to be set aside.

13. If error of law were to be found,  Mr  Caskie  proposed  to  develop  a
    submission  that  the  respondent's  latest  country  information   and
    guidance,  Iraq:  Humanitarian  Situation,   August   2016,   warranted
    departure from the Upper tribunal's most recent country  guidance.  The
    appellant's home area was in  a  disputed  area,  not  in  the  Kurdish
    autonomous  region.  The  evidence  showed  that  the   situation   had
    deteriorated to the point where return should now be considered  unduly
    harsh.  The appellant, if that stage were  reached,  would  be  content
    with an outcome on that basis.  It was  accepted  that  the  respondent
    would be entitled to an opportunity to consider and respond, by way  of
    an adjournment. I therefore did not ask for the  point  to  be  further
    developed. I indicated that if I did find material error of law,  there
    would be a further hearing.

14. Mr Matthews submitted thus.  At screening interview an appellant is now
    asked for a brief explanation of all reasons. At 4.1 the appellant gave
    a quite full reply, taking his history up to leaving the hands  of  the
    Peshmerga, followed by his statement of a decision "to flee". That  was
    not at all consistent with his later account. The judge had shown  that
    he was aware of the need to approach a screening interview with caution
    and in context, in particular at paragraph 90. The judge  was  entitled
    to conclude that the appellant added to his  evidence  to  improve  his
    chances. The logic of the judge's point about fingerprinting might  not
    be entirely clear, but the issue raised by  ground  (iii)  was  only  a
    bolster to the much more fundamental point covered by ground (i)  which
    the appellant failed to displace. Grounds (iv) - (vi) were  all  simply
    disagreements.  The determination should stand.

15. Mr Caskie in reply said that there was plainly a dissonance between the
    admonition at screening interview to make only a  brief  statement  and
    the requirement to state all reasons.  Mr  Matthews  had  analysed  the
    appellant's screening interview evidence to derive  a  point  from  the
    phrase "decided to flee" which had not been taken by the judge, and  so
    should not now be relied upon in aid of his findings. They had to stand
    on their own merits. From Q/A28 onwards at  substantive  interview  the
    appellant seemed to display very little knowledge about Daesh, but that
    could be understood on the basis that to his mind he  was  being  asked
    about the particular individuals  who  kidnapped  him,  not  about  the
    organisation itself. The respondent had submitted  that  the  appellant
    had no need to approach the Peshmerga, but that was the opposite of the
    respondent's standard submission that appellants should seek protection
    available to them.

16. I reserved my decision.

17. On ground (iii), the question which the form required to be put to  the
    appellant was,  "Have  you  ever  been  fingerprinted  in  any  country
    including your own? (if yes please obtain detail of where when and  why
    fingerprinted)".  His reply was,  "Yes,  I  don't  know  where,  I  was
    forced.  I have been fingerprinted twice".  The matter was not  further
    explored, then or since.  There was no "Eurodac" match, which  suggests
    no fingerprinting in Europe.  I think it is possible  to  see  why  the
    judge thought the second fingerprinting might logically (if the further
    account were true) have been by the Peshmerga or the  Asayish,  and  so
    the mention of the matter should have brought his  further  experiences
    to mind.  However, the matter is obscure.  It  is,  as  the  respondent
    submitted, a very  small  adjunct  to  the  general  finding  that  the
    appellant's alleged experiences were invented.

18. Despite valiant attempts to refute the point, the series  of  questions
    and answers leading up to the critical exchange, "Q. Who do you fear in
    Iraq? A. Only Isis", creates a context where the judge was entitled  to
    draw the obvious conclusions which he did.

19. That was the strongest of the judge's reasons, but it was far from  the
    only one.  I am satisfied that all the grounds other than (iii),  which
    is very minor, disclose only insistence and re-argument on  the  facts,
    and no legal error.  The various points were all open to the judge, and
    the reasons given are all sensible.

20. On that view, there is no scope to revisit the country guidance and the
    internal  relocation  alternative.   If  the  appellant,  upon  advice,
    considers that worth taking further, his course is by way  of  a  fresh
    claim.

21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            20 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




