
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04476/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2016                  |On 24 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    A H C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who has  remained  illegally  in
    the United Kingdom since 2002.  On 11 August 2012 he applied for  leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules which were  refused.  Following
    directions being set for his removal in March the appellant on 22 March
    2016 applied for asylum. That application was refused on 29 April 2016.

2.   The appellant sought to  challenge  that  refusal,  which  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain on 20 June 2016.   The  appeal
    was dismissed in all respects.

3.   The appellant now seeks to challenge that decision as  being  one  made
    in fundamental error of law.  Leave to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rimington on 17 October 2016 on the basis that the Judge
    appeared to merely adopt  the  reasoning  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    without further critical analysis and  failing  to  evaluate  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant.

4.   The matter comes before me to determine the issues as to the  merit  of
    that appeal.

5.   It is the case of the appellant that his problems in Pakistan began  in
    1996 or 1997 after his marriage to his wife. His relatives were unhappy
    about the marriage as they wanted him to marry one within their family.
     He inherited some land from his grandfather jointly with his  paternal
    uncle who refused to share the land  with  him.   In  August  2011  the
    police came to his house, took him away and beat him, detaining him for
    two months.  They asked him to sign a document agreeing  to  hand  over
    his land to the relatives but he refused to do so.   Seemingly  he  was
    then charged with rape and taken to court. Because of his  injuries  he
    was taken to hospital from where he escaped and travelled to the United
    Kingdom. There is therefore violence both from family members and  also
    from the police, there being currently an arrest warrant against him.

6.   The appellant was  interviewed  about  his  claim.   It  was  a  fairly
    lengthy interview, having some 131 questions and answers. He  indicated
    that following his beating he had  had  his  hands  broken  which  made
    working difficult and he was trying  to  get  documents  from  Pakistan
    about the rape case.  There was an attack on his house. When asked  how
    it was that was connected to the land issue, he indicated that his wife
    had told him that she was receiving telephone calls asking her to  tell
    him to give up the land.

7.   The decision of 29 April 2016 is a very  detailed  one  and  summarises
    the appellant's case by reference to the interview.  It was also  noted
    currently there was an arrest warrant issued for  his  arrest,  arising
    out of an answer to question 123.  It was noted in particular that  the
    appellant had not submitted any documents in support of his  claim  for
    asylum and the immigration history was noted.

8.   The decision considered the account as given  and  clear  reasons  were
    set out for the respondent not to accept the various accounts that  had
    been presented.  In particular it was noted that no evidence  had  been
    presented to support the claim that he had inherited some land or  that
    he was arrested in November 2011,  nor  any  medical  treatment,  court
    appearance or arrest  warrant.  It  was  submitted  that  the  lack  of
    documentary evidence was damaging to credibility.

9.   The decision also looked at  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
    relocation among other matters. It also  dealt  with  the  private  and
    family life and exceptional circumstances.

10.   The  Judge  in  the  determination  has  set  out  the  basis  of  the
    application and the nature of the evidence that was presented orally by
    the appellant at the hearing. At the outset  of  the  hearing  Counsel,
    representing the appellant, had made an application for an  adjournment
    on the basis that the appellant was awaiting  documents  from  Pakistan
    and had a witness arriving from Pakistan in the next seven days. It was
    considered that the appellant had had sufficient time  to  respond  and
    deal with matters and accordingly  the  adjournment  was  refused.   In
    reality the appellant has had many years to obtain the  documents  that
    he now seeks to acquire and in any event the hearing  was  on  20  June
    2016, a month from the interview at which time the appellant  had  been
    represented.  The issue of the adjournment was  not  a  matter  pursued
    before me.

11.  The evidence of the appellant was set  out  and  really  differed  very
    little from that which was set out in his interview.  He  claimed  that
    he did not claim asylum in 2002 because he did not know about  it.   He
    was asked why he could not get the arrest warrant and replied  that  he
    had applied for it.  He asked a friend to get it and send  it  to  him.
    He was unable to provide medical evidence because he had run away  from
    the hospital.  He was able to get a copy of the FIR.  He is  still  not
    sure of those who attacked his wife's house and he does  not  have  any
    evidence of  the  attack  because  he  does  not  speak  to  his  wife.
    Seemingly since the fire she stopped talking to  him  and  was  staying
    with her parents but has no contact with him.  He tried to  obtain  the
    FIR about two months previously saying  that  he  was  not  advised  to
    obtain it earlier by his solicitors.

12.  As to the land he said that he owns  ancestral  property  and  did  not
    want to give it up  because  he  had  nothing  else  other  than  that.
    Although he had been working in the UK doing gardening work he  claimed
    that he could not get a job in Pakistan because of his  injured  hands.
    He claimed that he had been last threatened five or six years before.

13.  In assessing the overall credibility of the appellant the  Judge  noted
    the delay in claiming  asylum.  This  was  also  a  linked  to  a  wish
    expressed in August 2015 to voluntarily depart the  United  Kingdom,  a
    request which had then be cancelled. The appellant  denied  making  the
    request in the first place.

14.  The Judge noted a number of passages in the reasons for  refusal  which
    challenged the credibility  of  the  appellant.   The  Judge  expressed
    agreement with the  concerns  as  there  expressed.   For  example,  in
    paragraph 32 the Judge noted that the appellant  had  stated  that  his
    grandfather left him the land for himself and three of  his  own  sons,
    whereas  in  interview  that  he  had  inherited  the  land  from   his
    grandfather and that his uncle was  joint  inheritor.   The  respondent
    said that such an  inconsistency  damaged  credibility  and  the  Judge
    agreed with that assessment.  It  was  noted  in  particular  that  the
    appellant had provided no evidence to show that he  had  inherited  the
    land.

15.  The  Secretary  of  State  had  highlighted  an  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's evidence with regard to the position of those who  reported
    an  allegation  of  rape  against  him.  The  Judge  agreed  with  that
    conclusion.

16.  What is  said  in  essence  is  that  the  Judge  gave  no  independent
    assessment of what the appellant had to say but rather  simply  adopted
    wholesale what the respondent in her decision letter had to  say  about
    the matter.

17.  I do not uphold that challenge.  It seems to me it is entirely open  to
    a Judge, having heard the evidence, to consider that what the Secretary
    of State had said about the account was to be taken into consideration.
    If the Judge agrees with the reasoning of the Secretary of State in the
    decision then it is open to the Judge to say so.

18.  Of significance in this appeal is that it is  not  suggested  that  the
    Judge overlooked any material matter or difference in the oral evidence
    of the appellant that was not before the Secretary of State at the time
    of the decision.  Sometimes of course the oral evidence is  to  give  a
    further explanation to an answer given in interview or a  comment  made
    at interview. That does not arise  in  this  case.   Fundamentally  the
    appellant was giving the same account as he gave to  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Secretary of State had made comments about it  which  the
    Judge felt to be justified in all the circumstances.

19.  I can find no basis to indicate that the Judge paid  little  regard  to
    what the appellant had to say.  It is clear that the Judge gave  little
    weight to what the appellant had to say, given the credibility findings
    made adverse to the appellant on a number of occasions.

20.  This is somebody who was illegally  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  many
    years and who could have claimed asylum  particularly  when  in  August
    2012 he applied for leave to remain outside the Rules.  If he had  fear
    of returning that would have been an oblivious time in  which  to  have
    expressed those fears, but he did not.  It  was  only  when  directions
    were set for his removal that he finally sought asylum.

21.  As to human rights, it is entirely clear that  he  does  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules  and  that  there  are  no  compelling  circumstances
    outside his claim for asylum which would  make  his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom disproportionate.

22.  It had been the view of the Secretary  of  State  that  protection  was
    available to the appellant. Alternatively that internal relocation  was
    properly open in all the circumstances.  The Judge is entitled to agree
    with that conclusion or not, as the case may be.

23.  Overall I find that the determination fairly set out the case  for  the
    appellant and explained with reasons why the Judge did not accept  that
    case to be so.

24.  No doubt if documentation is to be forthcoming that  can  be  presented
    to the Secretary of State for consideration as to a fresh claim. In the
    absence of any documentation whatsoever in support of any aspect of the
    asylum claim, particularly in  the  light  of  the  delay  in  claiming
    asylum, it is an entirely proper comment  to  make  that  the  lack  of
    documentation is significant.

25.  Mr Jarvis who represents  the  appellant  invited  my  attention  to  a
    decision of the Tribunal of  TB  (Credibility)  Zimbabwe  [2004]  UKIAT
    00159 in relying on paragraphs 10 and 11 thereof.   In  that  case  the
    appellant had claimed asylum only in the immediate aftermath  of  being
    apprehended by the police and it was considered in those  circumstances
    it was entirely justified that the adjudicator found the  claim  to  be
    wholly false without being required to look at  the  substance  of  the
    claim. It seems to me that jurisprudence has moved on since those  days
    and there is a requirement of a holistic consideration of the evidence.
     Looking at the determination as a whole I find that that was done.  No
    material element of evidence was overlooked or ignored.



Notice of Decision

26.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal before me  is  dismissed.   I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. Thus the original
    decision shall stand, namely that  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  is
    dismissed as it is also on humanitarian protection grounds.  The appeal
    in respect of human rights is also dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]    Date 24 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

