
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04153/2019 v


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 May 2021                        |On 28 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant/Secretary of State for the Home Department:  Ms J
                    Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Tobin, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. I shall refer to the Respondent as the Appellant as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal anonymised  the  Appellant
    and this order is to continue.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and his date of  birth  is  6
    February 1992.

 3. The Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  G  Clarke  to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent  on  3  April
    2019 to refuse his claim on protection grounds.  Permission was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 2 February 2021.  Thus the matter
    came before me to determine whether the judge made an error of law.

The Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal

 4. The Appellant is a Sunni Muslim of Pashtun ethnicity from Baghlan.  The
    judge accepted the Appellant's claim that his brother was killed by the
    Taliban in 2001.  He found the Appellant's account consistent with  the
    "objective" evidence on the modus operandi of the Taliban in  terms  of
    forced recruitment and land grabs and the prevalence of  land  disputes
    (see paragraph 79).

 5. The Appellant said he was at risk on return from  Commander  Attiq  and
    the judge recorded  that  the  Respondent  accepted  the  existence  of
    Commander Attiq although the Respondent's evidence is that  he  is  now
    deceased having been killed by Afghan and NATO forces in 2012.

 6. The judge  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  the  Appellant's
    brother.  They were both cross-examined.  The judge found the  core  of
    the Appellant's account consistent that their brother was killed by the
    Taliban in 2001.  She accepted that the family's  land  was  seized  by
    Commander Attiq.  The judge said she made allowances for the  Appellant
    suffering from mental health issues which can affect concentration  and
    memory.

 7. The judge took into account the medical evidence of Dr Singh concerning
    the Appellant's mental health  and  the  evidence  of  country  expert,
    Rachel Reid. The judge properly treated the Appellant as  a  vulnerable
    witness bearing in mind  Dr  Singh's  opinion  that  the  Appellant  is
    suffering from a depressive episode of moderate severity  and  that  he
    shows signs of PTSD (but he did not meet the criteria for  a  diagnosis
    of PTSD) (see paragraph 67 of the judge's  decision).   Dr  Singh  took
    into account a report from  Dr  Cutting  of  2  August  2019  that  the
    Appellant was suffering from "severe depressive episode with  psychotic
    symptoms".

 8. The judge set out parts of Dr Singh's evidence, in whose  opinion,  the
    Appellant  is  suffering  from  "a  depressive  episode   of   moderate
    severity." She set out that Dr Singh stated that, "The current position
    is that he is presenting with depression with  no  signs  of  recovery.
    This is exerting a negative effect on his life in respect of social and
    occupational  functioning,  leading  to   distraction   on   day-to-day
    activities". The judge recorded at paragraph  68  that  Dr  Singh  also
    diagnosed the Appellant as having "moderate symptoms of psychopathology
    and moderate impairment in social or occupational functioning" and that
    "[t]his impairment  is  attributed  to  mental  health  problems."   At
    paragraph 72 the judge stated as follows:

         "I also remind myself that  DH  (Particular  Social  Group:  Mental
         Health) Afghanistan [2020] UKUT 223 establishes that someone living
         with mental health problems may be a member of a particular  social
         group and therefore potentially qualify under  the  Convention  for
         international protection as a refugee.  However, Ms Tobin confirmed
         in her closing submissions that this aspect was not  being  pursued
         and reliance  was  placed  on  the  Appellant's  imputed  political
         opinion."

 9. Taking  into  account  all  the  evidence  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's brother was killed by the Taliban under Commander Attiq and
    that the Appellant's family was targeted by the  Taliban  resulting  in
    the death of his father and the seizure of the family's land.  However,
    the judge said that the Appellant "has failed to prove,  on  the  lower
    standard, that Commander Attiq  is  still  alive  and  I  rely  on  the
    objective evidence that Commander Attiq was killed in 2012."

10. The judge said as follows:-

         "The Appellant has failed to prove that there are thousands of  men
         who are loyal to Commander Attiq with  the  implication  that  they
         would have an adverse interest in the Appellant to the extent  that
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution on account of his  impute
         (sic) political opinion".

11. The judge found that there was no credible evidence that Taliban forces
    under the command of Attiq have any interest  in  the  Appellant,  some
    nineteen years after the death of the Appellant's brother  or  eighteen
    years after the death of his father and seizure of the family  land  or
    eight years after the death of Attiq.

12. The judge said at paragraph 97 that she relied on the  report  of  Miss
    Rachel Reid that the Appellant is unlikely to be of adverse interest to
    the Afghan forces or  Hezb-e-Islami.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant did not have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  from  the
    Taliban  or  Afghan  forces  or  Hezb-e-Islami  either  in  Baghlan  or
    elsewhere in Afghanistan (see paragraph 97).

13. The judge then at paragraph 98 said that she had to consider relocation
    to Kabul.  She directed herself in relation to  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    [2020] Afghanistan UKUT 130.  The judge said the following at paragraph
    101:-

         "Even if I were to accept that the  Appellant  is  of  lower  level
         interest to the Taliban - which I do not  -  the  country  guidance
         leads me to conclude that such an interest does not lead to a well-
         founded fear of persecution.  This is because the Appellant is  not
         a senior government or Security Services official and is not a  spy
         and therefore, in accordance with the country guidance, is  not  at
         real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul."

14. At paragraph 102 the judge found  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    adduce evidence that would lead her to go against the country  guidance
    regarding  Article  15(c)   of   the   Council   Directive   2011/95/EU
    (Qualification Directive) and that  there  was  not  a  real   risk  of
    serious harm ( " serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or
    person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence   in   situations   of
    international or internal conflict") should  the  Appellant  internally
    relocate to Kabul that would entitle him to subsidiary protection.

15. The judge in the following paragraphs considered the reasonableness  of
    the Appellant relocating to Kabul. The judge found that  the  Appellant
    speaks Pashtu, Farsi and a little English  and  he  would  be  able  to
    communicate and converse in one of the  languages  spoken  in  his  own
    country.  The judge took into account the Appellant's evidence that  he
    had worked for someone who had a fruit business in  Kabul.   The  judge
    found that while the Appellant suffers from mental health problems  his
    physical health was not impaired.

16. The judge found that the Appellant had not disclosed  to  Dr  Singh  or
    Miss Reid that his parents' in-law live in Kabul. She found  that  this
    undermined his credibility. She stated that she had  factored  in  this
    concealment from the experts when deciding what  weight  to  attach  to
    their opinions. The Appellant's oral  evidence  was  that  his  in-laws
    could not support him because he  himself  is  at  risk  and  they  are
    scared. He said Kabul was not safe because the Taliban are  everywhere.
    He said that his in-laws would not allow the  Appellant  to  live  with
    them because he will attract the attention of  the  Taliban.   However,
    the judge concluded that the appeal "turns on  the  Appellant's  mental
    health." She stated as follows:-

         "109. On my findings, the Appellant is not of adverse attention  to
             the Taliban - or indeed Hezb-e-Islami or  the  Afghan  forces.
             The Appellant has failed to adduce any credible  evidence,  on
             the lower standard, as to why  his  parents-in-law  could  not
             accommodate him and support him on return to Kabul.  While the
             Appellant claims not to have seen his wife  and  children  for
             ten years, the Appellant confirmed in his oral  evidence  that
             he is in regular contact with his  wife  in  Pakistan  through
             WhatsApp.   In  my  opinion,  there  is  no  reason  why   the
             Appellant's wife could not arrange with her parents  that  the
             Appellant could stay with them in Kabul while  he  establishes
             himself in the city.

         110. However, in my view, this  appeal  turns  on  the  Appellant's
             mental health and his ability to access treatment and  support
             for his mental health in Kabul.

         Access to mental health in Kabul paragraph

         111.  The Upper Tribunal in  AS  made  the  following  findings  in
             respect of mental health provision in Kabul.

             '241.    The panel in the 2018 UT decision noted that EASO had
                  recorded very high levels of  mental  health  problems  in
                  Afghanistan, creating significant needs,  but  that  there
                  was  a  lack  of  trained  professionals  and   inadequate
                  infrastructure.  It was noted  that  there  was  only  one
                  dedicated mental health hospital in Kabul.

             242. The evidence before us is  consistent  with  the  panel's
                  findings: the  conflict  has  resulted  in  mental  health
                  problems for many inhabitants of Kabul,  but  there  is  a
                  lack  of  facilities  (and  professionals)  available   to
                  provide treatment.  There is no new evidence on this issue
                  to warrant a departure from the findings of the panel.'

         112. The reasons for refusal letter dated 3 April 2019 states  that
             there is treatment available for the Appellant in Kabul.   The
             refusal letter refers to a MedCOI response which confirmed, as
             of 5th February 2019, that inpatient and outpatient  treatment
             by a neurologist as well as inpatient and outpatient treatment
             by a psychiatrist are  available.   The  refusal  letter  also
             states,

              'MedCOI have advised, in response to  another  enquiry,  that
                  the treatment listed  below  is  available  at  the  Nejat
                  Centre, Jadae Darulaman Saraki 2, Habibia School, Kabul,

                  - Inpatient or outpatient treatment and follow  up  by  a
                    psychiatrist;  -  psychotherapy   including   cognitive
                    behavioural therapy;




                  - Psychiatric treatment of PTSD by means of  EMDR  and  -
                    psychiatric treatment of PTSD  by  means  of  narrative
                    exposure therapy.

                  Inpatient treatment by a psychiatrist is available at  the
                  Ali Abad Hospital, Karte Sakhl,  Kabul  University,  Kabul
                  (public facility).

                  Various medicines prescribed for psychiatric treatment are
                  available in Afghanistan (Kabul).'

         113. In terms of the provision of mental health services, Miss Reid
             states that the objective evidence relied on by the Respondent
             is 'misleading or inaccurate'.  She comments,

                  'Firstly, it lists a range of services that exist without
                  realistic comment on true availability in a country  where
                  demand  far  outstrips  demand  (sic).   This  prevents  a
                  misleading account  of  the  availability  of  healthcare.
                  Secondly  it   includes   inaccurate   information   about
                  facilities, citing the Nejat Centre and  Kabul  University
                  as providing mental healthcare.   The  former  is  a  drug
                  rehabilitation centre and is in fact  widely  known  as  a
                  drug treatment and HIV prevention centre.   It  is  not  a
                  place for general mental  health  issues,  in  fact  as  a
                  specialist place  for  drug  users  and  HIV  patients  it
                  unfortunately carries a stigma for those who visit it  ...
                  the report also refers to a mental health  unit  at  Kabul
                  University:  I  was  sceptical  about  this  so  contacted
                  someone  who  works  at  Kabul  University.   Waheed  Wafa
                  (executive director of the  Afghanistan  Centre  at  Kabul
                  University) confirmed that while there was  once  a  small
                  unit in the psychology department which  did  not  receive
                  external patients it has now closed.  Thus the Home Office
                  information about mental health is poorly informed.'

         114. I accept that Miss Reid is an expert on  Afghanistan  for  the
             following reasons.  Firstly, it is clear from Miss  Reid's  CV
             that she has extensive professional and academic  interest  in
             Afghanistan.  She has worked since 2006 on matters relating to
             Afghanistan as a journalist  with  the  BBC,  a  human  rights
             investigator and a consultant.  I also find that her expertise
             is increased by the fact that she lived for several years as a
             freelance journalist and human rights researcher  working  for
             Human Rights Watch from 2007  to  2011,  and,  as  she  states
             herself, 'during this time I travelled all over  the  country,
             interviewing a wide range of actors including  Afghan  victims
             of conflict,  Afghan  and  international  military  officials,
             members  of  the   Taliban,   elders,   diplomats   and   many
             intelligence operators working for  Afghan,  European  and  US
             intelligence agencies'.  Even after Miss  Reid  moved  to  the
             United States to focus on human rights issues  in  Afghanistan
             and  Pakistan  she   continued   to   travel   frequently   to
             Afghanistan.

         115. Secondly, I also attach weight to Miss Reid's opinion that she
             has given expert evidence to the European Parliament,  the  US
             Congress and the Afghan and other government.

         116. Thirdly, Miss Reid's CV indicates an extensive publishing  and
             research record on Afghanistan.

         117. Fourthly, like Dr Singh, Miss Reid has been  provided  by  the
             Appellant's  solicitors  with  documents  that  are  not  only
             supportive to the Appellant but  also  with  the  Respondent's
             bundle.

         118. Finally, Miss Reid recognises that her overriding duty  as  an
             expert is to the Tribunal  and  she  accepts  that  issues  of
             credibility are the provenance of the Tribunal.

         119. For all these reasons, I  attach  significant  weight  to  the
             report of Miss Reid.

         120. In terms of the specific issue of the Appellant's  ability  to
             access mental health services in Kabul, I rely on  the  expert
             evidence of Miss  Reid  that  the  facilities  quoted  by  the
             Respondent as available are not available.  Miss Reid has  not
             simply expressed her opinion that the Respondent's summary  of
             what treatment and facilities for mental health are  available
             in Afghanistan but have contacted the  executive  director  of
             the Afghanistan Centre in Kabul University and asylum  seekers
             from Afghanistan, 30 August 2018.

         132. As well as finding internal relocation to  Kabul  unreasonable
             for this Appellant, I also find internal relocation to Baghlan
             is also unreasonable.

         133. For all these reasons, I allow the appeal on asylum  grounds."



17. The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the  appeal  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and she directed herself in relation to the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department in Kamara [2006] EWCA Civ 813.  The judge
    summarised her conclusions in relation to very significant obstacles as
    follows:-

         "135.    In line with AS, the Appellant will receive some financial
             support as a returnee when he is removed to Kabul.  He has the
             option, on my findings, to live, even on  a  temporary  basis,
             with his parents-in-law and given his previous employment, may
             be able to secure employment in the fruit business.   However,
             I rely on the expert  evidence  of  Miss  Reid  regarding  the
             paucity of mental health services in Afghanistan.  I  find  it
             likely that the Appellant will  not  be  able  to  access  the
             expert treatment and intervention for his mental  health  that
             he requires, as set out by Dr Singh, and I  find  that  he  is
             likely to suffer a significant  deterioration  in  his  mental
             health.   Such  a  deterioration   will   prevent   him   from
             reintegrating to life in Afghanistan and being  enough  of  an
             insider to function within Afghan society.  I  therefore  find
             that  the  Appellant  meets  the  test  of  'very  significant
             obstacles' under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)."

18. The judge however continued to go on and consider Article 8 outwith the
    Rules  and  concluded   that   removal   of   the   Appellant   was   a
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights.



The Grounds of Appeal

19. There is one ground of appeal under  the  heading  "Making  a  Material
    Misdirection of Law. It reads:-

         "The assessment of relocation was otiose bearing in mind  that  the
         Appellant was found to not be at risk on return to his  home  area.
         It is unclear how the Appellant's claimed  mental  health  problems
         amount to a Convention reason such that he is to be recognised as a
         refugee"

20. The finding of very significant obstacles is challenged  on  the  basis
    that "there is no evidence that the Appellant made a valid  application
    in this category ...".  It is also challenged on the basis that:

         "The FTTJ has failed to give adequate reasons for this  finding  in
         light of the  fact  that  the  Appellant  failed  to  disclose  the
         presence of family members in Kabul to the  medical  expert.   They
         did not therefore have the opportunity  to  assess  his  return  in
         light of having family support, which is submitted makes a material
         difference."

21. It is also submitted that basic mental health services are available in
    Kabul.   Section  12  of  the  Country  Policy  and  Information   Note
    Afghanistan: Medical and Healthcare Provision Version 1.0  of  December
    2020 is relied upon.

Submissions

22. I heard oral submissions from the parties.  I indicated my  provisional
    view that there was  an  error  in  the  judge  going  on  to  consider
    relocation on the basis that there was a finding that the Appellant was
    not at risk of return to his home area.

23. The thrust of Ms Isherwood's  submissions  was  that  the  decision  is
    inadequately reasoned, and the judge failed to take into  account  that
    the Appellant has family in Kabul.  The  decision  in  respect  of  the
    reasonableness of relocation is inadequately  reasoned.  There  was  no
    proper assessment of the medical evidence. The judge has not applied DH
    and in any event the appeal could not succeed properly applying DH.  Ms
    Isherwood relied on the CPIN of December 2018, February 2019 and  March
    2019.  The judge did not properly  assess  very  significant  obstacles
    having earlier identified that the Appellant was in  contact  with  his
    wife and could reconnect contact with his in-laws.  The judge  did  not
    apply the correct test.

24. Ms Tobin conceded that there was an error of law but not  that  it  was
    material because I proper reading of the decision  indicates  that  the
    judge found that the Appellant is at risk of persecution as a result of
    his mental health.  However, she could not remember what  she  said  at
    the hearing in respect of DH.  She accepted that it was not  raised  in
    the Grounds of Appeal because the case of DH was not promulgated at the
    time they were drafted. (The grounds were drafted for the first hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal in 2019).  However,  her  view  is  that
    despite what, if anything was said about DH, the judge went on to allow
    the appeal properly applying DH.  If I am not with her  in  respect  of
    that  argument  her  second  argument  was  that  the  judge   properly
    considered return to Baghlan on the basis that it was  not  clear  from
    the decision letter where the Appellant  was  to  be  returned,  either
    Baghlan or Kabul.

25. She said that the challenge under Article 8 was narrow and misconceived
    because the judge did factor into the assessment the  presence  of  the
    Appellant's in-laws in Kabul but decided that this  did  not  make  any
    difference to the medical/expert evidence. She drew my attention to the
    narrow nature of the challenge raised in the  grounds  which  concerned
    inadequate reasons relating to  the  Appellant's  parents-in-law.   She
    submitted that there was no challenge to the credibility  findings  and
    if the decision should be remade, they should be preserved.

Error of law

26. I do not accept that the judge found that the Appellant was at risk  on
    return of persecution on account  of  mental  illness.  This  does  not
    reflect what the judge said at [72].  It was not a ground of appeal and
    not a matter pursued at the hearing. It would not have been open to the
    judge to allow the  appeal  on  this  basis.   The  decision  does  not
    disclose that the judge engaged with the reasoning in DH and applied it
    to the facts.  The judge made a clear finding that  the  Appellant  was
    not at risk of persecution in his home area of Baghlan.

27. In so far as the  grounds  challenge  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    background  evidence,  The  Country   Policy   and   Information   Note
    Afghanistan: Medical and healthcare provision Version 1.0 December 2020
    (2020 CPIN), raised in the grounds, was effective from 9 December.  The
    hearing took place on 19 November 2020. The evidence was not before the
    judge and there was no  reason  why  she  should  have  taken  it  into
    account.  In any event,  while  the  evidence  in  the  2020  CPIN,  at
    paragraph 12, differs in some respects from   the  background  evidence
    cited in the RFRL which was before the judge, neither  the  grounds  of
    appeal nor Ms Isherwood in oral submissions sought to clearly  identify
    any evidence in the  2020  CPIN  which  would  undermine  the  expert's
    consideration of the RFRL.  Ms Reid referred to the background evidence
    that was before the judge and cited in the RFRL. The judge was entitled
    to rely on her  evidence  concerning  this.  The  judge  preferred  her
    evidence to the background evidence relied on by the Secretary of State
    (to which Ms Isherwood draw my  attention  to  in  submissions).   What
    weight to attach to the  evidence  is  a  matter  for  the  judge.  The
    decision is adequately reasoned. It was not argued that the conclusions
    reached by the judge and/or Ms Reid's conclusions are at odds with  the
    country guidance.

28. There was no coherently presented  argument  which  would  lead  me  to
    conclude that the judge should have taken into account the  2020  CPIN.
    There was no coherent argument advanced that if the CPIN 2020 had  been
    before the judge, it would have made any difference to the  outcome  of
    this appeal. The ground as presented to me was an  attempt  to  reargue
    the case and a disagreement with the findings.

29. The grounds do not accurately represent the  decision.  The  judge  was
    entitled to attach weight to the evidence of the  expert  Ms  Reid  and
    gave a number of reasons why relocation would not be  reasonable,  none
    of which have  been  challenged  (see  [115]-[119]).  Contrary  to  the
    grounds, it is unarguable that  the  judge  did  not  factor  into  the
    assessment of the evidence that the Appellant's parents -in  -law  live
    in Kabul and that he had not disclosed this to  the  experts  (I  shall
    engage with this issue later in more detail).

30. Despite there being no material error in the assessment  of  relocation
    to Kabul, it was a wholly unnecessary exercise because it was not  open
    to the judge to allow the appeal on  protection  grounds,  because  she
    made an unequivocal finding that the Appellant is not at risk on return
    to his home area, to which there is no cross challenge.

31. Whether return to Baghlan was reasonable was neither  here  nor  there.
    (It was not stated by Ms Tobin that the Appellant's case was that there
    was a risk of return to the Appellant's home area under  Article  15(c)
    (which is not supported by the evidence of Ms Reid). This would  accord
    with the grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  It was  not
    open to the judge to allow the appeal on protection grounds. The  judge
    materially erred in allowing the appeal on protection grounds.

32. In so far as the  finding  under  paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules is concerned, it is not material that  the  Appellant
    did not make an application in this  category.  Ms  Isherwood  did  not
    pursue this line of challenge. However, the challenge on the basis that
    the decision is inadequately reasoned was  maintained.  It  was  argued
    that the judge did not take into account material matters; namely, that
    the Appellant had failed to disclose to the medical expert that he  has
    family in Kabul.  The judge  at  [128]  acknowledged  that  Dr  Singh's
    conclusions are not "focused  solely or mainly  on  the  emotional  and
    practical supports (sic) which the Appellant receives from his siblings
    in the United Kingdom, a role his parents- in -law could  undertake  in
    Afghanistan". The judge attached weight to the  evidence  of  Dr  Singh
    that the Appellant "needs treatment and interventions and if he  cannot
    obtain such treatment in Afghanistan, it is likely that  the  Appellant
    will experience a significant deterioration in his mental health".  The
    judge considered this evidence in the context of  Ms  Reid's  evidence,
    which was accepted. Notwithstanding that the Appellant could live  with
    his parents-in-law, the judge found that there is a real risk  that  he
    will be unable to access the mental health services and treatment  that
    he needs to manage his condition.

33. The judge gave adequate reasons why she found that there would be  very
    significant obstacles to integration. She accepted that there would  be
    a significant deterioration in the Appellant's health. The decision  is
    adequately reasoned at (see [135]). Ms Isherwood said  that  the  judge
    did not apply the correct test. The grounds, however, contain a reasons
    challenge and do not raise the application of the correct test. In  any
    event, the judge properly directed herself at [134] and she  applied  a
    broad evaluative judgement to the evidence.   The  judge  accepted  the
    medical evidence and the evidence of Ms Reid. There is no challenge  to
    specific findings or to the application of the law in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

34. I set aside the decision of the judge to allow the appeal on protection
    grounds. There is no reason to go behind the decision of the  judge  to
    allow  the  appeal  under  Article  8  on  the  basis  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to integration. That decision is maintained.



Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on protection and humanitarian grounds.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date17 May 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

