
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04822/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Video Link at Field House   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2020                 |On 3 June 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     ddm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.
      Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  I  make
      this order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker and  so  entitled
      to privacy.

   2. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      dismissing the appeal of the  Appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
      Respondent on 2 August 2016 refusing  him  asylum  or  other  kind  of
      international protection.

   3. Regrettably the appeal has been  determined  unsatisfactorily  on  two
      previous occasions and the decision before me is  the  third  Decision
      and Reasons dismissing the appeal.

   4. For the purposes of introduction, it is the Appellant's case  that  he
      has been the bodyguard  of  a  relative  of  a  prominent  Sri  Lankan
      politician but that politician has fallen from favour and  the  former
      bodyguard is now implicated unjustly in  allegations  about  behaviour
      which leave him at risk of serious ill-treatment in the event  of  his
      return.  In outline,  his  application  was  refused  and  his  appeal
      dismissed because he was disbelieved.

   5. The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  is  not  particularly  long.   It
      includes appropriate self-directions on law.

   6. I set out below the findings of fact and reasons that I consider to be
      important.

   7. It is the Appellant's case  that  he  is  a  Sri  Lankan  national  of
      Sinhalese ethnicity who served in the Sri Lankan Army from  July  1996
      until June 2010.  From October 2001 he worked as a  Personal  Security
      Officer to the son of a former high ranking official in the government
      of Sri Lanka.  The Appellant retired from active service in June  2010
      and then arrived in the United Kingdom in September  2010  with  leave
      under Tier 5 to take up a job as a  driver  at  the  Sri  Lankan  High
      Commission.  His employment had been  arranged  by  the  high  ranking
      official.

   8. Following a change of government in 2005 the Appellant claimed to have
      started to receive threats from Sri Lanka owing to his connections  to
      the former regime.  He said that individuals claiming to be  from  the
      new government visited his home.  His employment with the  Sri  Lankan
      High  Commission  was  terminated  in  December  2015  following   his
      conviction for driving with excess alcohol.

   9. The Appellant claimed that he feared  return  to  Sri  Lanka  when  he
      claimed asylum on 3 February 2016.

  10. He said that in around May 2016 officers of the  Sri  Lankan  CID  had
      visited his home.  On 2 June 2016 a warrant was issued for his arrest.
       Particulars of the offence included murder, manslaughter  and  aiding
      and abetting money laundering.

  11. He understood the murder to be the murder of one Wasim Thajudeen whose
      murder was linked to the former president.

  12. The Appellant said that his father had been  detained  and  questioned
      about the Appellant's whereabouts and there had been several visits to
      the Appellant's matrimonial and family homes looking for  him  and  he
      was frightened to go back.

  13. The Judge found that the Appellant  had  served  in  the  army  as  he
      claimed and that he  had  worked  for  the  influential  family  as  a
      Personal Security Officer.  This claim had been made consistently  and
      was supported by photographs and documentation issued by the army.

  14. The Appellant produced a typewritten letter purporting  to  come  from
      the person he protected dated February 2019.  According to that letter
      the  Appellant  is  related  to  the  person  being  protected.    The
      Appellant's   grandfather's   sister   is   the   protected   person's
      grandmother.

  15. The Judge accepted too that the Appellant had been nominated  for  the
      job by the former President and that he was employed from his  arrival
      in September 2010 until he was discharged in December 2015.

  16. The Judge noted at paragraph 22  that  it  was  the  Appellant's  case
      initially that he:

  "Was continuously receiving phone calls from the Foreign Ministry in  Sri
  Lanka saying that his days were over.  However  when  the  Appellant  was
  asked who called him from Sri Lanka, the Appellant stated that they  were
  not personal/direct calls to him, but they were calls to the reception at
  the Sri Lankan High Commission, and it was the staff that told him".

  17. At paragraph 23 the Judge noted that the Appellant did not identify by
      name the person who told him  about  the  calls.   The  Appellant  had
      produced a typed letter on A4 paper dated 28 March 2019 from  a  Ms  M
      (the full name was given but the decision is anonymised).  The  person
      writing the letter identified  herself  as  being  in  charge  of  the
      reception desk in the Sri Lankan High Commission  and  said  that  the
      Appellant received "life  threats  from  the  new  foreign  minister's
      supporters.  There were some telephone calls  I  answered  ...".   The
      sender's address at the top of the letter is in Sri Lanka.

  18. Ms M had provided documents to support her claim that she  had  worked
      as a receptionist at the Sri Lankan High Commission  in  London.   The
      identity documents were issued on 27 August 2012 but her copy passport
      shows she entered the United Kingdom on  9  August  2012.   The  Judge
      said:

  "Although I accept that she was working as a receptionist in 2012  I  see
  no evidence that she was working as a receptionist in 2015.  I note  that
  no such evidence from her had  been  provided  before  until  2019.   The
  Appellant claimed asylum in February 2016 but waited three years in order
  to obtain evidence of such calls".

  19. The Judge also found an inconsistency in the evidence.  Ms M's account
      was that the Appellant received "continuous threats"  and  there  were
      some  telephone  calls  that  she  answered.   The  Judge  found  this
      inconsistent with the Appellant's claim at his asylum  interview  that
      he  received  no  direct  calls  but  all  the  threats  came  through
      reception.  The Judge found this an inconsistency that  detracts  from
      the Appellant's and Ms M's credibility that the  Judge  found  damaged
      the claim and the weight that could be attached to the letter.

  20. The Judge then found it "implausible" that threats would be made  from
      the Sri Lankan Foreign Ministry indirectly through  reception  at  the
      High Commission rather than directly to the Appellant.

  21. The Judge noted that it was the Appellant's case  that  there  was  an
      arrest warrant outstanding against him and a copy of the  warrant  was
      produced with a translation.  The arrest  warrant  was  dated  2  June
      2016.

  22. It was the Appellant's case, set out in a witness statement dated June
      2017, that the Appellant stated in May 2016 that  he  heard  from  his
      wife that officers from CID had visited their house and  were  looking
      for the Appellant, they showed her a piece of paper that they said was
      a warrant for the Appellant's arrest.  The Judge said that he had seen
      a letter from the Appellant's wife saying:

  "later in May 2016, some police officers from  Madolsima  Police  Station
  came to my place with  a  Warrant  of  Arrest  and  enquired  about  [the
  Appellant]".

  23. The Judge had also seen a letter dated 10 June 2017 (a year and a  day
      later) from the Appellant's father stating:

  "in May 2016, a few police officers appear again with a Warrant of Arrest
  against my son ...".

  24. The Appellant's father said that the visitors searched his  house  and
      arrested him and questioned him about the Appellant.

  25. The Judge noted the Appellant's wife had written another letter  dated
      21 March 2019 in which she stated that the date on her previous letter
      was wrong.  It was dated June 2016 but it  was  written  in  2017  not
      2016.  She also made a mistake about when the police visited with  the
      arrest warrant.  She had said that the visit was in May 2016 but  that
      was wrong, the visit was in June 2016.  She said  that  she  gave  the
      wrong date to the Appellant's father when he wrote his letter  and  he
      copied the mistake about when the police came with an  arrest  warrant
      to his house.

  26. The Appellant's father had written another  letter  dated  March  2019
      stating that he had asked  his  daughter-in-law  about  the  date  the
      police came and he was confused.  She had told him the  visit  was  in
      May 2016, he had accepted that but now realised it was June  2016  not
      May.

  27. The Judge began at paragraph 31 with the observation:

  "I note that the Appellant's wife and father has been inconsistent as  to
  the dates that they were visited by the police with an arrest warrant".

  28. The Judge had to decide what weight to give to the document, being  an
      arrest warrant said to be issued on 2 June 2016.  The Judge noted that
      the letter from the Appellant's wife is dated  9  June  2016  but  the
      Appellant's wife has now said that the date is wrong.  The Judge noted
      that if in fact the letter had been written  on  9  June  2016  as  it
      stated, and if in fact the police arrived with an  arrest  warrant  in
      June 2016 as claimed in a  corrected  version,  the  writer  would  be
      recalling an event very shortly before  the  letter  was  dated.   The
      Judge found that the Appellant's wife had  untruthfully  claimed  that
      the letter was written in 2017 not 2016 in order to make more credible
      her claim to have said mistakenly that the warrant  was  delivered  in
      May 2016 when it was in fact delivered in June  2016.   Clearly  there
      would be difficulty in maintaining that it was delivered in  May  2016
      because it is dated June 2016.

  29. The Judge also found that  the  Appellant  had  stated  in  a  witness
      statement that his wife spoke to him on the day the police visited and
      that was in May 2016.  The Judge noted this  was  independent  of  his
      wife's recollection and that the Appellant and his wife and his father
      had all said that the police visited in May 2016 which was problematic
      given the date on the warrant.  The Judge evaluated the evidence as  a
      whole and found he could attach little weight to the evidence  of  the
      Appellant's wife and father.

  30. The Judge then moved on to consider another topic.  The Appellant  had
      not mentioned the arrest warrant at his  substantive  interview.   The
      Appellant said he was not aware of the arrest warrant at the  time  of
      his interview.  However, he told the Judge in  evidence  that  he  was
      first aware of the arrest warrant in the beginning of June 2016.   His
      asylum interview was on 15 July 2016.  He  plainly  did  know  at  the
      second interview about the arrest warrant if in fact  he  was  telling
      the truth.  The Judge  checked  the  record  and  confirmed  that  the
      Appellant had not mentioned the arrest warrant in  the  interview  and
      the Judge found that the Appellant did have  an  opportunity  to  talk
      about the arrest warrant.  The Judge found that this went to the  core
      of the claim and the credibility was damaged.

  31. I have checked the interview record relating to  an  interview  on  15
      July 2016.  There is no mention of the arrest warrant.   It  concluded
      with the formal but important question  "Would  you  like  to  add  or
      clarify anything you have told me today?" and the  Appellant  did  add
      something about his screening interview.  However, the interview began
      at question 3 with the question "Do you have any documents  you  would
      like to submit in support of your asylum  claim?"  and  the  Appellant
      replied in the affirmative referring  to  some  photographs  and  army
      discharge papers.  He was also asked directly at question 4  "Are  you
      expecting any other documents?"

  32. Returning to the Decision and Reasons the Judge noted at paragraph  34
      that it was the Appellant's case that in June 2016  he  spoke  to  his
      wife and told him the police  were  interested  in  him  concerning  a
      murder of a rugby player as well as money laundering and asked why  he
      did not mention  the  murder  of  the  rugby  player.   The  Appellant
      indicated that he had but the record indicated he had not.

  33. The Judge concluded paragraph 34 with:

  "I find that the fact that one of the charges in the  arrest  warrant  is
  murder of the rugby player and that the  Appellant  who  claims  to  have
  known about it in June 2016 but did not mention it in  asylum  interview.
  I find that the fact that the Appellant does  not  mention  at  interview
  that the Appellant is being investigated for the murder of a rugby player
  because of his links with [the  person  he  guarded]  detracts  from  the
  Appellant's credibility and his claim  that  goes  to  the  core  of  his
  claim".

  34. The Judge also noted the Appellant did not mention in  interview  that
      his father was arrested and held overnight. The Appellant said he  had
      had no opportunity to raise it but the Judge noted, as I  have  above,
      the general question near the end of the interview.  The Judge did not
      accept the explanation for not raising these things.

  35. The Judge found the omissions "adversely affects the weight  that  can
      be attached to the court documents produced by the Appellant".

  36. There was a court document date stamped 21 June  2017  but  the  Judge
      noted too what the Judge described as  a  substantial  change  in  the
      Appellant's claim.  Originally it was the Appellant's  claim  that  he
      was harassed by phone calls and pushed out of work by  the  change  of
      government and would face unknown difficulties because  of  his  links
      with the important family.  It was altered to being  investigated  for
      money laundering and the murder of a  rugby  player  after  an  arrest
      warrant  and  court  documents  had  been  produced  but  it  was  the
      Appellant's case that he knew about the arrest warrant soon after  his
      wife and father had been shown the  arrest  warrant  but  he  did  not
      mention it in asylum interview.  The Judge did not believe that  these
      things happened.

  37. The Judge looked again at the court documents and that the murder  was
      in May 2012 at a time when the Appellant was in the United Kingdom and
      found that the contention that the Appellant was linked to the  murder
      made no sense.

  38. The Judge noted a newspaper article and said at paragraph 39:

  "I note the newspaper article from the Colombo Telegraph dated 18 January
  2016 reported 'six individuals, including 'Captain Tissa',  the  personal
  chauffeur of former President Mahinda Rajapaksa, had been traced  by  the
  CID as possible suspects in the  case.   The  CID  has  already  obtained
  travel bans on the six individuals,  preventing  them  from  leaving  the
  country.  According to the Asian Mirror,  top  sources  from  the  police
  headquarters said the CID would arrest suspects before the  end  of  this
  month'.  I find that the six suspects are in Sri Lanka because there is a
  travel ban of not being allowed to leave Sri Lanka.   I  find  that  this
  newspaper article is inconsistent with the court documents  submitted  by
  the Appellant.  I find that this inconsistency reduces  the  weight  that
  can be attached to such documents".

  39. The Judge then noted the letter from an  attorney  instructed  by  the
      Appellant's father.  The Judge said that  having  looked  at  all  the
      evidence in the round, including inconsistent dates about whether  the
      Appellant's family was visited, the  failure  to  mention  the  arrest
      warrant and the murder of the rugby player and money laundering in the
      asylum interview, the inconsistency of the Appellant's story  and  the
      newspaper article and the Appellant supposedly  being  involved  in  a
      murder in Sri Lanka when the Appellant was in the UK,  that  he  would
      attach little  weight  to  the  arrest  warrant  or  the  other  court
      documents.

  40. The Judge noted the Appellant worked as a chauffeur.   He  also  noted
      that the Appellant had been banned from driving for sixteen months for
      an excess alcohol offence. When he had to renew his leave to be in the
      United  Kingdom  the  Sri  Lankan  High   Commission   supported   his
      application for a new visa even though he was not able to  work  as  a
      driver.  However, the application was refused  leave  because  of  his
      conviction and the Judge found that the asylum claim was  not  because
      the Appellant needed protection but because he wanted to remain in the
      United Kingdom and invented a reason for not returning to Sri Lanka.

  41. The Judge found that the Appellant did not  claim  asylum  in  January
      2015 when he claimed he was receiving threats  and  that  this  was  a
      delay that was relevant and discreditable because of Section  8(2)  of
      the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

  42. The Judge found that the Appellant had not told the truth and did  not
      come within any of the categories identified in  country  guidance  as
      being at risk and found no  meritorious  claim  under  Article  8  and
      dismissed the appeal.

  43. The grounds of appeal are drawn by  Ms  Anzani  and  I  consider  them
      below.

  44. The first substantial point criticises the  Judge's  approach  to  the
      evidence of Ms M, the former receptionist in the High Commission.  The
      grounds describe the approach  as  "overtly  critical"  (I  wonder  if
      "overly critical" was intended). For example, it is right  that  Ms  M
      provided evidence of her employment in 2012 but  the  Judge  comments,
      apparently adversely, that there was no independent evidence  of  that
      employment continuing.  The point in the grounds is that there was  no
      reason to doubt that the employment  was  continuing  and  it  was  an
      example of the Judge being unfairly too hard to persuade.

  45. The grounds go on to say that the Judge was wrong  to  describe  Ms  M
      evidence as inconsistent with the Appellant's account.  The  point  is
      the Appellant had said he had no direct calls  and  all  threats  came
      through reception.  The problematic passage is paragraph 24 where  the
      Judge says:

  "I note that the  letter  from  Ms  Mallika  states  that  the  Appellant
  received continuous threats and that there were some telephone calls that
  she  answered.   I  find  that  this  letter  is  inconsistent  with  the
  Appellant's asylum interview in which he stated  he  received  no  direct
  calls himself but that all the threats came through  reception.   I  find
  that this inconsistency detracts from the Appellant's  and  Ms  Mallika's
  credibility and I find that this damages the Appellant's  claim  and  the
  weight that I can attach to the letter".

  46. As Ms Anzani states in the grounds:

  "This finding is based on Ms Mallika having stated that there  were  some
  telephone calls that she answered.  It is unclear how this  evidence  can
  rightly be said to be inconsistent, particularly where the FTTJ failed to
  clarify with the Appellant or anybody else if Ms  Mallika  was  the  only
  receptionist working at the Sri Lankan High Commission in 2015".

  47. At paragraph 9 the grounds complain that the Judge was wrong  to  find
      "implausible" the Appellant's claim that threats were made  indirectly
      through the reception at the Sri Lankan High Commission.   Nothing  is
      identified in country guidance or background  material  that  supports
      such a finding.

  48. Paragraph 11 criticised the Judge  for  commenting  adversely  on  the
      Appellant's failure to say that there was a warrant that he  would  be
      able to produce.  It was the Appellant's contention that he  was  told
      at the start of the interview to only answer the questions  asked  and
      he is being criticised for doing as he was told where criticism  ought
      to be aimed at the interviewing officer for not pressing further.

  49. The second ground is the contention that the Judge has failed to  make
      findings on material issues  or  not  given  proper  reasons  for  the
      findings made.

  50. The point is that the Judge referred to "the letter" from the attorney
      whereas in fact there were two letters.  There are indeed two  letters
      in the Appellant's bundle.  The first is at B(i).  It  comes  from  Mr
      Indika Muhandiram and is dated 6 March 2019.  There  the  writer  says
      that the Appellant's father instructed him "for  a  verification"  and
      that the writer visited the Magistrates' Court in Colombo in  February
      2019 and perused the case file under  the  supervision  of  the  court
      clerk.  A fee was paid and a receipt enclosed.  The attorney said  how
      the matter had been filed by the Criminal Investigation Department and
      the court had  issued  a  warrant  against  the  Appellant  which  was
      "pending and alive".

  51. The second letter is at C on page 46.  This is dated 22 June 2017  and
      encloses the certified copies of the court documents received from the
      Criminal Investigation Department  and  checked  at  the  Magistrates'
      Court.  The attorney noted that that had proceeded in the  absence  of
      the Appellant who could be arrested on return  because  there  was  an
      outstanding warrant.

  52. The grounds complain that no reasons have been given  for  discounting
      this evidence.

  53. The grounds also complain that the Judge did not  refer  to  a  letter
      sent by the CID to the Foreign Ministry dated 12 May  2015  requesting
      the Appellant's personal files in  connection  with  an  investigation
      into the former president's family.  This appears at paragraph  32  of
      the appeal bundle and purports to say what the grounds imply  that  it
      says.

  54. Ms Anzani's submissions were based closely on her grounds.   There  is
      every reason for them to be placed on  the  grounds  which  are  fully
      particularised and careful.  I do however note an observation  in  her
      oral submission that I considered to  be  particularly  apposite.  She
      said "these court letters are important  and  they  are  not  assessed
      properly".

  55. Ms Isherwood contended there was no material error.  Particularly  she
      said that at paragraph 43 of the Decision and Reasons the  Judge  said
      that the Rajapaksa family were now in power.  They  were  returned  to
      power on 16 December 2019.  If the  Appellant's  problems  started  in
      2015 when there was a change of government  there  was  no  reason  to
      think that he would be at any risk to anybody now.

  56. Further, she submitted that the disputed findings  were  open  to  the
      Judge.  The Judge was entitled to say that there was a change from the
      Appellant saying initially that he was  continuously  receiving  phone
      calls from the Foreign Ministry to him saying later  that  there  were
      calls about him to the reception of the High Commission and the  staff
      reported them.

  57. This has to be set in context.  The recorded answer to question  7  of
      the interview is:

  "And also I got harassed continuously  receiving  phone  calls  from  the
  Foreign Ministry in LKA saying that my days are over.  Also the  staff  I
  used to be friendly with them and they kind of stopped talking to me".

  58. However, the next question 28 was:

  "Who called you from the Foreign Ministry in LKA?"

The recorded reply is:

  "It wasn't person calls the calls came to the reception:  official  calls
  came from the reception staff they told me I have to start packing now".

  59. Then in answer to the next question 29 the Appellant confirmed that he
      had not received any direct calls.

  60. Ms Isherwood contended it was also open to the Judge  to  decide  that
      the warrant could have been mentioned in the interview.   It  was  the
      Appellant's case that he knew about it.  The Judge was  also  entitled
      to find it undermining credibility that the  newspapers  report  about
      the murder of a rugby player did not chime with  the  Appellant's  own
      account.

  61. In reply Ms Anzani said that the return of the family  to  power  does
      not nullify the potential danger.  There is a stop list and an  arrest
      warrant.

  62. I remind myself that it is my task to determine if there is a material
      error of law in the decision.

  63. There are aspects of the Judge's analysis of the evidence of Ms M that
      concern me.  The Judge is right to say that there was no  evidence  of
      her working as a receptionist after 2012 other than her assertion  and
      the Appellant's assertion but it is also right to say that  there  was
      no obvious reason to require such evidence. However it is hard to  say
      that the Judge's correct observation was a significant feature in  the
      Judge's reasoning.

  64. Of more concern to the Judge was the fact that the  evidence  did  not
      emerge until three years after the asylum claim had been made.

  65. I cannot agree with the  Judge  at  paragraph  24  that  there  is  an
      inconsistency between Ms M's  evidence  that  the  Appellant  received
      continuous threats and  there  were  some  telephone  calls  that  she
      answered and the Appellant's own  claim  that  all  the  threats  came
      through reception.  This is answered completely in Ms Anzani's grounds
      and submissions.  There  is  no  evidence  that  there  was  only  one
      receptionist at the Sri Lankan High  Commission  and  there  is  every
      reason to assume there are more than one.  I do not  accept  that  the
      inconsistency that bothered the Judge at paragraph 24 exists.

  66. However, the Judge was perfectly entitled to find the whole concept of
      the Appellant being threatened by phone calls to the reception desk at
      the High Commission "implausible".  This  part  of  his  claim  really
      makes no sense.   I  do  not  understand  why  anybody  interested  in
      interviewing the Appellant as part of a criminal  investigation  would
      want to warn him not to return to Sri Lanka, if they did, why they did
      not tell him directly but sent messages through a third party.  I  can
      think of no good reason for the Appellant's alleged enemies wanting to
      warn him  through  a  third  party.  However,  it  clearly  suits  the
      Appellant's case for another person to know about the threats so  that
      person could give evidence.

  67. I do not agree with Ms Anzani that the Judge was not entitled to  draw
      adverse inferences from the failure to  mention  the  arrest  warrant.
      The interview is controlled to some extent but the Appellant was given
      an opportunity to raise other matters and did not take it.  The arrest
      warrant is important and  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  draw  adverse
      inferences from the failure to raise it.

  68. The Judge was also entitled to draw adverse inferences from the muddle
      in the evidence about when  the  arrest  warrant  was  delivered.   At
      paragraph 31 the  Judge  gives  perfectly  proper  reasons  for  being
      doubtful  about  the  supporting  evidence  about  the  warrant.   The
      Appellant's wife and father have got in a muddle in  their  chronology
      and it is hard to see why that would  happen  if  they  were  truthful
      people.

  69. At paragraph 32 the Judge noted the Appellant  had  said  he  did  not
      mention his arrest warrant at his substantive interview because he was
      not aware of it at the time.  The Appellant had said in evidence  that
      he was first aware of the arrest warrant in the  first  week  of  June
      2016.  His asylum interview was in July 2016 so some six  weeks  later
      or thereabouts.  The Appellant accepted that at the  second  interview
      he knew about the arrest warrant and he said that it was "according to
      my knowledge I mentioned it in the interview".  He  did  not  and  the
      Judge was entitled to draw adverse inferences.

  70. Ms Anzani makes good points when she complains that the Judge did  not
      give clear findings, or rather an explanation for his findings, on the
      letters from Sri Lankan attorney  but  this  has  to  be  set  against
      paragraph 33 where the Judge found the failure to mention  the  arrest
      warrant at interview damages the credibility of the claim  that  there
      was such a warrant and that was something the Judge did bear  in  mind
      when assessing the weight to the documents obtained  from  Sri  Lanka.
      The  point  is  that  when  assessing  that  evidence  the  Judge  had
      acknowledged evidence making it doubtful that there  was  anything  to
      produce and factored that into his evaluation.  That  was  permissible
      in law.

  71. At paragraph 37 there is a clear finding that the Appellant would have
      mentioned the warrants at interview  if  they  had  been  genuine  and
      available.  This is a permissible finding.

  72. I do not follow the Judge's reasoning about the harmful effect of  the
      newspaper report concerning "Captain Tissa".   I  have  no  reason  to
      assume that newspaper reports are particularly reliable.   I  can  see
      how a newspaper report that agreed with the Appellant's account  could
      support his account but not  how  one  that  disagreed  undermined  it
      though it is to be noted the Judge said at paragraph 39 that he  found
      the inconsistency "reduces the weight that can  be  attached  to  such
      documents".

  73. The Judge was entitled to make adverse findings as he did at paragraph
      41 and 42 about the timing of the claim and to factor  them  into  his
      overall evaluation.

  74. I remind myself, as the Judge was perfectly  aware,  that  credibility
      findings have to be made on an evaluation of the evidence as  a  whole
      and it is always troubling to say that a  finding  is  sound  when  it
      includes elements that are not sound and I have reflected carefully on
      this.  Nevertheless, it is my view having gone into the  Decision  and
      Reasons and the evidence with, I  hope,  considerable  care  that  the
      Judge has given lawful reasons  to  support  his  adverse  credibility
      finding and they are not undermined by other strands of reasoning that
      might be less satisfactory.  In particular, the Judge was entitled  to
      rely on the incongruity of the claim, the late arrival  of  supporting
      evidence from Sri Lanka, and the timing of the claim  and  the  muddle
      over the date of the warrant being  served  or  the  attempted  arrest
      being made.

  75. Further, I can find no satisfactory answer to  Ms  Isherwood's  "trump
      card", namely the unchallenged finding that the Appellant's fear is of
      somebody who is out of power and been replaced by the  person  he  was
      supposed to have helped.  Ms Anzani may well be right to say that that
      change of government does not take the Appellant off a wanted list but
      if the Appellant is telling the truth  it  would  surely  be  an  easy
      matter not to stay on that list.

  76. I am not satisfied that there is a material error of law and I dismiss
      this appeal.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 May 2021                    |

