
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04077/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2017                      |On 3 October 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                VIET QUOC DAU
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P Asimwe, instructed by Pillai & Jones Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shanahan promulgated 20.6.17, dismissing on all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    15.4.16, to refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted permission to appeal on 17.7.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 2.10.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to  require  the
    decision of Judge Shanahan to be set aside.

 5. I am bemused as to why permission to appeal was granted in  this  case.
    The grant of permission suggest that it is arguable that the  judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account the explanation  of
    the interpreter at Q41 of the substantive asylum interview, in relation
    to  a  warrant.  The  interpreter  suggested  that  there  had  been  a
    misunderstanding.

 6. However, it is clear that the judge  spent  considerable  time  in  the
    decision assessing this very issue, between [16] and [25] and again  at
    [41]. The judge fully took into account the argument that the interview
    is defective and could  not  be  relied  on  because  of  alleged  poor
    translation and interpretation. At [20]  the  judge  recorded  that  he
    asked the appellant is there was anything  else  other  than  that  one
    matter that had not been  interpreted  correctly,  with  the  appellant
    confirming  that  there  was  not.  Despite  what  was  said   by   the
    interpreter, the judge explained at [21] that the answers given by  the
    appellant outside of Q41 remained inconsistent  and  not  reconcilable,
    whether or not he ever personally received a copy of the warrant.

 7. It is not clear to me what more the judge could have done. The decision
    was  well-made  and  provided  clear  and  cogent  reasoning  for   the
    conclusions reached. No error of law is disclosed.

Conclusion & Decision

 8. The for the reasons explained above, the making of the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a  point
    of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


