
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/04429/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 May 2017                        |On 12 May 2017                       |
|Prepared on 11 May 2017               |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. M.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
                    Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant says that he is a citizen of Iraq.  He  entered  the  UK
      illegally and made an application for protection on 22  October  2015.
      The Respondent refused that application on  20  April  2016,  and  the
      Appellant's appeal to the First tier  Tribunal  ["FtT"]  against  that
      decision was heard on  14  October  2016.  It  was  dismissed  on  all
      grounds, in a decision promulgated on 20 October 2016  by  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Hands.
   2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  23
      January 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on the basis that it  was
      arguable the decision did not engage with the  evidence  relied  upon,
      or, the submissions that had been made on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
      Thus it was arguable the Appellant had not enjoyed a fair  hearing  of
      his appeal.
   3. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 Notice in relation to the grant  of
      permission dated 10 February 2017, although as Mr Diwnycz  accepts  it
      does not properly engage with the Appellant's case. Neither party  has
      made formal application to adduce further evidence.  Thus  the  matter
      comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   4. The Appellant said from the outset that his home was the city of Gwer.
      This city does not  lie,  as  the  Judge  concluded,  in  the  Kurdish
      Regional Governate [52]. It was, as the Respondent had accepted in her
      refusal an area that was under the control of ISIS, and thus lay in  a
      "contested  area"  for  the  purposes  of  any  consideration  of  the
      Appellant's ability to return to his home area  in  safety,  and,  his
      ability to obtain documents from his home area.  Since  the  Appellant
      denied having any identity documents in his possession this issue also
      went to the heart of the question of whether his return  to  Iraq  was
      "feasible" for the purposes of his humanitarian protection appeal.  It
      is therefore common ground before me that  the  Judge  approached  the
      appeal upon the basis of a significant and material error of fact, and
      that this amounted to a material error of law.
   5. The Judge also  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible
      witness. Much  of  his  account  had  however  been  accepted  by  the
      Respondent as true, and the relevant  concessions  of  fact  were  not
      withdrawn. Before me the Respondent accepts that the Judge's  approach
      to the issue of credibility as reasoned in  paragraphs  45-47  of  the
      decision was inadequate and unsafe.
   6. Finally, whilst the Judge did not have the benefit of the decision  of
      the Upper Tribunal in BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT  18,
      there was objective evidence placed before her that  was  also  before
      the Upper Tribunal in  that  appeal,  and  also  the  various  country
      information reports upon Iraq of August 2016. It  is  plain  that  the
      Judge's approach to  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  could
      physically be returned to the KRG, or relocate there after a return to
      Baghdad did not foreshadow the approach of the Upper Tribunal to  that
      issue. The Respondent accepts that the approach to this issue is  also
      unsafe,  and,  that  there  was  no  adequate  consideration  of   the
      Appellant's ability to relocate to Baghdad itself as one who would  be
      perceived, correctly, to be a Sunni Kurd from the area  of  Gwer.  The
      issue of relocation goes to both the  asylum,  and,  the  humanitarian
      protection grounds of appeal.
   7.  In  the  circumstances,  as  the  Respondent  accepts,  the  decision
      discloses material errors of law that  render  the  dismissal  of  the
      appeal unsafe, and the decision must in the circumstances be set aside
      and remade. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to
      remit the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be  reheard,  or
      whether  to  proceed  to  remake  it  in  the   Upper   Tribunal.   In
      circumstances where it would appear that the relevant evidence has not
      properly been considered by the First Tier  Tribunal,  the  effect  of
      that error of law has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity
      for his case to be properly considered by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;
      paragraph 7.2(a) of the  Practice  Statement  of  25  September  2012.
      Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise is such that
      having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
      appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b)
      of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.  Having  reached  that
      conclusion, with the agreement of the parties  I  make  the  following
      directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing at the North  Shields  hearing  centre.
        The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Hands.
    ii) A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required for  the  hearing  of  the
        appeal.
   iii) The time estimate is estimated to be 3 hours.
    iv) It is not anticipated by the Respondent that she  has  any  further
        evidence to be filed. The Appellant anticipates that  a  review  of
        the evidence is required and that a short further witness statement
        may be filed. The Appellant is therefore  to  file  and  serve  any
        further evidence to be relied upon at his appeal by 5pm 25 May 2017
     v) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
        available date at the North Shields hearing  centre  after  29  May
        2017 for final hearing, but given the location of  the  Appellant's
        representatives it shall only be listed after consultation with the
        Appellant's solicitors. Whilst it is desirable that Ms  Sanders  be
        available to present the appeal it is not necessary that she should
        do so.
    vi) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
   vii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

   8. The decision promulgated on 20 October 2016 did involve the making  of
      an error of law sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and
      reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal
      with the directions set out above.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 11 May 2017
