
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04962/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2019                   |On 21 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 YOUMNA [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Bisson, P N Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is  a  national  of  Lebanon.   She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 12 January 2017 as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  and  applied
    for asylum on 16 February 2017.  Her  application  was  refused  on  17
    August 2017 and she appealed but she became appeal rights exhausted  by
    22 February 2018.

2.   Meanwhile, she had married a Palestinian on  15  July  2017  and  their
    daughter, AMT, was born on 11 August 2018. By that time,  she  and  her
    husband had separated.

3.   She lodged further submissions on 19  March  2019  asserting  that  she
    feared persecution on account of her sur place political activities  in
    the United Kingdom.  She also asserted that she would be  returning  to
    Lebanon as a sole female with a child who is stateless. Her application
    was refused on 6 May 2019 and she appealed against this decision. First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  dismissed  her  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 July 2019.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted her permission  to  appeal  on
    19 August 2019 on three of the five grounds of appeal.



ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   Counsel for the Appellant made oral  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    nationality of the Appellant's daughter and the manner in which  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Greasley addressed her Section 55 rights. The  Home
    Office Presenting Officer then replied. I have taken their  submissions
    into account when reaching my decision below.



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   In paragraph 23 of his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley
    noted that "the appellant had provided a copy of her  daughter's  birth
    certificate which named the father as Mahmoud Taha and that  his  place
    of birth was Lebanon" and concluded  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    support the claim that the daughter's father was in fact Palestinian".

7.   When reaching this finding the Judge failed to take  into  account  the
    fact that  the  Appellant's  marriage  certificate  confirms  that  she
    married a man called Mahmoud Taha, who was 26  years  old  on  15  July
    2017. There is also a UK Border Agency Application  Registration  Card,
    and a copy of a Residence Card, which confirms his date of birth  as  9
    January 1991. The former document also confirms that he is Palestinian,
    as does a Bail  201  document,  which  refers  to  his  nationality  as
    Palestinian Authority.

8.   His photograph is attached to the Bail 201 and clearly shows  the  same
    man as the one issued with a Special ID Card for  Palestinian  Refugees
    issued by the Republic of Lebanon, on 23 February 2010. It  also  gives
    his date of birth as 9 January 1991.

9.   The fact that the Appellant's daughter's birth  certificate  gives  her
    father's  place  of  birth  as  Lebanon  is  not  conclusive   of   his
    nationality. Lebanon nationality  law  is  not  based  on  a  jus  soli
    principle and article 1 of the Lebanese Nationality Law does not extend
    a right of citizenship to those born in  the  Lebanon  merely  on  that
    basis.

10.  The expert report by Nadia Bazzaz, dated  10  December  2019,  says  at
    paragraph 60 that "a child is deemed Lebanese "if the child is born  of
    a Lebanese father". In paragraph 61 she also explained that:

         "Like many neighbouring countries, Lebanese mothers are  unable  to
         pass their Lebanese nationality on to their children as Lebanon  is
         a  patrilineal  society  and  the  law  reflects  the  concept   of
         nationality only being inherited through a father...".

11.  Therefore, as the Appellant's daughter's father is Palestinian, she  is
    not entitled to Lebanese citizenship.

12.  The letter from the State of Palestine Palestinian Mission to  the  UK,
    dated 26 October 2018, also explained that  the  Mission  cannot  issue
    Palestinian passports to  Palestinian  refugees  living  abroad.  These
    passports can only be issued in Gaza and the West Bank.  Therefore,  it
    would appear that the Appellant's daughter's father is not entitled  to
    a Palestinian passport, which is why he has to travel on a  special  ID
    card for Palestinian refugees.

13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley failed  to  take  into  account  the
    totality of the evidence which indicated on a  balance  of  probability
    that, as the father of the Appellant's child is a  Palestinian  refugee
    born in Lebanon and with no right to live in Gaza or the West Bank  and
    as she is not entitled to Lebanese citizenship, she is stateless.

14.  Furthermore, the best  interests  assessment  conducted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley was undermined by the fact that he  had  failed
    to understand that the  Appellant's  daughter  is  stateless.  He  also
    failed to take into account that paragraph  64  of  the  expert  report
    stated that, as a consequence, she would have to  renew  her  residency
    annually and would face difficulties accessing  education  and  medical
    care.

15.  In paragraph 51 of his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley
    relied on an assertion by  the  Respondent  in  paragraph  151  of  her
    refusal letter that the Appellant's daughter would be  eligible  for  a
    grant of a temporary residence  permit.  However,  this  relied  on  an
    election promise made before the  last  elections  in  Lebanon  and  no
    evidence was provided that any action has now been taken to address the
    difficulties faced by children whose fathers are not Lebanese.

16.  In addition, in the light of the unequivocal expert  evidence  relating
    to the acquisition of Lebanese nationality by birth  and  the  evidence
    that  her  father  was  Palestinian,  it  was  not  necessary  for  the
    Appellant's daughter to apply for Lebanese citizenship to be aware that
    she was not entitled to it.

17.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew did not give permission to  appeal  in
    relation to ground 5 of the Appellant's grounds of appeal.  However,  I
    have noted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley assumed in paragraph
    47 of his decision that it was necessary for an expert to interview  an
    appellant  before  providing  a  report  which  would  conform  to  the
    necessary professional standards. However, in my opinion, this  is  not
    the case. Unlike when preparing a medical report, the  expert  was  not
    being asked to undertake a physical or psychological assessment of  the
    Appellant or her daughter.  She  was  being  asked  to  provide  expert
    country evidence in relation to the political situation in Lebanon  and
    Lebanese nationality law.

18.  The expert explained her qualifications to provide such  a  report  and
    outlined the instructions she  had  been  given.   She  also  made  the
    necessary "Expert Declaration" at paragraphs 78 to 86 of her report and
    signed a Statement of Truth at the end of her report.

19.  Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley it is also  arguable  and
    I take the point that he erred in law when considering what  weight  he
    could give to the expert report.

20.  For all of these reasons First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley's  decision
    did contain errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

 (2) First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Greasley or First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew.



DIRECTIONS

1.   The appeal is to be remitted to Hatton Cross IAC to  be  heard  on  the
    first open date after 20 January 2020. (This is to give the Appellant's
    representatives time to  consider  whether  an  application  for  leave
    should be made by the Appellant's daughter as a stateless person and to
    give both parties the  time  to  consider  what  status,  if  any,  the
    Appellant's daughter would  have  in  Lebanon  as  the  daughter  of  a
    Palestinian refugee who had himself been born in Lebanon.)


Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 17 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

