
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04079/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 January 2018                         |On 17 January 2018               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Appelllant
                                     and

                                    [O A]
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr A Malik, instructed by Kilc
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Samimi promulgated 7.7.17, allowing on human rights
    grounds the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State,  dated  19.4.17,  to  refuse  [her]  protection  claim  made  on
    20.10.16.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 25.5.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brunnen  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    10.10.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 9.1.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. I note that there is no appeal against that part of the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal  on  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons summarised below, I found such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside and remade by remitting it to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. The grounds submit that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  law  by
    finding that for the purpose of article 8  ECHR  the  appellant  has  a
    family life in the UK, without giving adequate reasons for making  such
    a finding.

 8. The judge noted that the appellant does not  live  with  her  son,  but
    found that he supports her financially and  emotionally.  However,  she
    has other family members in  the  UK,  and  lives  with  a  friend  who
    provides her with accommodation in a different  area  to  the  son,  in
    Croydon. Whilst she sees her son regularly, he has his own  family  and
    busy working life separate and independent of  his  mother,  living  in
    East London.

 9. At [13] the judge found that the appellant has been  an  emotional  and
    intrinsic part of her family in the UK and wholly reliant  on  her  son
    and her friend. However, the judge conflated the issue of  what  family
    or social support she might have on return to Nigeria with the issue of
    identifying the extent of her article 8 qualifying family life  in  the
    UK.

10. The judge has not provided any cogent  reasoning  why  the  mother  was
    found to be so emotionally reliant or dependent on her son, and did not
    identify what circumstances beyond the normal blood and emotional  ties
    to be expected between a parent and an independently living  adult  son
    with  his  own  family,  so  as  to  render  removal  disproportionate.
    Similarly,  the  judge  failed  to  identify  what  other  than  normal
    emotional ties there is about her relationship to her young grandson in
    the UK. The mere fact of these family relationships  and  ties  is  not
    sufficient alone to engage article 8 ECHR,  or  if  engaged  to  render
    interference disproportionate. As held in Kugathas, "neither blood ties
    nor the concern and affection that ordinarily  go  with  them  are,  by
    themselves or together, enough to constitute family life.  Most  of  us
    have close relations of whom we are extremely fond and whom  we  visit,
    or who visit us, from time to time; but none of us would say  on  those
    grounds alone that we share family life in any sense capable of  coming
    within the meaning and purpose of article 8."

11. Whilst I accept that reasons in a decision can be briefly stated, to be
    adequate they must be at least clear and decipherable to the parties. I
    also accept that such an assessment is fact-sensitive  and  may  differ
    with cases to be decided on their own particular facts. However, I find
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to provide adequate reasoning and I
    am not satisfied that the judge applied the correct test at all on  the
    facts of this case. It follows that the decision to allow the appeal on
    human rights grounds cannot stand and must be set aside.

Remittal

12. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the reasoning for findings on
    a crucial issue at the heart  of  an  appeal  are  unclear,  the  error
    vitiates all other relevant findings of fact and the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

13. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, I do so on the basis that this is a case which
    falls squarely within the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing and  that  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2 to deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  including  with  the
    avoidance of delay, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusion & Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh in the First-
                    tier Tribunal in accordance with the attached
                    directions.

                    [pic]

                    Signed

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                    Dated

Consequential Directions

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House;

16. The ELH is 3 hours;

17. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the  appellant's
    protection claim have not been challenged and shall stand as made.  The
    remitted appeal is strictly limited to human rights grounds only.

18. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Samimi;

19. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

20. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. However, I was not asked to make any anonymity direction and  on
the  unchallenged  findings  can  see  no  reason  to  do  so.   Given   the
circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus no fee award can be made.

                    [pic]

                    Signed

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                    Dated
