
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04349/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th February 2019                         |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     NI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam of Counsel instructed by Hamlet Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Loke (the  judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 8th January 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh  born  30th  June  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK in November 2009 as a student.  On 25th  August  2016
    he claimed asylum on the basis of his political opinion, that being his
    involvement with the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP).

 3. The international protection and human rights claim was refused on 29th
    March 2018.

 4. The appeal was heard by the judge on 12th  December  2018.   The  judge
    heard evidence from the Appellant and did not find him to be  credible.
    The judge considered court documents said to  emanate  from  Bangladesh
    and found that they could not be relied  upon.   The  judge  found  the
    Appellant would not be at risk if returned to  Bangladesh.   The  judge
    considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention, finding that  the
    Appellant had not developed family life in the UK.  Little  weight  was
    attached to his private life because it had been established  while  in
    the UK with a precarious immigration status.  The judge concluded  that
    the Appellant's removal to Bangladesh would be proportionate and  would
    not breach Article 8.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. The Appellant's solicitors relied upon four grounds.

 6. Firstly it was contended that the judge was wrong at  paragraph  11  to
    conclude "there is no credible evidence of any compelling circumstances
    that would merit consideration outside the  ambit  of  the  Immigration
    Rules."  It was contended that the judge had failed to follow  guidance
    given in MF Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).

 7. Secondly it was  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  placing  "over
    reliance on section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004".  It was submitted that  the  Appellant  had
    not concealed any information nor misled the court.

 8. Thirdly it was submitted the judge erred in concluding that she was not
    satisfied even to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  required.   It  was
    submitted that an "assessment of lower standard would require  being  a
    little bit lenient  on  to  the  evidence.   From  the  outset  of  the
    determination it appears  that  the  FTTJ  has  been  negative  to  the
    appeal."

 9. Fourthly it was  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's private life in the UK and had failed to make an assessment
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

The Grant of Permission

10. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  in  the
    following terms;

         "It is arguable that the judge has misdirected herself  by  failing
         to consider the Appellant's facts and circumstances under paragraph
         276ADE of the Immigration Rules before going  on  to  consider  his
         facts and circumstances outside the Immigration Rules under Article
         8 of the ECHR."

11. Following the grant of permission to  appeal  the  Respondent  did  not
    lodge a response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

12. Directions were given that there should be an oral hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

13. At the oral  hearing  Mr  Alam  relied  upon  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal had been granted with the exception  of  Ground  1
    which did not appear to relate to this appeal.  I  was  asked  to  find
    that  the  judge  had  erred   in   failing   to   consider   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  In addition although Mr Alam accepted that the  grounds
    were generic, I was asked to find that  they  challenged  the  findings
    made by the judge  in  relation  to  the  protection  claim.   Mr  Alam
    submitted that the judge had erred by not making a factual  finding  as
    to whether the Appellant was a member of the BNP.   In  addition  there
    were documents submitted from the BNP which had not been considered.

14. On behalf of the Respondent it was accepted that the judge had erred by
    failing to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) but this was  not  material
    as there was no evidence before the judge which could  amount  to  very
    significant obstacles.  It was submitted that the decision of  the  FTT
    disclosed no error in relation to the protection claim.

15.  I consider that Mr Alam was  correct  not  rely  upon  Ground  1.   It
    clearly has no application to this case.

16. I find that the grounds do not disclose any error of law in relation to
    the  consideration  by  the  judge  of  the   Appellant's   claim   for
    international protection.  Paragraph  9  demonstrates  that  the  judge
    applied the correct burden and standard of proof.  The judge  carefully
    considered   the   Appellant's   credibility   and    noted    relevant
    inconsistencies.   The  judge  was  entitled   to   find   that   those
    inconsistencies went to the core of the claim.   The  judge  considered
    court documents submitted by the Appellant at paragraphs 15 and 16  and
    applied  the  appropriate  principles,  noting  that  it  was  for  the
    Appellant to show that those documents could be relied upon.  The judge
    found the documents could not be relied upon and gave adequate  reasons
    for that finding.

17. In my view the judge erred at  paragraph  18  in  making  reference  to
    section 8(6) as the appropriate reference should have been  to  section
    8(5) as the Appellant had made  a  claim  for  asylum  after  receiving
    notification of an Immigration Decision.  That is not a material  error
    of law.  There is reference in the grounds submitted on behalf  of  the
    Appellant to section 8(2) but the judge makes no reference to that, and
    I cannot see any error of law on this point.

18.  The  judge  erred  in  failing  to  specifically  consider   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  which  was  relied  upon  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument.  However in  the  circumstances  I  find  the  error  is  not
    material.

19. To succeed with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) the Appellant must
    show  that  there  would  be  very   significant   obstacles   to   his
    reintegration into Bangladesh.  He replied upon two issues  before  the
    FTT, those being his political activities, and  his  relationship  with
    his nephew.  The judge in fact dealt with both of  those  issues.   The
    judge found that the Appellant would not be at risk by  reason  of  his
    political activities as his account was not accepted as credible.  With
    reference to his nephew the judge considered this at  paragraphs  23-27
    and found that the Appellant had not developed  a  family  relationship
    with his  nephew  and  that  the  main  carer  of  his  nephew  is  the
    Appellant's uncle.  The judge found that the uncle is the nephew's main
    and primary carer and made a specific  finding  at  paragraph  27  that
    there was no evidence to indicate that the uncle or  the  nephew  would
    suffer  any  practical  or  emotional  difficulties  if  the  Appellant
    returned to Bangladesh.

20. The judge noted that the Appellant's skeleton argument raised the issue
    of depression, and dealt with this at paragraph 20 recording  that  the
    Appellant gave evidence that he  had  no  mental  health  issues.   The
    Appellant's Counsel did not  address  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's alleged depression.   The  judge  noted  the  lack  of  any
    medical evidence to show that the Appellant  had  been  diagnosed  with
    depression.  The judge found that the Appellant would not be at risk if
    returned to Bangladesh, having found that his claim in relation to  his
    political activities was not credible.  The Appellant did not have  any
    medical issues that could not be treated in Bangladesh.  The  Appellant
    is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He  had  resided  in  Bangladesh  for  the
    greater part of  his  life.   The  judge  specifically  considered  the
    Appellant's claimed relationship with his nephew and made findings upon
    that, finding there was no family relationship which engaged Article 8.

21. There was therefore no evidence before the judge to indicate  that  the
    Appellant would encounter very significant obstacles to his integration
    in Bangladesh.  Points raised in the Appellant's skeleton  argument  on
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  were  considered,  analysed  and  dealt  with
    adequately by the judge despite the lack of any specific  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

22. The judge considered the evidence in the round, and made findings  open
    to her to make on that evidence and provided  sustainable  reasons  for
    the findings.  The decision does not disclose a material error of law.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 28th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
