
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04407/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2018                         |On 21st December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                   H D A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo of Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Powell (the Judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 7th August 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq.  He  was  born  on  1st  May  1991
    making him 27 years of age at the date of hearing.

 3. The Appellant entered the UK on 2nd November 2017 and  claimed  asylum.
    His claim was based upon his fear of  persecution  as  a  member  of  a
    particular social group that being doctors in Iraq, and he also  feared
    that he would be at risk if returned to Iraq, from the Al Baydani tribe
    because he had a relationship with a member  of  the  tribe  which  was
    discovered by her family.

The Refusal

 4.  The  Appellant's  human  rights  claim  and  claim  for  international
    protection was refused on 18th March 2018.  The Respondent accepted the
    Appellant's nationality, but not the remainder of his account.  It  was
    not accepted that he would be at risk by reason of being  a  doctor  in
    Iraq.  It was not accepted that he had  been  in  a  relationship,  and
    therefore it was  not  accepted  that  he  would  be  at  risk  from  a
    particular tribe.

 5. In any event the Respondent found that if the  Appellant  would  be  at
    risk if returned to his home area, which was not  accepted,  he  had  a
    reasonable internal relocation option to Baghdad  which  would  not  be
    unduly harsh.  It was not accepted that the Appellant would be at  risk
    if returned to Iraq and therefore he was not entitled  to  a  grant  of
    asylum or humanitarian protection, and it was  not  accepted  that  his
    removal from the UK would breach any human rights protected by the 1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 6. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant, and took into account  the
    Respondent's bundle of documents,  the  Appellant's  bundle  containing
    sections  A-D,  and  the  Appellant's  skeleton  argument.   The  judge
    concluded that doctors as a profession form part of a social  group  in
    Iraq but that the group requires further definition.  The  judge  found
    that the social group in  question  is  one  consisting  of  practising
    doctors.  The judge found that the Appellant is not a practising doctor
    in Iraq and therefore he is not part of that particular social group.

 7. The Appellant did not claim to be a practising  doctor  in  Iraq.   His
    case was that he had left Iraq in 2014.  He had qualified as  a  doctor
    in Ukraine.  He wished to practise as a doctor  in  Iraq  but  believed
    that he would be at risk if he did so.

 8. The judge went on to consider a scenario in which the particular social
    group consisted of doctors whether practising or  not.   Such  a  group
    would include the Appellant, but the judge found that this did not mean
    that the Appellant personally faced a real risk  of  persecution.   The
    judge found that the evidence  indicated  that  doctors  are  generally
    targeted because of their high salaries and lifestyle and a belief that
    they can be extorted or held for ransom.  There is also  evidence  that
    some doctors are targeted  by  militias  for  a  variety  of  political
    reasons.

 9. The judge found that the Appellant would not be targeted on his  return
    as he has not worked as a doctor in Iraq.  He does not have a job as  a
    doctor awaiting him, and it was not likely he would be recognised as  a
    doctor simply because he had published evidence of his graduation as  a
    doctor on Facebook.  He did not have an income or lifestyle that  would
    mark him out as ripe for extortion.  He did  not  fit  the  profile  of
    doctors or medics who had been targeted.

10. The judge found that the Appellant would not be at risk as at the  date
    of hearing, and if in future he established himself in  practice  as  a
    doctor in Iraq, 'and gains the trappings that have led to some  doctors
    being targeted, is not a matter for me to decide today.'

11. The judge found that the Appellant would not be at  risk  from  the  Al
    Baydani tribe.  It was not accepted that the Appellant had  provided  a
    reliable account of his relationship with a girl from that tribe.   The
    Appellant's account was not accepted.  The judge did  not  believe  his
    account of being threatened or his family being threatened and was  not
    satisfied that he faced a real risk of harm from that tribe.

12. The judge went on to make an alternative finding, which was that if the
    Appellant was at risk from that tribe in his home  area  the  Appellant
    would be able to relocate to a different area which would not be unduly
    harsh.  The judge noted that his family had relocated.

13. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

14. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal relying on  six  grounds
    which are summarised below;

         Ground 1:

         The judge erred by failing to apply the  principles  in  HJ  (Iran)
         [2010] UKSC 31.  The judge accepted that practising doctors form  a
         particular social group in Iraq and therefore accepted by necessary
         implication that were the Appellant to return to Iraq and  practise
         as a doctor he would face a well-founded fear of persecution.   The
         judge thereafter failed to apply the principles in HJ (Iran)  which
         amounts to a material error of law.

         Ground 2:

         The  judge  erred  by  making  an  erroneous  distinction   between
         practising doctors and qualified doctors.  The judge erred  by  not
         accepting evidence that doctors were targeted per  se.   The  judge
         partially accepted this at paragraph 38 by making  a  finding  that
         there is evidence to show that some  doctors  are  targeted  for  a
         variety of political reasons. It was submitted that  the  political
         social group must  be  either  "qualified  doctors"  or  "qualified
         doctors who intend to practise on return".

         Ground 3:

         The judge erred by not accepting evidence which confirmed that  the
         Appellant would practise as a doctor if returned.




         Ground 4:

         The judge failed to consider the importance of indirect threats and
         was wrong in law by effectively requiring  the  Appellant  to  show
         that he had already  been  directly  threatened  and  ignoring  the
         central importance of inter-tribal contact.

         Ground 5:

         The judge erred by failing  to  consider  case  law  and  objective
         evidence in relation to threats.

         Ground 6:

         The judge erred by failing to conduct a proper internal  relocation
         analysis.  He did not apply the test of "undue harshness" laid down
         in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5.  The judge erred by  concluding  that  the
         fact that the Appellant's family  had  relocated  disposed  of  the
         question of whether the Appellant could internally relocate.

Permission to Appeal

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge S H Smith and I set out below
    the grant of permission in part;

         "2.  The grounds assert that the judge erred in that, (1) he failed
             to consider HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, (2)  drew  an  erroneous
             distinction between practising doctors and  qualified  doctors
             when considering  membership  of  a  particular  social  group
             ("PSG"), (3) failing to take into account evidence  suggesting
             the Appellant would practise upon return to Iraq, (4) took the
             wrong approach to evidence of inter-tribal conduct, (5) failed
             to consider the authorities and objective evidence  concerning
             threats and, (6) conflated risk to the Appellant's family with
             risk to the Appellant personally.

         3.   There is an arguable material error of law.   It  is  arguable
             that the judge  fell  into  error  by  drawing  a  distinction
             between practising and qualified doctors.  The  Appellant  has
             trained as a doctor and clearly seeks to practise as a  doctor
             in the future.  By failing to  consider  the  implications  of
             whether, pursuant to HJ (Iran), the  Appellant  will  have  to
             suppress his vocation and membership  of  this  PSG  upon  his
             return, the judge arguably fell into error.  Indeed, the judge
             appeared to consider that not practising in Iraq as  a  result
             of fear or persecution deprived a doctor of  PSG  status  (see
             [36]) whereas such an approach arguably runs  contrary  to  HJ
             (Iran), and is arguably inimical to the Geneva Convention.

         4.   The other grounds are  simply  disagreements  with  legitimate
             findings of fact or are immaterial.  They have less merit than
             the first."

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

16. Mr Yeo made oral submissions in relation to the risk to  the  Appellant
    as a doctor and submitted authorities, those being RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]
    UKSC 38 and MSM (Somalia) [2016] EWCA Civ 715.

17. Mr Yeo submitted that the first  three  Grounds  of  Appeal  should  be
    considered together.  The Judge erred by failing  to  apply  HJ  (Iran)
    principles.  Reference was made to RT (Zimbabwe), on the basis  that  a
    person has a right to have  no  political  opinion,  a  person  who  is
    politically neutral is  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  It was submitted that MSM  (Somalia)  is  in  legal  terms
    similar to this case.  Mr Yeo accepted that the conclusions reached  by
    Beatson LJ at paragraph 35 onwards are obiter dicta and  therefore  not
    legally binding, but submitted that these remarks were support for  the
    proposition  that  an  Appellant  cannot  be  expected  to  change  his
    occupation to achieve safety,  particularly  if  his  occupation  is  a
    profession such as a doctor.

18. Mr Yeo submitted that doctors in Iraq have  been  politicised,  and  in
    this case the Appellant would either be a member of a particular social
    group, or at risk because of political  opinion  or  imputed  political
    opinion.

19. Mr Yeo submitted that the judge had erred as  contended  in  the  first
    three grounds  contained  within  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, and that background evidence contained within  the  Appellant's
    bundle at section CA indicated that doctors in Iraq were at risk.

20. I was asked to conclude that the judge had erred, which meant that  the
    decision should be set aside.  Mr Yeo submitted that this  was  a  case
    which could be remade by the Upper Tribunal without a further  hearing,
    based upon the evidence that was before the FtT.

21. Mr Howells submitted that the  judge  had  made  findings  and  reached
    conclusions which were open to him to make on  the  evidence.   It  was
    relevant that the Appellant, although recently qualified as  a  doctor,
    had never actually practised in Iraq.  The judge was entitled  to  find
    that even if the Appellant was a member of a  particular  social  group
    that did not necessarily mean that he would be at risk.

22. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had made a relevant  finding,  that
    as at the hearing date, the Appellant was not a  practising  doctor  in
    Iraq and therefore would not be at risk as  at  the  date  of  hearing,
    which was the date that the judge must consider.  It was  not  for  the
    judge to consider a hypothetical situation or speculate.

23. Mr Howells submitted that there was  no  material  error  of  law,  but
    agreed with Mr Yeo that if I found to the contrary,  and  decided  that
    there was such a material error, then  the  decision  could  be  remade
    without the necessity of a further hearing,  based  upon  the  evidence
    that was before the FtT.

24. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. The judge has prepared a careful and considered decision.   I  find  no
    error of law in the conclusion at paragraph 54 that the  Appellant  has
    not provided a reliable account of his relationship with  a  member  of
    the Al Baydani tribe.  The judge did not err in  being  satisfied  that
    the Appellant had not had an intimate relationship and in finding  that
    he would not have been perceived to have been in  such  a  relationship
    with her.  The Appellant had not proved that he had been threatened and
    the judge was entitled to conclude that he was not satisfied  that  the
    Appellant faced a real risk of harm in Iraq from the Al Baydani tribe.

26. Turning to the consideration of risk to the Appellant as a doctor,  the
    Respondent has  not  challenged  the  finding  made  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 36 that the country evidence establishes that  doctors  as  a
    profession form part of a social group in Iraq.  The primary finding by
    the judge is that the social group in question  is  one  consisting  of
    practising doctors.  The Appellant's case is that the particular social
    group should be either "qualified doctors" or  "qualified  doctors  who
    intend to practise on return to Iraq".

27. There was evidence before the FtT that the Appellant wished to practise
    as a doctor in Iraq.  The  judge  does  not  specifically  reject  that
    evidence.

28. This is a somewhat unusual  case,  in  that  the  Appellant  has  never
    practised as a doctor in Iraq, although he is an Iraqi citizen, and  it
    is accepted that he is now a  qualified  doctor,  having  qualified  in
    Ukraine.  In my view it was an error  of  law  for  the  judge  not  to
    consider the Appellant's evidence that he is a qualified doctor  and  I
    do find that the judge erred by failing to take into  account  evidence
    suggesting that the Appellant would practise as a doctor upon return to
    Iraq, and drew an erroneous distinction between practising doctors  and
    qualified doctors when considering membership of  a  particular  social
    group, and erred by failing to consider the HJ (Iran) principles.

29. In my view the judge erred  at  paragraph  41  when  finding  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk at the date of hearing, and declining to
    consider whether he may be at risk in future if he establishes  himself
    as a doctor in Iraq.  Although the circumstances  appertaining  at  the
    date of hearing must be considered, the  judge  must  consider  whether
    there is a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  the  future,  if  an
    individual was to be returned to their own country.

30. For the reasons given above,  although  the  decision  is  careful  and
    considered, I find an error of law  in  relation  to  the  first  three
    Grounds of Appeal, and therefore conclude that the decision of the  FtT
    is unsafe and must be set aside.   The  findings  in  relation  to  the
    absence of a risk from the Al Baydani tribe are preserved.

31. I find it appropriate to remake  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that was  before  the  FtT.   I  am  considering  whether  the
    Appellant has proved to a reasonable degree of likelihood that he would
    be at risk of persecution if returned to Iraq as a qualified doctor.  I
    am also considering Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.   The  burden  of
    proof is on the Appellant.

32. It is common ground that the Appellant is a qualified  doctor.   It  is
    not in dispute that he qualified in Ukraine and he has not practised as
    a doctor in Iraq.  He was  last  in  Iraq  in  2014.   He  is  a  newly
    qualified doctor.  I accept the Appellant's  evidence  in  his  witness
    statement, so far as it relates to his profession as a  doctor  and  in
    particular I accept the contents of paragraph 9 in which the  Appellant
    states  that  if  working  as  a   doctor   one   must   treat   people
    unconditionally, regardless of  their  religion  or  ethnicity.   I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant is a member of a particular  social  group
    that being a qualified doctor who wishes to practise medicine in Iraq.

33. I have to consider whether the Appellant has  proved  to  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that he would be at risk if he returned to Iraq as
    a doctor.  I find that  objective  and  background  evidence  contained
    within the Appellant's bundle proves that he would  be  at  risk.   The
    relevant section in the bundle is CA.  I refer to  an  article  at  CA1
    dated 8th August 2017 in which an Iraqi  Health  Ministry  spokesperson
    described attacks on doctors occurring daily in Baghdad.

34. I then refer to an article dated 7th March 2017 headed  'Iraq's  public
    healthcare system in crisis'.  Unfortunately, the  paragraphs  are  not
    numbered but at page 4 (CA5  of  the  bundle)  there  is  reference  to
    doctors  in  Baghdad  being  killed  at  a  rate  of  47.6  per   1,000
    professionals when American soldiers withdrew  from  Iraq  in  December
    2011.  I then turn to an article beginning at CA10 of the bundle headed
    'The Wall Street Journal' with a subheading  of  'Iraq's  doctors  face
    threats of violence'.  This article is dated 1st  May  2016  and  makes
    reference to a breakdown in public order exposing the country's doctors
    to revenge attacks from grieving families, powerful tribes and  militia
    leaders.  The unchecked attacks, are prompting some doctors  to  depart
    the  country  even  as  it  suffers  from   a   shortage   of   medical
    professionals.  The article makes reference  to  the  weakness  of  the
    government and the power of militias.  There is reference  to  violence
    against medical professionals having flared.

35. There is an article by Associated Press dated  15th  December  2015  at
    CA13 of the bundle which confirms that doctors still  working  in  Iraq
    face  violence  and  tribal  justice.   There  is  a  further   article
    commencing at CA16 of the bundle by Global Research making reference to
    medical doctors in Iraq being vilified, hunted and killed.

36. There is a further article prepared by  middleeasti.net  commencing  at
    CA18 of the bundle which at CA20 refers to an interview with  a  doctor
    and the fact that his profession has made him a perpetual target.   The
    doctor in question had received repeated  death  threats  from  various
    militias who suspected him  of  treating  Daesh  wounded.   The  doctor
    described working in fear of retaliation simply for treating members of
    his community, regardless of  association.   The  article  goes  on  to
    describe "the multiplicity of armed actors, including Daesh, the  Iraqi
    Army and the Shia militias  (themselves  a  loose  network  of  popular
    mobilisation forces), has created a fatally, unpredictable  environment
    for  healthcare  providers  and  their  families."   There  is  further
    reference in the article  to  doctors  who  "continue  to  brave  daily
    violence and intimidation to save the lives of their compatriots."

37. I now consider the HJ  (Iran)  principles.   I  firstly  must  consider
    whether the Appellant would be at risk as  a  member  of  a  particular
    social group, that being a doctor, if he lived openly in Iraq.  I  find
    that the background and objective evidence referred to above  indicates
    to a reasonable degree of likelihood that he would be at risk.

38. I then must consider what the Appellant would do if returned  to  Iraq.
    I am satisfied that he would wish to work as a doctor.  I find that  if
    he lived openly as a doctor, he would be at  risk.   If  the  Appellant
    lived discreetly, I  must  consider  why  he  would  do  so.   To  live
    discreetly, the Appellant must either  hide  the  fact  that  he  is  a
    doctor, and operate as a doctor in secret, or give up  his  occupation.
    I must consider why the Appellant would give up his occupation  or  try
    and operate as a doctor in secret, and the answer is because of a  fear
    of persecution.  I therefore conclude that the Appellant has proved  to
    a reasonable degree of likelihood that if he lived openly as  a  doctor
    in Iraq he would be liable to persecution, and if he chose to  give  up
    his occupation or operate as a doctor in secret, this would be  because
    of a fear of persecution, and therefore he would still be entitled to a
    grant of asylum.

39. Because the Appellant is entitled to  a  grant  of  asylum  he  is  not
    entitled to humanitarian protection.  I conclude that  if  returned  to
    Iraq he would be at risk of treatment that would breach  Article  3  of
    the 1950 Convention for the reasons I have given when  considering  his
    asylum claim.

40. I was not asked to consider Article 8 in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  3
of the 1950 Convention.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 5 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 5 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
