
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04258/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2019                   |On 27 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  FALIH [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 February 1978 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iraq. He was convicted on 3 May  2016  of  possession  with  intent  to
    supply a controlled class B drug (cannabis) and breach of  a  suspended
    sentence. He was sentenced to a total of 21 months'  imprisonment.  The
    appellant was served with a notice of intention to deport him on 20 May
    2016. His international protection/human rights claim was  rejected  by
    the respondent by decision dated 10 April 2019. The appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 31  July
    2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, told me that the appeal was not opposed. I shall therefore be
    brief. In his analysis at 63.c the judge found that 'the appellant does
    not  report  significant  worsening  of  his   motion   regulation   or
    impulsivity or  experiencing  memory  deficits  following  the  alleged
    assault.' That finding arose from the judge's acceptance of the medical
    expert's report dated 9 July 2019. However, the medical expert  had  in
    fact stated the opposite:  '[the  appellant]  does  report  significant
    worsening is a motion regulation impulsivity  and  experiencing  memory
    deficits following the alleged  assault...  [the  appellant]  had  some
    anger issues and impulse control issues prior to the  assault  in  2016
    similar pattern of worsening of these pre-existing  features  are  well
    known in brain injuries. Some of these difficulties are evident in  the
    assessment I carried out with [the appellant].' I find that the judge's
    analysis and conclusions have been based upon an  erroneous  assessment
    of the expert evidence. Accordingly, I set aside the decision. None  of
    the findings of factual stand. The appeal is returned to the First-tier
    Tribunal for that tribunal to remake the decision following a hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 2 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

