
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04342/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 November 2017                       |On 26 January 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                     AU
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Adejumo of Counsel instructed by J F Batula
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national of Rwanda born [ ]  1976.   On  17  October
    2009 she arrived with leave as a student which was  extended  until  28
    October 2016 on which day she sought asylum on the basis of her  sexual
    orientation.  She also made a claim based on  her  private  and  family
    life with her partner.

The Home Office Decision

 2. On 24 April 2017 the Respondent refused the Appellant's application  on
    all grounds.  For  reasons  which  will  be  later  adumbrated,  it  is
    necessary only to detail the reasons why  the  Respondent  refused  the
    Appellant's claim based on her private and family life.

 3. The Respondent noted the Appellant did not supply any evidence  of  her
    partner's status in the United Kingdom.  She was not a parent  and  she
    did not meet  any  of  the  time  critical  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.   Having  rejected  her  claim  for
    international surrogate protection,  the  Respondent  considered  there
    were no very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration  into
    Rwanda and so  she  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  The Respondent considered the Appellant had  not  shown
    there were any exceptional circumstances which would warrant a grant of
    leave  under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.

The Original Appeal

 4. On 8 May 2017 the Appellant lodged through  her  solicitors  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are entirely  generic  and
    formulaic.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 5. By a decision promulgated on 14  June  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal D Reid dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  On 10
    July  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lambert  refused  the
    Appellant permission to appeal.  The Appellant renewed her  application
    to the Upper Tribunal supported by amended grounds.   On  11  September
    2017 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam refused  permission  to  appeal  in
    respect of the Appellant's claim for international surrogate protection
    but granted permission on grounds founded on  the  Appellant's  private
    and family life stating that the evidence before the Judge was that the
    Appellant's partner had permanent residence.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Appellant and her partner attended with one of the witnesses in the
    First-tier Tribunal proceedings.  A bundle for the Appellant  had  been
    filed with the Upper Tribunal on 21 November 2017 but it  appears  that
    this is the same as the bundle before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    with the addition of a copy of the grant on  19  October  2012  to  the
    Appellant's partner of a Residence  Permit  described  as  "Settlement"
    with the remarks "indefinite leave to remain" but expressed to be valid
    until 30 May 2022.

 7. There was a  discussion  about  the  Residence  Permit  issued  to  the
    Appellant's partner.  Ms Adejumo started by submitting that  the  Judge
    had erred in law by not making an express finding that the  Appellant's
    partner was settled in the United Kingdom. After taking  some  time  to
    review the contents of the Tribunal file, I noted that at para.4 of her
    decision  the  Judge  had  identified  the  Respondent's  bundle   with
    documents A - F and the Appellant's bundle paginated to  page  F3.  The
    last item in the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    numbered H1, followed by a copy of  the  Respondent's  bundle.  I  then
    referred to the Appellant's bundle filed on 21 November  2017  for  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing and  noted  that  it  included  a  copy  of  the
    partner's residence permit at page numbered I.1 and consequently  could
    not be considered to have been before the First-tier Tribunal. In  this
    light I concluded the reference at paragraph 59 of the Judge's decision
    to the partner's length of residence in the United Kingdom could not be
    taken as a finding that she had status.  However, I did accept that now
    that a copy of the Residence Permit had been produced, there was  clear
    evidence of Appellant's partner's status in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    person with indefinite leave to remain since 19 October 2012, the  date
    the Residence Permit was issued. Her partner  said  she  had  lost  the
    permit and was in the process of obtaining a replacement.

 8. Ms Adejumo explained that the  Appellant's  partner  had  obtained  the
    Residence Permit following an initial grant of leave as a refugee minor
    from the Democratic Republic of Congo.  I remarked  that  the  Tribunal
    contained no documentary evidence to  show  the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellant would meet the relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules
    in particular paragraph  295D  and  Appendix  FM  that  the  extent  of
    compliance with  the  Immigration  Rules  would  be  a  factor  in  the
    assessment of the  proportionality  of  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's claim.

 9. Ms Adejumo referred to para.59 of the Judge' decision and accepted that
    there was no evidence before the Judge of the nature and quality of the
    relationship between the Appellant  and  her  partner  for  the  period
    between 2014 and 2016.  However,  the  Judge  had  accepted  it  was  a
    genuine subsisting relationship and so had erred in then dismissing the
    appeal under Article 8 at para.62.  Having found Article 8 was  engaged
    the Judge could not then go on  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   There  then
    followed a discussion about the recommended structured approach to  the
    assessment of claims made under Article 8 set out in R (Razgar) v  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27 after which Ms Adejumo had  no  further  submissions  to
    make.

10. Mr Bramble for the Respondent relied on the response of 5 October  2017
    pursuant to Procedure Rule 24.  Even if the Judge had made an  unforced
    error about  the  status  of  the  Appellant's  partner,  the  question
    remained whether that error, if it be  an  error,  was  material.   The
    Judge had dealt with the claim and  set  out  the  evidence  about  the
    Appellant's relationship at paras.56-57 of  her  decision,  relying  on
    evidence contained in paras.20-21 and the Appellant'  statement  of  29
    May 2017. The evidence was the Appellant and her partner had  not  been
    living  together  for  a  minimum  of  two  years  and  therefore   the
    application was bound to fail under the terms of the Immigration Rules.

11. At para.60 of the Judge's decision  she  had  considered  the  relevant
    factors identified in Section 117B of the 2002 Act and in  effect  this
    covered  much  the  same  ground  as  the  important  elements  of  the
    structured approach endorsed in Razgar.   The  Appellant's  immigration
    status had  been  precarious  throughout  and  there  was  very  little
    evidence about the nature and quality  of  her  relationship  with  her
    partner.  He submitted it might be said the  Judge's  consideration  of
    Section 117B and assessment and consideration of the  relevant  factors
    to be to be taken into account in the assessment of the proportionality
    of the Respondent's decision could have  been  articulated  at  greater
    length but the Judge had done sufficient.  In the light of her findings
    whether or not the Appellant's partner had settled  status  would  have
    made no difference.  The Judge's decision should be upheld.

12. Ms Adejumo submitted that the Appellant's  status  was  not  precarious
    because she had been in the United Kingdom for a considerable period of
    time.  I pointed out the length of stay did not indicate  a  degree  of
    lawful status in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant had  entered  as  a
    student and then  claimed  asylum.   Her  status  throughout  had  been
    precarious: see Rhuppiah v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ.803.   Ms  Adejumo  had
    nothing further to submit in reply.

13. I decided that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain
    a material error of law such that it should be set  aside  for  reasons
    which I would give in this decision.

14. The Judge cannot be criticised for not  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    partner had settled or similar status since I have found that there was
    no evidence of the partner's status  before  the  Judge  and  it  would
    appear there  was  no  explanation  for  the  failure  to  supply  such
    evidence.  In any event, the Appellant's claim  under  the  Immigration
    Rules was bound to fail because there was no  documentary  evidence  to
    show she went any way towards meeting the requirements of  Appendix  FM
    and additionally there was no evidence other  than  mere  assertion  to
    show her relationship with her partner had endured  for  at  least  two
    years at the date of the application.

15. The hearing in  the  first-tier  Tribunal  was  on  5  June  2017.  The
    Appellant's evidence at paras.20-21 of her statement was that  she  had
    met her partner in 2010.  They had started an intimate relationship  in
    2014 and started to live together in May 2016.  There was  no  evidence
    other than her assertion  and  that  of  her  partner.   There  was  no
    explanation for the absence of such evidence before the Judge.

16. The standard of proof is the civil standard; that  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities and the burden is  on  the  Appellant.   On  the  limited
    information before the Judge it cannot be said the Appellant had  shown
    there were exceptional  circumstances  which  warranted  the  grant  of
    discretionary leave by reference to her private and family  life  in  R
    (Agyarko)  v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11.  The  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    structured approach recommended in Razgar could have been more full and
    better articulated but she has in the circumstances of this  particular
    appeal done sufficient to give sustainable reasons for  her  conclusion
    at para.62 of her decision to dismiss the claim on Article 8 grounds.

17. It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain
    a material error of law and shall stand.   The  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

18. Given what the Appellant  and  her  partner  claim  about  the  nature,
    present length and durability of their relationship they may  now  wish
    to seek legal advice about promptly making a new  application  and  the
    evidence they will need to support it.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on both  protection  and  human
    rights grounds dismissing the appeal shall stand.


    Appeal dismissed.


    Anonymity direction made.


Signed/Official Crest                                     Date 25. i. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







