
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04837/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 January 2018                        |On 26 January 2018                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                    [H R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Danial, Reymond Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1958.  He  claims
    to have left Bangladesh on 10 January 2016 and to have arrived  in  the
    UK the following day in possession of a valid visit visa. There  is  an
    alternative start point, which is that the Appellant arrived in the  UK
    on 11 January 2011 on a valid visit visa.  In either event  he  claimed
    asylum on 3 November 2016 on the basis of a fear of persecution due  to
    his membership of the Jamaat-e-Islami Party, as a consequence of  which
    he stated he was at risk from the Awami  League  who  attacked  him  in
    either 2010 or 2009 and 2010, following which he went into  hiding  and
    fled to the UK.  He claimed that in 2013 false accusations were made by
    the Awami League against him to the effect that he had been responsible
    for killing eight people.   The  Appellant  also  claimed  to  have  an
    alternative name which is [MI] born on [ ] 1956.

 2. His asylum application was refused  on  4  May  2017  and  he  appealed
    against that decision.  His  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan for hearing on 19 June 2017.  On that date the Appellant
    was not in attendance  but  had  a  legal  representative,  Mr  Danial,
    requested an adjournment on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    present, that he had been unwell and had contacted his  representatives
    on 16 June  2017  informing  them  that  he  was  unwell  and  that  an
    adjournment request had been made on  that  date.   Mr  Danial  further
    submitted that there had been insufficient time for his representatives
    to prepare the appeal and that his case  would  also  benefit  from  an
    expert  report.  Counsel  representing  the  Home  Office  opposed  the
    adjournment request.  The judge gave Mr Danial until midday to  provide
    medical evidence that the Appellant was unwell, however at midday  such
    evidence was not forthcoming, thus the request for an  adjournment  was
    refused and the  judge  decided  to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant pursuant to Rule 28  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules.

 3. The judge heard submissions from the Respondent's  representative  only
    and then proceeded  to  dismiss  the  appeal  relying  on  inconsistent
    statements made by the Appellant in his screening and asylum interviews
    [24]  and  finding  that  the   Appellant   had   failed   to   explain
    inconsistencies in his evidence [31].  The judge at [33] stated "I find
    on the evidence  before  me,  on  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  the
    appellant has fabricated evidence in order to support his asylum  claim
    based on his political opinions" and at  [35]  "I  do  not  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that he fears  on  the  ground  of  his  political
    involvement on his return to Bangladesh.  I do not find  the  appellant
    credible  or  consistent  with  regards  to  his  asylum   claim."   An
    application for this decision was promulgated on 12 July 2017.

 4. An application for permission to appeal was made to the Upper  Tribunal
    on the basis that the judge had acted unreasonably and the  failure  to
    grant an adjournment had resulted in an unfair hearing.  Reference  was
    made to a discharge  summary  from  the  Homerton  Hospital  which  was
    appended to  the  grounds  of  appeal  confirming  that  the  Appellant
    attended the hospital on 19 June 2017 presenting with left-sided  chest
    pain.  It was submitted in the alternative, that the judge had erred in
    failing to consider documents and evidence due to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had been unwell and his legal representatives had been unable
    to prepare the evidence including expert evidence  in  support  of  his
    case.  Reference  was  made  to  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC).  Thirdly,  it  was
    submitted that the conduct of the hearing was unfair in  light  of  the
    fact there was no Appellant's bundle, no Home Office bundle or evidence
    relating to the Appellant at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    which rendered one party i.e. the Appellant's representative unable  to
    fully present its case. It was further asserted that the Appellant  had
    been deprived of a fair hearing and reliance placed on the decision  in
    Elayi (fair hearing - appearance) [2016] UKUT 508 IAC.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on 14 November 2017 by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede in the following terms:

         "Whilst  there  was  justification  for  Judge  Khan  refusing  the
         adjournment request in view of the lack of any medical evidence  at
         the time, it is just about arguable, in the light of  the  hospital
         discharge summary now provided, that the appellant was deprived  of
         a fair hearing of his appeal owing to his inability to attend.  The
         lack of documentation before the  judge  is  also  related  to  the
         question of the appellant's health and accordingly all grounds  may
         be argued."

     Hearing

 6. I heard submissions from Mr Danial on behalf of the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Bramble on behalf of the Respondent.  Whilst no  application  had  been
    made to adduce further evidence in accordance with Rule 15(2)(a) of the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008 it appeared in fact that there were
    documents missing from the Upper Tribunal file which I admitted in  the
    interests of justice.  The first of those documents is a  copy  of  the
    inpatient discharge summary from Homerton University Hospital.   It  is
    dated 19 June 2017.  This confirms that the  Appellant  presented  with
    left-sided chest pain he had an ECG, he was transferred  to  the  Acute
    Care Unit for further  assessment  and  the  summary  states  that  the
    patient was asking to go home before being seen by the  medical  doctor
    "We explained to the patient we are concerned he may have had  a  heart
    attack.  From his medications it seems he has risk  factors  for  this,
    also had LBBB on ECG."  The summary  concluded  that  the  patient  had
    discharged himself with no medication.  There is no  time  recorded  on
    the discharge summary as to when exactly on 19 June 2017 the  Appellant
    was discharged.

 7. The other material document was the request for an  adjournment,  which
    was sent to the First-tier Tribunal on 16 June 2017.  There  is  a  fax
    header which confirms that the document went through, however  it  does
    not appear on the Tribunal's file so either it was not received or  was
    not placed on the Appellant's file in this matter.  This letter  states
    that:

         "It has now come to our attention that our client has a hearing  on
         19 June 2017 after we were contacted by  him  today,  informing  us
         that he is quite unwell and has  an  appointment  with  his  GP  on
         Monday 19 June 2017 at 11.00 am as the same date as his hearing.

          We have subsequently undertaken an investigation to  identify  why
         we were not aware of the pending  hearing.   We  have  established,
         that he visited our offices after initial instructions  were  given
         on 20 May 2017, where we  discussed  the  merits  of  his  case  to
         prepare a bundle, including amended grounds and witness  statement.
         Additionally, at that meeting we were informed by him that his real
         name is [MI] and not [HR].  He had  already  stated  this  fact  in
         screening interview and substantive interview, that his  real  name
         is [MI].

         We accordingly requested he sign a further Letter of Authority  and
         subsequently updated our computer systems.  This  appears  to  have
         caused the current issue at hand, the  case  details  were  updated
         whereby the case details of [HR] were replaced with [MI].  ...   In
         effect the case file under the name of [HR] no longer existed.

         Any subsequent correspondence was therefore not  accordingly  dealt
         with."

    The basis of the adjournment  request,  which  I  summarise,  was  that
    firstly the Appellant is suffering from a number of medical  conditions
    for  which  he  is  receiving  treatment  from  his   current   medical
    practitioner, therefore a medical report should be obtained to identify
    whether this is relevant to his asylum claim.   Secondly,  contact  had
    been made with Dr Sham Qayyum associate  senior  lecturer  in  law  and
    leadership at SOAS to prepare an expert report as to how the Appellant,
    as a religious teacher and imam, who has been part of  Jamaat-e-Islami,
    could be affected if returned to Bangladesh in light of the false cases
    registered against him and thirdly the solicitors wished to instruct an
    expert in Bangladesh to confirm the veracity  and  genuineness  of  the
    court documents to confirm  the  false  cases  registered  against  the
    Appellant.

 8. Reference was made to the relevant Procedure Rules and to the  decision
    in Nwaigwe, however as stated earlier it appears that this request  was
    either not received or did not reach the file in order for  a  decision
    to be made in respect of which.

 9. I heard detailed submissions from Mr Danial and also  from  Mr  Bramble
    who  asserted  that  the  judge  was  correct  not  to  accede  to  the
    adjournment request.  There  had  been  a  CMRH  on  5  June  2017  and
    therefore the Appellant's solicitors had had an opportunity  to  inform
    the Tribunal that they were not ready to proceed and  this  essentially
    was delaying tactics on the part of the Appellant  or  his  solicitors.
    He  also  queried  why,  in  the  letter  of  16  June  requesting   an
    adjournment, reference was made to a GP appointment at 11am on 19 June,
    whereas the discharge summary is from the  Homerton  Hospital  and  not
    from the GP surgery.  I permitted Mr Danial  to  take  instructions  on
    this point and he provided the name and address  of  the  GP's  surgery
    that the Appellant attended but the Appellant instructed  he  had  left
    his appointment card and letters in relation to his GP at home.

10.  Mr  Danial  submitted  that  the  Appellant  would  be   significantly
    prejudiced if he is not afforded the opportunity to address the  issues
    raised in the Respondent's refusal letter.  It was the  case  that  the
    Appellant was an overstayer and had then made an asylum claim so  there
    was no rationale for any delaying tactics and that  all  the  Appellant
    sought was to have a hearing before the Tribunal in which he could  put
    forward his  claim  and  that  the  consequences  of  not  having  that
    opportunity, given that the claim involved asylum were potentially dire
    for him.

     My findings

11. I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err  materially
    in law in not adjourning the appeal of this Appellant.  I have done  so
    with some reluctance given that the reason the  Appellant's  solicitors
    were not ready  to  proceed  was  their  own  error  in  replacing  the
    Appellant's name in respect of which he has sought  asylum  i.e.  [HR],
    with what he says is his real name  on  their  file  system,  with  the
    result that they failed to engage with or  properly  file  the  hearing
    notice in respect of the hearing on 19 June 2017 and the  CMRH  hearing
    on 5 June 2017.  Be as  that  may,  it  cannot  be  disputed  that  the
    Appellant is someone with health issues including the fact that he  may
    have had a heart attack as was noted  in  the  discharge  summary  from
    Homerton Hospital.  Whilst it was not unreasonable for  Judge  Khan  to
    ask for medical evidence to have been provided by  midday,  given  that
    the Appellant attended A&E on a drop in basis, in light of the evidence
    now available, it is clear that his inability to  provide  evidence  by
    midday was through no fault of his own but simply due to  the  fact  he
    had to wait to be seen by doctors and tests and a diagnosis made.

12. I have also had regard in particular to the  overriding  objective  and
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe  [2014]  UKUT  00418  IAC
    where the former president made clear that the test to  be  applied  is
    that of fairness and whether there was any deprivation of the effective
    party's right to a fair hearing. It is clear from the manner  in  which
    the case then proceeded before Judge Khan,  in  which  the  Appellant's
    representatives were unable to play any part due to the fact  they  had
    no Appellant's bundle, no Respondent's bundle or expert evidence or  an
    Appellant to give evidence and the fact that the judge  relied  heavily
    on inconsistencies between the evidence provided by  the  Appellant  in
    his screening and asylum interviews, in order to  dismiss  the  appeal,
    the absence of the Appellant and his inability to  address  the  issues
    raised in a refusal decision has effectively deprived  him  of  a  fair
    hearing in light of the decision in Nwaigwe and particularly bearing in
    mind that the Appellant's credibility was very much in issue as  raised
    by the Respondent in the  refusal  decision.   For  these  reasons  the
    decision by the First tier Tribunal to proceed to hear  the  appeal  in
    the absence of the Appellant is unsustainable.

     Decision

13. I set aside the decision and the appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing de novo to be heard by a judge other  than  M  A
    Khan.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date: 24 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

