
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04058/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 January 2020               |On 29 January 2020               |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                               ST (SrI Lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Chelvan, instructed by MTC & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission granted by a judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal, against a decision which was issued by Judge Chana on 13
    September 2019.  By that decision, the judge dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of  his  protection  and  human
    rights claims.

 2. For reasons which will shortly become clear, I  need  say  very  little
    about the appellant's claim.  It had essentially three components.  The
    first related  to  the  appellant  having  fallen  under  suspicion  of
    assisting the LTTE during the  course  of  his  employment  with  World
    Vision International.  The second aspect of  the  claim  was  that  the
    appellant had information about the unlawful sale of  body  parts  from
    Sri Lanka to India.  The third related to his sur place  activities  in
    favour of the  Transitional  Government  of  Tamil  Elam  ("TGTE")  and
    protesting publicly against the government of Sri Lanka whilst  in  the
    UK.

 3. The judge seemingly accepted that the appellant had  worked  for  World
    Vision but not that he had been involved with the LTTE, or that he  had
    been suspected of any such involvement.  She found there to be no merit
    in the assertion that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  because  of
    information he had discovered about body parts  being  sold  to  India.
    She concluded  that  any  sur  place  activities  had  been  undertaken
    opportunistically and that they would not give rise to any suspicion on
    the part of the Sri Lankan authorities that the appellant was a  threat
    to  the  unitary  state  of  Sri  Lanka.   She  dismissed  the   appeal
    accordingly.

 4. The appellant's solicitors sought and  were  granted  permission  on  a
    number of grounds, the first of which related to the judge's assessment
    of the appellant's credibility.  It was said in this  ground  that  the
    judge had been presented with a medico-legal  report  which  suggested,
    amongst other things, that the appellant was a vulnerable  witness  but
    that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  extent  to  which  the
    conditions described in that report (PTSD and  depression)  might  have
    accounted for the difficulties in the appellant's account.

 5. In her written response to the grounds of appeal, the respondent  noted
    that  there  was  no  indication  in  the  judge's  decision  that  the
    appellant's counsel before  the  FtT  had  made  any  request  for  the
    appellant to be treated as a vulnerable  witness,  nor  was  there  any
    'indication that the appellant put forward  at  the  hearing  an  issue
    about recalling aspects of his evidence.'  In those circumstances,  the
    respondent formally resisted ground one.

 6. I explored those grounds of resistance with Ms Isherwood at  the  start
    of the hearing.  I noted that the judge's Record of  Proceedings  began
    with the following:

         [Counsel for the appellant]:

         A be treated as a Vulnerable Witness based on report.

         I tell A to tell me if he needs breaks etc.

 7. Ms  Isherwood  readily  accepted,  in  these  circumstances,  that  the
    experienced member of the Bar who had represented the appellant in  the
    FtT had asked the judge to treat the appellant as a vulnerable  witness
    in light of the medical evidence then available.

 8. I moved on to the second point in the respondent's  notice  under  rule
    24.  There was before the judge a detailed medico legal report prepared
    by Dr Gallagher of Freedom from Torture.  At p19 of that  report  there
    is a  section  entitled  'Interpretation  of  Psychological  Evidence'.
    Within that section, at [125] of the report, the doctor concluded  that
    the appellant met the diagnostic criteria for a depressive illness.  At
    [127], he  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from  Post-
    Traumatic Stress Disorder.  Having reached those conclusions, there was
    then a paragraph which I must set out in full:

         "[128]   He described poor memory for aspects of his experiences in
         detention in 2008.  There are  several  possible  explanations  for
         this which are not mutually exclusive, so it is possible more  than
         one is involved.  First it should be noted that in  normal  healthy
         individuals temporal memory is poor.  As Cameron  puts  it:  "After
         many years of studies, researchers agree  that  in  remembering  we
         have access to 'very little temporal  information'.   There  is  no
         question that we can remember events  in  considerable  detail  and
         still have only a vague idea of when they happened, or  how  often,
         or for how long, or in what order".  In addition there are specific
         aspects of [ST's] situation that may impact on his memory.   He  is
         suffering from depression and PTSD both  of  which  impair  memory.
         Also, he said that he experienced episodes of loss of consciousness
         during torture.  He surmised that this was due to blows to the head
         which, in the absence  of  any  alternative  explanation,  is  most
         probable.  Memory impairment is a recognised consequence  of  brain
         trauma and may persist for many years.  To determine whether he  is
         experiencing lasting consequences from head  injury  would  require
         specialist assessment outside my area of expertise.   Such  testing
         may be compromised by the confounding effects of his mental  health
         problems, a  difficulty  acknowledged  in  the  Istanbul  protocol,
         paragraph 249, which states that "Torture can cause physical trauma
         that   leads   to   various   levels   of    brain    impairment...
         neuropsychological assessment and testing may be the only  reliable
         way of documenting the effects.  Frequently the target symptoms for
         such assessments have significant overlap with  the  symptomatology
         arising from PTSD and major depressive disorder."

 9. As can be seen, therefore, there was clearly a basis before the FtT  on
    which the appellant had  contended  that  there  was  an  'issue  about
    recalling his evidence'.  The respondent was wrong to contend otherwise
    in her rule 24 response, as Ms Isherwood again accepted.

10. The consequence of Dr Gallagher's report and  the  submission  made  by
    counsel before the FtT was that  the  judge  was  bound  to  apply  the
    approach described in the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010
    when  assessing  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account.   The
    material part of that  guidance  note  is  at  [15],  which  states  as
    follows:

         'The decision should record whether the Tribunal has concluded  the
         appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable or  sensitive,  the
         effect the Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability had  in
         assessing the evidence before it and thus whether the Tribunal  was
         satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her case  to
         the relevant standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should be
         given to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a
         state of mind.'

11. The  importance  of  that  guidance  has  been  underlined  in  various
    authorities, some of which were  helpfully  placed  before  me  by  the
    appellant.  There is the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  JL  (China)
    [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC).  There is then the important judgment  given  by
    the Senior President of  Tribunals,  with  whom  Ryder  and  Gross  LJJ
    agreed, in AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ  1123;  [2018]  4  WLR  78.
    Most recently, there is the decision of Lane P and Mr Ockelton  V-P  in
    SB (vulnerable adult: credibility) Ghana [2019]  UKUT  398  (IAC),  the
    judicial headnote to which is as follows:

         "(1) The fact that a  judicial  fact-finder  decides  to  treat  an
         appellant or witness as a vulnerable adult does not mean  that  any
         adverse credibility finding in respect of that person is thereby to
         be regarded as inherently problematic and thus open to challenge on
         appeal.

         (2)  By applying the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010,
         two aims are achieved. First, the judicial fact-finder will  ensure
         the best practicable conditions for the person  concerned  to  give
         their evidence. Secondly, the vulnerability will also be taken into
         account when assessing the credibility of that evidence.

         (3)  The Guidance makes it plain that it is for the judicial  fact-
         finder to determine the relationship between the vulnerability  and
         the evidence that is adduced."

12. It is unfortunately very clear, as was accepted by Ms  Isherwood,  that
    the judge did not adopt the correct approach to the  medical  evidence.
    She did not consider whether, in light of counsel's submission  at  the
    start of the hearing and the medical evidence upon which it was  based,
    whether the appellant was  a  vulnerable  witness.   And  she  did  not
    consider,  if  so,  whether  there  was  a  relationship  between  that
    vulnerability and the difficulties with the evidence that was  adduced.
    What  she  did,  instead,  was  to  note  that  there  were   extensive
    difficulties with the consistency  and  plausibility  of  that  account
    which caused her to have 'grave doubts' about the truthfulness  of  the
    same.  That might have been the case, but the observations made  by  Dr
    Gallagher at [128] of his detailed report provided  the  prism  through
    which those difficulties fell to be considered.  The judge erred in law
    in failing to look through that prism.   That  failure  represented  an
    error of law for the reasons explained in the authorities  I  have  set
    out above and tainted the FtT's assessment of credibility as a whole.

13. I should note that the judge did not  overlook  the  medical  evidence.
    This is not a case in which the expert evidence was simply ignored, and
    it is only fair to the judge that I should  observe  that  there  is  a
    section of her decision which is addressed to that  report.   At  [48],
    the judge stated that the appellant had 'provided a medicolegal  report
    to demonstrate the torture that he claims that he experienced from  the
    authorities in Sr Lanka.'  The judge then proceeded, over the course of
    [48]-[55],  to  analyse  what  was  said  by  Dr  Gallagher  about  the
    appellant's physical and mental state. Unfortunately, it is clear  that
    the judge's focus in these paragraphs was on the extent  to  which  the
    report supported the appellant's account of events in Sri  Lanka.   The
    judge was plainly alive to the point made in Mibanga  [2005]  INLR  377
    and subsequent authorities, which is that the  presence  of  scars  and
    mental health conditions such as PTSD  may  lend  support  the  account
    given by an asylum seeker.  What she was clearly not alive to  was  the
    altogether separate question posed by [15] of  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance, which is the extent to which the vulnerability  described  in
    the report might serve to explain the difficulties in the account given
    to the respondent or the Tribunal.   That  separate  question  was  not
    considered at all by the judge.

14. Ms Isherwood accepted, in the circumstances, that  the  decision  could
    not stand.  That concession was plainly correct and I shall so order.

15. As to relief, Ms Isherwod was neutral.  For his part, counsel  for  the
    appellant initially submitted (at length) that the  appropriate  course
    was for the matter to be retained in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  to  be
    designated as suitable for country guidance on sur place activities.

16. I do not propose to rehearse the detailed submissions made  by  counsel
    in support of that submission.  Although I accept that there is clearly
    a need for country guidance on the question of sur place activities  in
    Sri Lankan asylum claims (particularly TGTE activities), I come to  the
    clear conclusion that this case is not a suitable vehicle for the same.
     The reasons for that conclusion should be clear from the  above.   The
    appellant's protection claim comprises the three elements  I  have  set
    out above.  As a result of the conclusions I have reached above,  there
    are now no findings in respect of the first two elements.  Counsel  for
    the appellant might be correct in his submission that there  is  little
    room for doubt about the appellant's sur place activities but the  risk
    arising from those  activities  cannot  sensibly  be  considered  in  a
    vacuum.  There must be proper findings made  about  the  whole  of  the
    appellant's claim before detailed consideration can  be  given  to  the
    country situation to which the appellant can be returned.

17. Undeterred by that observation, counsel sought to submit that the Upper
    Tribunal could 'stagger' its assessment of  the  appellant's  case,  by
    hearing his evidence and  making  findings  of  fact  and  then,  at  a
    separate  hearing,  giving  detailed  consideration  to   the   country
    situation with a view to giving country guidance.  That submission  was
    unmeritorious for two reasons.  Firstly, and most importantly, if (as I
    accept to be the case) there is a need for country guidance on the  sur
    place question, that aim is best achieved expeditiously by selecting  a
    case which does not need to undergo such a 'staggered'  assessment,  in
    which the findings of fact are already settled.  Using this case  as  a
    vehicle would be likely  to  prolong,  rather  than  to  expedite,  the
    issuance of new guidance on this important issue.  Secondly,  the  cost
    to the public purse of having two hearings in the Upper Tribunal  would
    be greater.

18. In the circumstances, I indicated to counsel that the appeal would  not
    be put forward as suitable for country guidance.  He asked for  further
    time to take instructions on the relief sought in those  circumstances,
    which I duly gave.  In writing, very  shortly  after  the  hearing,  he
    indicated to me that it was the appellant's  request  that  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo by  a
    judge other than Judge Chana.  Having reminded myself of the  terms  of
    the Practice Statement, and considering the extent of the findings  now
    required, I consider that to be the appropriate course and I  shall  so
    order.  I do so without objection from the respondent.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is  set  aside  in  its  entirety.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the FtT for hearing de novo before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
Chana.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
