
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04547/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2020                   |On 04 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'HH'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

1. These are a written record of oral reasons for my decision given  at  the
   hearing.

2. This is an appeal by the appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Verghis (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 24  October  2019,  by
   which she dismissed his  appeal against the respondent's refusal  of  his
   most recent protection and human rights claims in a decision of 16  April
   2019.

3. In  essence,  the  appellant's  claims  involved  the  following  issues:
   whether he had fled Afghanistan  because  of  adverse  treatment  by  the
   Taliban; whether he would be at general risk if he were removed to Kabul;
   and whether his rights under article 3 would risk being breached  because
   of his mental health issues.  The core points taken against the appellant
   by the respondent related  to  the  findings  of  a  previous  First-tier
   Tribunal determination in 2004 that the  appellant  had  not  established
   that he had been living in Afghanistan in the 8  to  10  years  prior  to
   leaving in 2003, as he claimed, but had in fact been living in  Pakistan;
   the option of internal relocation to Kabul, as per the  authority  of  AS
   (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT  00118  (IAC),  as  well  as
   other country evidence, including a Country Policy and  Information  Note
   ('CPIN') dared April 2018. The respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant
   suffered from moderate anxiety, depression and PTSD, but  that  treatment
   was available for these conditions in Afghanistan.

The FtT's decision

4. The FtT was not impressed by various aspects  of  the  evidence,  finding
   there to be  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  original  account  of
   travelling to and from Pakistan and his family living there,  as  opposed
   to his current evidence that they had always lived  in  Afghanistan.  She
   reminded herself of the impact of being a vulnerable witness, but did not
   accept such an inconsistency, going to the core of the appellant's claim,
   as explicable on that  basis.   The  FtT  further  rejected  the  witness
   evidence of a number of the appellant's supporters, who had testified  as
   to his presence in Afghanistan. She was critical of the weight she  could
   attach to their evidence, given, at least for one witness, the brevity of
   his evidence; she attached limited  weight  to  written  threats  to  the
   appellant from the Taliban, given the ease  with  which  false  documents
   could be obtained and lack of explanation for  how  these  documents  had
   been obtained. She did not accept the risk to the appellant in relocating
   to Kabul in light of the  case  of  AS  (Afghanistan);  and  the  medical
   prognosis from those treating the appellant was good.

5. Having considered the evidence as a whole, the FtT  found  dismissed  the
   appellant's claims on protection and human rights grounds.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

6. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which  are  essentially  that  the
   FtT had erred in relying on AS, in the light of the  criticisms  of  that
   decision by the Court of Appeal; had erred in attaching limited weight to
   witnesses who had testified on behalf of the appellant merely because  of
   the brevity of their evidence or because it potentially  conflicted  with
   the appellant's evidence; and had not assessed the  documentary  evidence
   in the round when assessing the appellant's credibility.

7. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien granted permission on 5 December  2019.
   He regarded it as arguable that the FtT had erred in  her  assessment  of
   witnesses' credibility on the basis of their brevity; and in following AS
   (Afghanistan).  The grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

8. Mr Lindsay expressly conceded that the FtT had erred in  law  in  relying
   on AS (Afghanistan) in relation to the viability of  internal  relocation
   to Kabul; and had further erred in her assessment of  the  risks  to  the
   appellant where he  had  lived  (with  the  home  location  remaining  in
   dispute), accepting that witness evidence could not be  dismissed  merely
   because of its brevity.  On that basis, both representatives agreed  that
   the errors of law were material, such that the FtT's decision  is  unsafe
   and cannot stand.

Decision on error of law

9. In light of Mr Lindsay's concession, there are material errors  here  and
   I must set the FtT's decision aside.

Disposal

10. With reference to paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Direction  and  the
   necessary breadth of the fact-finding, both representatives  agreed  that
   this is clearly a case that has to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
   for a complete rehearing.

11. The remittal shall involve a  complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal.  All
   aspects of the claims must be addressed and there is no  preservation  of
   any findings of fact.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  rehearing
with no preserved findings of fact.

The remitted  appeal  shall  not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Verghis.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.

Signed J Keith                  Date:  30 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
