
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: PA/04237/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                         Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 19 September 2018                         On 27 March 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                    [P L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by Greater
London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                                ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who made a protection claim.
    That was refused on 14 March 2018. The Respondent rejected the
    Appellant's account that he had been involved with the LTTE and was
    wanted by the authorities. The Appellant's appeal against that refusal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul ("the judge"), who
    dismissed it in a decision promulgated on 4 July 2018. The judge
    rejected the credibility of the account and the reliability of court
    documentation from Sri Lanka.

2.    The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on 7 August 2018 on the ground that
    it was arguable the judge had failed to conduct a fair hearing. The
    application was supported by a witness statement of Counsel Ms Walker
    who represented the Appellant before the judge; her contemporaneous
    notes of the hearing and her post-hearing attendance note addressed to
    the Appellant's representatives.

3.    The Respondent did not reply to that grant with a Rule 24 response
    and while Ms Isherwood did not formally concede the appeal, following a
    productive discussion during the hearing; an examination of the
    Tribunal's file and an absence of any hearing minutes from the
    Respondent's representative before the judge, little could be said to
    defend the decision.

4.    Central to the Appellant's formulation of complaint of unfairness is
    Ms Walker's evidence that following cross-examination the judge caused
    the Presenting Officer to take instructions in respect of the
    Appellant's court file and arrest warrant from Sri Lanka that had not
    hitherto been verified by the Respondent. Ms Walker states that when
    the hearing resumed the Presenting Officer had been unable to obtain
    instructions and that following a further discussion led by the judge
    as to whether to remit the appeal to the Respondent for reconsideration
    or proceed (the latter being the position adopted by Ms Walker), the
    judge concluded the hearing with a view to consideration being given as
    to how to proceed and did not permit oral evidence to be given by the
    Appellant's partner or allow closing submissions to be made. Ms Walker
    ends her witness statement by setting out her verbatim record of the
    judge's explanation to the Appellant. It is not necessary to rehearse
    that detail here.

5.    The evidence of Ms Walker supported by her detailed notes is not
    challenged by Miss Isherwood. Indeed, she was placed in a difficult
    position as there was no record of any minutes of the hearing in the
    Respondent's file. Notwithstanding, the judge's decision and the
    judge's record of proceedings accords with the evidence of Ms Walker.
    The judge's decision does not set out what occurred during the hearing
    or refer to any procedural matters discussed between the parties, and
    nor does it set out a summary of the parties' submissions. The judge's
    record of proceedings only consists of two-pages the contents of which
    are not entirely legible. What can be readily discerned however is the
    absence of any reference to submissions being made by either party. The
    judge's decision and the Tribunal's file support the evidence of Ms
    Walker which I accept. The appellant's credibility has been found
    wanting and the appeal dismissed without giving the appellant's
    representative a fair opportunity to present the appellant's case and
    make submissions.

6.    In the circumstances, the Appellant has made out his case of
    procedural unfairness, and the only proper course is to set aside the
    decision and remit the appeal for a  hearing afresh.

Notice of Decision

The decision did involve the making of an error of law sufficient to
require the decision to be set aside and reheard by the First-tier Tribunal
by a judge other than Judge Paul.


Signed                                       Date: 1 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
