
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04660/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the Papers                                 |On 4th April 2019             |
|On 6th March 2019                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                  Mr S H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, now 18 or 19, claimed to be a citizen of Iran  and  made
    application for asylum on his arrival in the UK on 19th  October  2017.
    The Respondent had refused the Appellant's application  on  23rd  March
    2018 and the Appellant had appealed that decision.

 2. The appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fowell  at
    Newport on 14th May 2018.  The  judge  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  Application for permission to appeal  had  been
    made and that application had been granted on 15th June 2018.   It  was
    said that arguable errors of law had been disclosed and that there  was
    overall an inadequacy of reasoning in  particular  in  that  the  judge
    appeared to omit regard to country information and an expert report.

 3. Directions had been issued for the Upper  Tribunal  firstly  to  decide
    whether an error of law had been made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the matter came before Vice President M Ockelton and myself sitting  as
    a panel at Newport on 15th  November  2018  in  accordance  with  those
    directions.  Following submissions raised by the representatives at the
    hearing, namely Miss  Bayoumi  instructed  by  Barnes  Harrild  &  Dyer
    Solicitors on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  and  Mr  Howell,  a  Senior
    Presenting Officer on behalf of the Respondent, we  found  for  reasons
    provided in our decision  promulgated  on  4th  December  2018  that  a
    material error had been made such that the matter would need to be made
    afresh.  In our decision we had indicated at paragraph 14 that  we  had
    before us all the material provided by both parties and that directions
    had been sent out to the parties in order for them to prepare  for  the
    error of law hearing on the basis that if the decision was  to  be  set
    aside as erroneous in law the re-making would take place  at  the  same
    hearing.  We invited written submissions from both parties.   In  order
    to clarify matters given that no submissions were received  within  the
    fourteen days  stipulated,  further  directions  were  issued  on  16th
    January 2019 indicating that the Upper Tribunal was now  ready  to  re-
    make the decision and that any submissions by  either  party  would  be
    taken into account if received within fourteen days of  the  date  that
    these directions were sent out.  Submissions were provided within  time
    by the Respondent and no further  submissions  have  been  received  on
    behalf of the Appellant.

Documents

 4. The Respondent's documents consist of:

       . Immigration history.

       . Those documents listed at folios A to H on the index sheet  to  the
         Respondent's bundle.

       . Decision letter 23rd March 2018.

 5. The Appellant's documents consist of:

       . Skeleton argument.

       . Those documents listed at pages 1 to 211 on the index sheet to  the
         bundle.



The Law

Asylum

 6. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that the  applicant  will
    be granted asylum if the  provisions  of  that  paragraph  apply.   The
    burden of proof rests on an Appellant  to  satisfy  us  that  he  falls
    within the definition of a refugee in Regulation 2 of  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006.  In essence an Appellant will have to show there are  substantial
    grounds for believing that he is outside his country of nationality  or
    if applicable his country of former habitual residence by reason  of  a
    well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and is
    unable or unwilling  owing  to  such  fear  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country.

Humanitarian Protection

 7. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules states that  an  applicant  who
    does not qualify as a refugee will be granted  humanitarian  protection
    if the provisions of that paragraph apply.  The burden of  proof  rests
    on an Appellant to satisfy me he is entitled to humanitarian protection
    under paragraph 339 of the Immigration Rules.  In essence an  Appellant
    will have to show there are substantial grounds for believing  that  if
    returned he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and he  is
    unable or owing  to  such  risk  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of the country of return.

The ECHR

 8. The burden of proof rests on an Appellant to satisfy me that there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that as a result of the  Respondent's
    decision he will be exposed to a real risk of  torture  or  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment contrary to Article 3.

Decision and Reasons

 9. I have carefully considered all the evidence in this case including the
    submissions received on behalf of the  Respondent  dated  4th  February
    2019.

10.  The  Appellant's  claim  was  that  he  was  Iranian  living  in   the
    predominantly Kurdish region of Iran bordering Iraq.   His  father  had
    been a smuggler and had been caught by the authorities  smuggling  KDPI
    material and had been taken by the authorities and not seen since.  The
    Appellant had himself  worked  as  a  smuggler  in  the  border  region
    smuggling a variety of merchandise.  He had  been  introduced  to  PJAK
    after working as a smuggler for about two years  and  on  a  number  of
    occasions had smuggled documents for them,  taking  them  to  his  home
    where someone would come and  collect  them.   The  Appellant  received
    information from his uncle that the authorities had raided his home and
    the Appellant therefore stayed with a friend before leaving Iran.



11. The Appellant's precise date of birth and age  was  a  matter  of  some
    dispute.  However, as noted by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  the
    previous hearing, even on the Home Office view of the Appellant's  age,
    he would be recalling events in Iran when was a teenager.  Further, the
    Appellant's evidence in interview (question 7)  suggested  he  had  not
    been educated and  that  does  not  appear  to  be  challenged  by  the
    Respondent.  Furthermore, that lack of education  is  not  inconsistent
    with circumstances for Kurdish children in that part of Iran.

12. The factors of his age and lack of education are matters  that  I  take
    into account when assessing his evidence and credibility.

13. The Respondent challenges the Appellant's account to be Iranian.   That
    was based on the Respondent's assertions that the Appellant was  unable
    to accurately refer to  geographical  positions  or  towns  and  cities
    within the area.  It was further said the  Appellant  had  inaccurately
    described the ID book that as a minor he would  possess.   The  refusal
    letter dealt with those issues of nationality at paragraphs 22 to 38.

14. I have already referred to the Appellant's age and  lack  of  education
    when  having  to  assess  his  evidence.   I   further   find   nothing
    inconsistent in the fact that  a  teenage  border  smuggler  would  not
    necessarily have travelled far beyond his recognised routes across  the
    border and would have therefore little real knowledge or experience  of
    life beyond that area.  Further, if he had no formal education then  it
    is most unlikely he would have gained knowledge  of  his  country  from
    books or newspapers.  The question of whether the  family  home  had  a
    radio or television was never mentioned.

15. The Respondent accepts that the  Appellant  was  able  to  answer  some
    questions.  For example, the Appellant gave the  name  of  one  of  the
    Iranian leaders, namely the President, but could not provide  the  name
    of the Supreme Leader.  The Appellant had also provided  the  names  of
    villages that were similar to the names  of  two  that  the  Respondent
    could reference from Google.  I bear in mind  that  sometimes  spelling
    and pronunciation of places may be different from that  which  is  done
    locally and that which may appear internationally.

16. The Respondent also relied upon the fact that the Appellant had  spoken
    about an adult Shunasmarer ID book rather than a minor's one which  was
    found to be inconsistent with the Appellant's claimed age.  However,  I
    bear in mind that the Appellant at question 76 readily accepted that he
    had had two types of Iranian documents, an identity card  and  what  he
    referred to as a Milly card which was small and yellow,  contained  his
    number (which he gave) and his date of birth  and  nothing  else.   The
    Appellant  described  an  Iranian  Shunasmarer  ID  booklet.   However,
    careful examination  of  the  interview  record  (question  76  to  78)
    indicates I find, that the Appellant was describing  the  small  yellow
    Milly card as being one that he had and further describing in general a
    Shunasmarer.  There is nothing to suggest  his  descriptions  of  those
    documents are not accurate and I find  that  his  ability  to  describe
    seemingly quite readily matters such as those, which he is more  likely
    to  have  seen  or  have  knowledge  about,  rather  than  geographical
    questions sufficient together with his evidence generally  to  conclude
    that applying the appropriate  standard  of  proof  he  is  Iranian  as
    claimed.

17. I have considered the Appellant's  claimed  history  alongside  country
    material and the expert report prepared by Dr Joffe.   I  find  nothing
    intrinsically inconsistent or  unfamiliar  in  the  Appellant's  father
    having been involved in border smuggling in that part of Iran.  It  may
    well be the case that either because of political support or  financial
    gain he may have  smuggled  documents  on  behalf  of  the  KDPI.   The
    regime's harsh dealing with Kurds and any form  of  Kurdish  separatist
    movement is documented within the report.  I find it unsurprising  that
    the authorities would covertly and/or overtly be operating in that area
    and the potential for a smuggler  to  be  unfortunately  caught  to  be
    present.  Further, mathematically the more often  a  smuggler  operates
    then potentially the greater the risk of being caught.  I do  not  find
    anything  intrinsically  implausible  in  the  account  given  by   the
    Appellant of the circumstances relating to his father and his  evidence
    does not indicate exaggeration or aspects of implausibility.

18. In like manner I can accept the Appellant  may  at  a  young  age  have
    himself become a smuggler.   In  some  respects  alternative  means  of
    earning  money  may  simply  not  have  been  available  to  him.   The
    Respondent questions whether the Appellant would have taken  the  risks
    of smuggling political material in particular knowing the  attitude  of
    the authorities and that which had occurred to his father.   Those  are
    valid points.  However, I bear in mind the relatively young age of  the
    Appellant at that time and the fact that he may  not  necessarily  have
    given the same mature consideration to  that  point  as  given  by  the
    Respondent.  Furthermore, intrinsically all smugglers accept  a  degree
    of risk even when the consequences are known.

19. The Appellant's account of his smuggling activities in interview I find
    to be a credible account not inconsistent with country  material.   The
    Appellant was able to  provide  details  of  goods,  numbers  involved,
    payment, and  where  goods  were  delivered  such  that  I  accept  the
    credibility of that account.

20. Against that  background  and  matters  generally  I  do  not  find  it
    implausible that the Appellant would have been  asked  and  would  have
    become  involved  in  smuggling  information  for  PJAK.   It  is   not
    necessarily clear as to why Karwan would have asked  the  Appellant  to
    smuggle material and take it to the Appellant's home, given that Karwan
    appeared to live in the same village, and that again is a matter raised
    by the Respondent in their submissions.  One  possible  explanation  of
    course is that it reduced the risk to Karwan himself being caught  with
    the material.  There may be other unknown reasons.  The  Appellant  has
    not sought to inflate his role in the respect  of  smuggling  materials
    for PJAK.  He does not claim to  be  a  supporter  or  member  of  that
    organisation (question 20).  He claimed to have smuggled PJAK  material
    at the behest of Karwan over a three year period but only on about five
    to nine occasions; so only an occasional aspect  of  his  almost  daily
    smuggling activities.  I find his account of smuggling  for  Karwan  on
    behalf of PJAK plausible, not exaggerated and not inconsistent with his
    background and circumstances generally in that part of Iran.

21. Given the authorities kept a watchful eye upon the Kurdish  region  and
    potential Kurdish disaffection, it is perhaps unsurprising  that  after
    three years of smuggling activities the Appellant may well have come to
    the attention of the authorities.  The fact his father had been  caught
    some years earlier may potentially have raised the Appellant's profile.
     It is also possible that the Appellant had come to  the  attention  of
    the authorities through his occasional links with Karwan.  Applying the
    appropriate standard of proof I find it credible that  the  authorities
    may well have raided both Karwan's  house  and  the  Appellant's  home.
    Although it seems somewhat convenient the Appellant was not at home and
    was warned by his uncle, I accept that as a possibility.  The Appellant
    had already explained that he would be involved in smuggling four  days
    a week and therefore would often be away  from  home.   I  accept  that
    timings may have varied in terms of his smuggling activities.   He  had
    already explained earlier  in  interview  that  most  in  his  village,
    including his uncle, were smugglers.  I find it not  inconsistent  that
    they may have been a tight-knit group prepared  to  look  out  for  and
    support each other and therefore consistent with  that  background  the
    uncle would if he could, have warned the Appellant and  therefore  have
    assisted him thereafter in the manner described.

22. In summary, I find applying the appropriate standard of proof that  the
    Appellant has provided a credible account of his circumstances in  Iran
    and his reasons for leaving.  It is consistent  with  country  material
    and the expert report.  I find therefore that the  Appellant  would  be
    known to the authorities and that they  take  a  harsh  view  of  Kurds
    involved in separatist  activities  however  minor  their  involvement.
    Accordingly, on return to Iran the Appellant would be at real  risk  of
    persecution.  His Kurdish ethnicity and lack of passport would  not  of
    course assist.

23. I accept the Appellant did  not  claim  asylum  in  a  number  of  safe
    countries such as Italy or France before he came to the UK and I  make,
    as I must, an adverse credibility finding in that respect under Section
    8 when looking at his credibility in the  round.   However,  I  do  not
    attach  much  weight  to  that  particular  feature   given   all   the
    circumstances including the Appellant's age at the  time  that  he  was
    travelling outside of Iran.

24. In summary therefore, given my findings on fact and credibility, I find
    that there would be a real risk to the Appellant on return to Iran as a
    result of his direct or imputed  political  opinion  and  therefore  he
    succeeds under the terms of the Geneva Convention.

Notice of Decision

25. I allow this appeal on asylum grounds.

    An anonymity direction is made.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
