
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04384/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2018                   |On 30 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                  anil [k]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins of Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turquet promulgated on 19 June 2017 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
    on protection grounds against a decision of  the  Respondent  dated  26
    April 2017.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Turkey born on [ ] 1992.  He arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 13 November 2016 and claimed asylum  on  arrival.
    He claimed that he had left Turkey three to four days earlier  and  had
    travelled across Europe before taking two flights to arrive in the  UK.
    A  screening  interview  was  conducted  on  13  November  2016  and  a
    substantive asylum interview was held on 6 April 2017. The  Appellant's
    application for protection  was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 26 April 2017.

3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

4.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Turquet promulgated on 19 June 2017.

5.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was in the first instance refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes
    on 26 September 2017. Permission to appeal was subsequently granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on 21 November 2017.

6.   At the core  of  the  challenge  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is what Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington  characterised  as  an
    arguable point that "the judge  misconstrued  the  screening  interview
    which was central to her adverse credibility findings".

7.   A copy of the screening interview is to be found  at  Annex  A  of  the
    Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is in  standard
    format.  It is relevant to note the following exchanges recorded in the
    document.

     (i) At Part 2, 'Health/Special Needs', question 2.3, the Appellant  was
    asked about his physical and/or mental health.  He described himself as
    "anxious".

    (ii) Part 4 of the pro forma screening interview is  headed  'Basis  of
    asylum claim' and  contains  the  following  question  or  instruction:
    "Please BRIEFLY explain ALL of the reasons why  you  cannot  return  to
    your home country?", with the following guidance then  offered  to  the
    interviewing officer - "Where applicable ask: What  do  you  fear  will
    happen to you on return to your home country? Who do you fear?  Why  do
    you fear them? When did this happen?".  The answers are recorded in the
    interview in the following terms:

         "They discriminate against my sect, Alevi.  They broke my arm  -  5
         Turkish people.  We were always ignored.  You can't even get a  job
         because they say you  are  Alevi  not  Muslim  really,  Kurdish,  a
         terrorist, traitor."


     The supplementary question is asked, "When was arm broken?",  to  which
    the Appellant is recorded as having answered "about 5 years ago".

     (iii) Part 5 is  headed  'Criminality  and  Security'.   The  Appellant
    answered to the question at 5.3, "Have you ever, in any  country,  been
    accused of, or have committed an offence for which you  have  been,  or
    could have been convicted? (including traffic offences)"  that  he  had
    been convicted of four traffic offences and also  been  convicted  four
    times "for causing injury because I got into  fights".   The  Appellant
    could not remember  the  dates  of  the  fights.  Under  a  sub-heading
    Offences it is written "Racism/discrimination" and details of a  number
    of convictions are provided.

    (iv) At question 5.4 the Appellant  was  asked,  "Have  you  ever  been
    detained, either in the UK or any other country for  any  reason?".  He
    answered "Yes about a month before I came  here.   In  Mersin,  Mezitli
    police station. Detained for being Kurdish about 10 hours there."

    (v) In response to question 5.5:

        "Have you ever been involved with, or  accused  of  being  involved
        with any pro-government groups, political  organisation,  religious
        organisation, armed or violent organisation, group or party?"


    the Appellant indicated with regard to 'political organisation',  "Yes,
    HDP (political). Youth branch".


    (vi) In answer to question 5.7 in respect of whether he had  ever  been
    involved in, or suspected of  involvement  in  terrorism,  war  crimes,
    crimes against  humanity,  genocide  or  human  rights  violations  the
    Appellant answered "No".

     (vii) In concluding the interview, which finished at 00:20  hours,  the
    Appellant was asked "Is there anything you would like to add or  change
    to your response?", to which he responded "Not now because my  mind  is
    messed".


    (viii) The Appellant declined to sign the screening interview record.

8.   The courts have from time to time offered guidance as to  the  approach
    to be taken to screening interviews when evaluating the credibility  of
    a claim on appeal.  The following two extracts are informative.

    (i) From YL (rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145 at paragraph 19:

         "When a person seeks asylum in the United  Kingdom  he  is  usually
         made the subject of a screening interview. ...The purpose  of  that
         is to establish the general nature of the claimant's case  so  that
         the Home Office official can decide how best to process it.  It  is
         concerned  with  the  country   of   origin,   means   of   travel,
         circumstances of arrival in the United Kingdom, preferred  language
         and other matters that might help the Secretary of State understand
         the case.  Asylum seekers are still expected to tell the truth  and
         answers given in screening interviews can be compared  fairly  with
         answers given later.  However, it  has  to  be  remembered  that  a
         screening interview is not done to establish in detail the  reasons
         a person gives to support her  claim  for  asylum.   It  would  not
         normally  be  appropriate  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to   ask
         supplementary questions or to entertain elaborate  answers  and  an
         inaccurate summary by an interviewing officer at that  stage  would
         be  excusable.   Further,  the  screening  interview  may  well  be
         conducted when the asylum seeker is tired  after  a  long  journey.
         These things have to be considered when any inconsistencies between
         the screening interview and the later case are evaluated."


     (ii) From KD (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2007] EWCA Civ 1384 at paragraph 8:

         "No authority is  needed  for  the  proposition  that  one  seeking
         refugee status is not expected, when first arriving, fully  to  set
         out his claim to asylum, although asylum seekers  are  expected  to
         tell the truth and discrepancies can legitimately  be  deployed  in
         the assessment of credibility. ...But in  the  instant  appeal  the
         Immigration Judge was entitled to place weight upon the absence  of
         any reference to detention and ill-treatment but one  month  before
         the appellant left Sri Lanka and the absence of  any  reference  to
         the trigger for the series of events which were said to  give  rise
         to a well-founded fear of persecution in the  future,  namely,  the
         discovery of weapons in a truck he had rented out."


9.    At  paragraph  30  of  her  Decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    identified the basis of the Appellant's claim advanced on  appeal  with
    reference to the submission made by the Appellant's Counsel:

         "The basis of the Appellant's claim at the date of hearing  as  put
         by his Counsel ... was that he was  a  refugee  owing  to  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution by reason of his political opinion as a
         supporter of the HDP Party and that his risk was further aggravated
         by his ethnicity and faith as an Alevi Kurd".

10.  It may be seen from the passages that I have quoted from the  screening
    interview that the three elements identified in  that  core  submission
    were referenced during the course  of  the  screening  interview.   The
    Appellant referred to his involvement with the HDP at question 5.5, and
    also made reference to his status as an Alevi Kurd  at  various  points
    throughout the screening interview.  To that extent it may be seen that
    the core elements, albeit not necessarily articulated in any particular
    detail, were present within the screening interview.

11.  The Judge said  this  in  respect  of  the  section  of  the  screening
    interview requiring the Appellant to briefly explain all of the reasons
    why he could not return to Turkey:

         "When asked in his Screening Interview at  4.1  why  he  could  not
         return to his home country he said, "they discriminate against  his
         Alevi sect.  Five Turkish people broke his  arm  about  five  years
         ago.  They were always ignored.  They could  not  even  get  a  job
         because they said they were Alevi, not  Muslim  really  Kurdish,  a
         terrorist, traitor".  There was no mention of being  involved  with
         HDP or of being detained whilst leafleting.  In  evidence  he  said
         that the answer at 4.1 was not the reason why he could not  return.
         The reason he could not return was because he was Alevi and because
         of his activities in the HDP party." (paragraph 31).

12.  At paragraph 39 the Judge said this:

         "As stated above the Appellant did not mention involvement with the
         HDP in his Screening Interview".


13.  In my judgement this quotation from paragraph 39 is plainly in error.

14.  The Appellant did - as Mr Bramble very properly acknowledges on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State - mention his involvement with the HDP in the
    screening interview.  Although  the  Appellant  did  not  make  express
    reference to it at paragraph 4.1 - and to that  extent  the  Judge  was
    factually accurate at paragraph 31 - this does  not  'save'  the  clear
    error at paragraph 39, or remove the overall impression that the  Judge
    overlooked, or otherwise misconceived,  a  significant  aspect  of  the
    screening interview. The Judge's misconception of fact was significant:
    the Appellant's case on appeal was articulated  on  the  basis  of  his
    support for the HDP aggravated by his ethnicity and faith as  an  Alevi
    Kurd. The Judge clearly considered that the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    mention such support for the HDP from the outset. I find that I  cannot
    be confident that the Judge's error has not informed and influenced the
    overall  assessment  of  credibility.  I  concluded  that  this  was  a
    misconception of fact that amounted to an error of law, and  that  such
    error was material.

15.  I acknowledge that absent this error, the Judge has otherwise  set  out
    with clarity other issues  and  concerns  arising  from  the  screening
    interview.  For example, when asked about detentions at section 5.4  of
    the screening interview, the Appellant only  related  one  incident  of
    detention about a month previously when he was detained for ten  hours;
    by contrast, during the  substantive  interview  he  referred  to  four
    detentions - in February 2016, in March 2016 when he was  held  for  24
    hours, in August 2016 when he was held for ten hours (considerably more
    than just about a month prior to the screening interview), and a fourth
    incident at the end of August 2016 when the Appellant says he was taken
    by car and beaten before being allowed to go.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge clearly thought  that  the  discrepancies  thus  identified  were
    indicative of a lack of credibility, and not simply  explained  by  the
    Appellant simply lacking coherence in the interview. However, it  seems
    to me that had the Judge correctly identified that  the  Appellant  had
    mentioned the HDP, it may have  resulted  a  different  approach  being
    taken to the contents of  the  screening  interview.  (Indeed,  in  due
    course the Judge who remakes the decision in  the  appeal  will  likely
    have to evaluate for himself the extent to which the  contents  of  the
    screening interview are to  be  seen  as  damagingly  inconsistent,  or
    merely lacking in coherent articulacy for some explicable reason  -  as
    has been argued on his behalf  -  such  as  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant's arrival and his  anxiety  in  the  face  of  the  screening
    interview.)

16.  Moreover, I also acknowledge  that  there  is  considerable  weight  to
    other aspects of the Judge's assessment of credibility.   For  example:
    at paragraph 34 the  Judge  seemingly  correctly  identified  that  the
    attack mentioned at section 4.1 of the screening interview in which the
    Appellant claimed to have had his arm broken by  five  assailants  five
    years previously, was not mentioned thereafter - although he did  refer
    to an incident involving five men at a different point in time;  indeed
    when the Appellant later referred to being beaten by five  men  in  the
    course of his substantive interview and  the  appeal  hearing,  he  was
    referring to much more recent events.  Further,  in  my  judgment,  and
    contrary to one aspect of the grounds of appeal, the Judge  sustainably
    identified at paragraph 36 a discrepancy in the Appellant's account  as
    to the identities of those who had attacked him  -  a  discrepancy  not
    explained away by the Appellant claiming that he  did  not  know  their
    identities at the initial time but learnt them later.  Yet further,  at
    paragraph 37, it seems to me that  the  Judge  has  with  some  cogency
    identified an element of implausibility in the Appellant's account with
    regard to the reasons he has offered for why  he  was  released  rather
    than being made to serve a sentence having been supposedly convicted of
    involvement in PKK activities.

17.  However, whilst these adverse evaluations are individually coherent,  I
    bear in mind the 'in the round' approach necessary in asylum cases. For
    the reasons already given I find that I cannot assume that the  Judge's
    significant misconception of  fact  has  not  in  some  way  materially
    impacted upon the overall consideration of credibility.  In consequence
    I conclude that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside for error of law, and that it is not  possible  to  preserve  any
    findings of fact. Accordingly the decision in the appeal requires to be
    remade before the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

19.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Turquet,
    with all issues at large.

20.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 27 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

