
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04079/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2016                            |On 18 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Wilkins, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hawden-Beale) allowing  the  appeal  by  the
    applicant against the respondent's decision made on  14  December  2015
    refusing his application for asylum.  In this decision I will refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, the  applicant
    as the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The background to this appeal can briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on  22  June  1983.   He  first
    arrived in the UK on 31 March 2011 claiming asylum the same  day.   His
    claim was refused on 27 May 2011 and an appeal  dismissed  on  28  July
    2011, permission to appeal being refused on 24 August  2011.   He  made
    further submissions in October 2011 which were found not to  constitute
    a fresh claim and then made further submissions in January 2012,  April
    2013, July 2015  and  finally  in  November  2015  all  of  which  were
    considered and resulted in the refusal of  his  claim  on  14  December
    2015.

3.   He claimed to be at risk of persecution on the basis of  his  ethnicity
    and political opinion and later because of his sur place activities  in
    the UK, having joined the Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran (KDPI).   At
    the hearing of the appeal in 2011 the appellant sought to argue that he
    would be at risk as a card-carrying member of the Green Party but  that
    evidence  was  not  accepted  by  the  judge  who  also  rejected   the
    appellant's evidence about being arrested, detained and ill-treated  by
    the Iranian authorities.  At the hearing of this appeal, the  appellant
    attempted to show that those findings were  ill-founded  but  this  was
    rejected by the judge who found that the previous findings had not been
    successfully rebutted by the further evidence.

4.   Since the previous decision the appellant claimed that  he  had  joined
    the KDPI, become involved in demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy
    in London and had his photograph of these demonstrations uploaded on to
    Facebook with the result that the authorities would have  become  aware
    of his anti-regime activities and had visited his  family  to  threaten
    them and had injured his brother.  However, the  judge  rejected  these
    claims.  She found that there was no evidence to support the contention
    that the appellant had become a member of the KDPI after 2011.  She did
    not accept the evidence about the risk  of  targeting  because  of  his
    postings on Facebook as no evidence of such postings were  produced  or
    even that the appellant had a  Facebook  account.   The  only  evidence
    produced were postings on the Green Voice  Facebook  account  which  he
    said showed him attending demonstrations outside  the  Iranian  Embassy
    but, having  looked  at  them,  the  judge  said  that  she  could  not
    distinguish him in any of the photographs.  She was not satisfied  that
    his attendance at any of the demonstrations would result in  him  being
    identified by the Iranian  authorities.   She  found  that  he  had  no
    political profile in the UK and was satisfied that he had no profile in
    Iran either.

5.   This left the question of whether the fact that  the  appellant  was  a
    failed asylum seeker who had left Iran illegally  and  was  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity was sufficient to put him at  real  risk  of  persecution  on
    return.  The respondent relied on the country guidance decision in  SSH
    and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  308
    that an Iranian male  in  respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  had
    previously been manifested by the Iranian state did  not  face  a  real
    risk of persecution on return on account of having left Iran  illegally
    and/or being a failed asylum seeker.

6.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  produced
    and relied on an  expert  report  prepared  by  Professor  Joffe  which
    concluded that there was an increased risk of harm on  return  to  Iran
    for  Kurdish  failed  asylum  seekers   returning   from   abroad   and
    particularly the UK following illegal  exit  from  Iran.   It  was  his
    opinion that such  ill-treatment  was  not  limited  to  those  with  a
    political profile and that being Kurdish in itself  was  enough  to  be
    subjected to severe discrimination amounting to treatment  contrary  to
    article 3.  The judge took the view that it was open to her  to  depart
    from the guidance in SSH and HR on the basis that  there  had  been  no
    examination in that case of the risk to Kurds on their return  to  Iran
    purely because of being Kurds.   It  was  accepted  that  the  relevant
    Operational Guidance Note (OGN) set out the disproportionate  targeting
    of minority groups including Kurds but had concluded that because there
    were no  examples  provided  of  ill-treatment  of  returnees  with  no
    relevant adverse interest factors other than  their  Kurdish  ethnicity
    that the evidence did not  show  any  risk  of  ill-treatment  to  such
    returnees.  However, the more recent report  from  Professor  Joffe  of
    March 2016 made it clear that in his opinion they were at such risk.

7.   The judge also referred to the Upper Tribunal judgment in R (Rashid)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00430  where
    there was a challenge to a decision on a fresh claim application  where
    the applicant relied on the report of Professor Joffe.  The  respondent
    rejected the claim on the basis that the expert report was generic  and
    could not outweigh country guidance and therefore would  not  create  a
    prospect of success before an immigration judge.  UTJ  Allen  disagreed
    saying that developments set out in the report suggested  that  persons
    returned to Iran as failed asylum seekers now faced an enhanced  threat
    from the Iranian authorities.  He made it  clear  that  the  system  of
    country guidance only applied where a subsequent appeal depended on the
    same or similar evidence.  The judge was therefore  satisfied  that  in
    the light of the further evidence it was open to her not to follow  the
    country guidance and the appeal was allowed accordingly.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   The substance of the respondent's grounds is that the  judge  erred  in
    law by failing to follow the country guidance in SSH and HR.  The judge
    relied, so the grounds assert, on a solitary report of Professor  Joffe
    to depart from authoritative country guidance given  after  considering
    the extensive documents and evidence which had been  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In SSH and HR it had been conceded that Kurds would  not  be
    at risk solely because of their  ethnicity.  The  OGN  noted  that  the
    behaviour of the authorities towards the Kurds did not show there would
    be a risk of ill-treatment to such returnees.  It is  argued  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal wrongly accepted the untested evidence of Professor
    Joffe and was wrong to depart from country guidance  on  the  basis  of
    Rashid which had been promulgated in 2015 and referred to other country
    guidance cases and not to SSH.

9.   It is further argued that it was not clear  on  what  basis  the  judge
    found that the appellant would have to explain why he had been  in  the
    UK for so long and what he had been doing here, especially  as  he  did
    not have a political profile on the basis of past activities in Iran or
    sur place activities in the UK.  The grounds also argue that the  judge
    was wrong to rely on an unreported decision (AA/12529/2015),  where  in
    any event the respondent had sought permission to appeal on  a  similar
    basis to the challenge in the present case.

10.  Mr Bates adopted his grounds.  He submitted that the applications  made
    in SSH and HR were based on three strands, the fact that the applicants
    had made illegal exits from Iran, were failed  asylum  seekers  and  of
    Kurdish ethnicity.  Therefore, the fact of  Kurdish  ethnicity  was  in
    play in that appeal.  The headnote referred to "Iranian males" which by
    necessity  included  Kurdish  Iranian  males.   At  that  hearing   the
    applicant's expert witness, Dr Kakhki, had  given  evidence  about  the
    risk of ill-treatment for Kurds but the Tribunal had rejected the claim
    that an individual faced a real risk on return on  the  sole  basis  of
    being Kurdish even though it was agreed that being Kurdish was relevant
    to how a returnee otherwise of interest to  the  authorities  would  be
    treated.  Mr Bates submitted that the further  evidence  of  Dr  Joffe,
    whose evidence had not been tested could not make up the  shortfall  in
    Dr Kakhi's evidence.  The Tribunal had been  given  details  about  the
    number of returnees to Iran.  There had been nothing  to  identify  any
    specific risk  arising  solely  from  Kurdish  ethnicity.  The  country
    guidance case had dealt with the same arguments  being  raised  in  the
    present appeal and could not be distinguished in the absence  of  clear
    reasons.

11.  Ms Wilkins made the initial point that the appeal in AA/12529/2015  had
    now been heard and dismissed by the Upper Tribunal.  She submitted that
    the judge had been entitled to depart from the country guidance in  the
    light of the further evidence from  Dr  Joffe  which  she  regarded  as
    compelling and had given full and cogent reasons for her  conclusions..
    The Tribunal in SSH and HR did not give guidance on the risk on  return
    to those who had illegally exited who were also of Kurdish ethnicity.

Assessment of the Issues

12.  The issue at the heart of this appeal is whether  the  judge  erred  in
    law by not following the country guidance in SSH and HR in the light of
    the expert report provided by Dr Joffe.  In SSH  and  HR  the  Tribunal
    held as summarised in the italicised headnote that:

         "An Iranian male  in  respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian state  does  not  face  a
         real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights  on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.   No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time  of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have been  established.   In
         particular there is not a  real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment."

14.  It is correct that the applicants in SSH and HR  were  Kurdish  and  on
    this issue the Tribunal said at [34]:

         "It was not suggested to us that an individual faces risk on return
         on the sole basis of being Kurdish.  It  was  however  agreed  that
         being Kurdish was relevant to how a returnee would  be  treated  by
         the authorities.  For example, the Operational Guidance Note refers
         at 3.12.14 to the government disproportionately targeting  minority
         groups, including Kurds, for arbitrary arrests, prolonged detention
         and physical abuse.  No examples however have been provided of ill-
         treatment of returnees with no relevant  adverse  interest  factors
         other than their  Kurdish  ethnicity,  and  we  conclude  that  the
         evidence does not show risk of  ill-treatment  to  such  returnees,
         though we accept that it might be  an  exacerbating  factor  for  a
         returnee otherwise of interest...".

15.  Mr Bates submits that as  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  evidence
    showed no risk of  ill-treatment  to  Kurdish  returnees,  that  factor
    cannot add anything of substance to the conclusion that  there  was  no
    real risk arising from the fact of having left Iran illegally or  being
    a failed asylum seeker.  However Ms  Wilkins  submits  that  there  was
    further evidence that there was an increased risk of harm on return  to
    Iran for Kurdish failed asylum seekers set out  in  the  report  of  Dr
    Joffe which was before the First-tier Tribunal  but  had  not  been  in
    evidence before the Upper Tribunal in the country guidance decision.

16.  In the Senior President's  Practice  Direction  the  issue  of  country
    guidance is dealt with as follows:

         "12.2    A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the
              IAT  bearing  the  letters  'CG'  shall  be  treated  as   an
              authoritative  finding  on   the   country   guidance   issue
              identified in the  determination,  based  upon  the  evidence
              before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT or the  IAT  that
              determined the appeal.  As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been
              expressly  superseded  or  replaced   by   any   later   'CG'
              determination, or is inconsistent with other  authority  that
              is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance  case  is
              authoritative in any subsequent appeal so far as that appeal:-




             (a)  relates to the country guidance issue in question; and


             (b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence'."


18.  I have been referred to the judgment of UTJ Allen in  Rashid  where  it
    was emphasised that the system of country guidance only applied where a
    subsequent appeal depended upon the  same  or  similar  evidence.   The
    issue therefore is whether the evidence relied on by the appellant  can
    be so categorised. In NM and others (Lone Women -  Ashraf)  Somalia  CG
    [2005] UKIAT 76 the Tribunal at [140-1] said:

         "These decisions are now denoted as "CG".  They  are  not  starred
        decisions. Those latter are decisions which are binding  on  points
        of law. The requirement to apply CG cases is rather different: they
        should be applied except where they do not apply to the  particular
        facts which an Adjudicator or the Tribunal faces and  can  properly
        be held inapplicable for legally adequate  reasons:  there  may  be
        evidence that circumstances have changed in a  material  way  which
        requires a different decision,  again  on  the  basis  that  proper
        reasons that are given; there may be significant new evidence which
        shows that the views originally expressed require consideration for
        revision  or  refinement,  even  without  any  material  change  in
        circumstances. It may  be  that  the  passage  of  time  itself  or
        substantial new evidence itself warrants a  re-examination  of  the
        position, even though  the  outcome  may  be  unchanged.  It  is  a
        misunderstanding of their nature, therefore, to see these cases  as
        equivalent to starred cases. The system does not have the  rigidity
        of the legally binding precedent but has instead the flexibility to
        accommodate individual cases, changes, fresh evidence and the other
        circumstances which we have set out. ...


        Unlike  starred  decisions,  it  is  always  possible  for  further
        evidence to show that the original decision was wrong or to  expose
        other issues which require examination.  They  are  not  accurately
        understood or described as 'factual precedents'."

19.  I am satisfied that the judge was entitled  to  find  that  Dr  Joffe's
    report could not be regarded as "the same or similar evidence".  It  is
    certainly not the same evidence as it was not before the Upper Tribunal
    in SSH and MH.  It is similar evidence only in the sense that it  deals
    with similar but not identical issues considered by that Tribunal.   It
    is evidence which, for  whatever  reason,  was  not  available  to  the
    Tribunal which dealt in detail and at length with the issue of the risk
    arising to Iranian  Kurds  on  return,  having  unsuccessfully  claimed
    asylum or having made an illegal exit from Iran.  It was fresh evidence
    which the judge was entitled to regard as significant and then  it  was
    for her to assess in the context of the evidence as a whole the  extent
    to which it  affected  the  application  of  country  guidance  in  the
    appellant's circumstances.

20.  She was, therefore, entitled to consider whether the  further  evidence
    from Dr Joffe required her to take a different view from  the  previous
    country guidance on the issue of whether the appellant would be at risk
    on return to Iran. I am satisfied that  her  findings  and  conclusions
    were properly open to her on the evidence.

21.  In the respondent's grounds it is argued that the judge  was  wrong  to
    follow the reported decision in AA/12529/2015 and  that  permission  to
    appeal had been sought.  However, that appeal has been  dismissed.   It
    was also argued that Rashid was dealing  with  other  country  guidance
    cases and not SSH and MH but, nonetheless, that case was  dealing  with
    the principles on which country guidance could be departed from.

Decision

22.  In summary, the grounds do not satisfy me that the judge erred  in  law
    by departing from the country guidance in  the  light  of  the  further
    evidence in Dr Joffe's report.  It follows that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.  The anonymity order made by the First-tier
    Tribunal remains in force.



Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 16 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


