
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/04146/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 October 2018                      |On 27 November 2018                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                   MS T O
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Lagunyo, Counsel for Howe & Co Solicitors,
Brentford
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 10  September  1986.   She
    appealed the respondent's decision of 15 March 2018 refusing her asylum
    and humanitarian protection claims.  Her appeal was heard by  Judge  of
    the First-Tier Tribunal Norris on 1 and 14 May 2018 and dismissed in  a
    decision promulgated on 23 May 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  on  7  August  2018.   The
    permission states that there may be some merit in the first ground  but
    the arguments are not limited.  The first  ground  is  that  the  Judge
    failed  to  adequately  consider  risk  on  return  in  light  of   the
    appellant's involvement in the Gulen Movement.  The Judge accepted that
    the appellant was an active member of the  Gulen  Movement  in  Turkey.
    This was also accepted by the respondent.  The Judge however found that
    the appellant's father and brother had not been detained  and  although
    the appellant's name is on a list of  persons  identified  as  Gulenist
    supporters, he found that she did not face a real risk of  persecution.
    The grounds state that the Judge failed to properly  consider  that  in
    May 2016 the Turkish government declared the Gulenist Movement to be  a
    terrorist organisation and the Judge  did  not  properly  consider  the
    connection between the appellant being mentioned on this list and being
    identified on return.  The Judge found that in the absence of an arrest
    warrant the appellant was not wanted by the authorities. The Permission
    states that the Judge  also  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  court
    documents and failed to consider that any period in detention carries a
    risk of torture or ill treatment in Turkey.

 3. The second ground is that the Judge failed to adequately  consider  the
    corroborative evidence supplied by the appellant.  He failed to  attach
    any evidential value to the evidence of [YK].  The grounds  state  that
    the Judge misconstrued the appellant's evidence  and  rejected  central
    parts of her claim due to misdirection and the Judge's rejection of her
    brother's detention was inadequately reasoned. The grounds  state  that
    the Judge's  overall  findings  on  credibility  are  flawed  when  the
    supporting evidence is considered on the lower standard of proof.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response on file.  It  states  that  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal  Judge  was  entitled  to  view  the  appellant's  documentary
    evidence in  light  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  the  absence  of  evidence
    reasonably available in light of TK  (Burundi).   The  response  states
    that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge gave cogent  reasons  at  paragraphs
    7.6 - 7.8 and 7.12 - 7.18 for concluding that the appellant had  failed
    to discharge the burden of proof and for finding that she  was  not  at
    risk on return.  The response goes  on  to  state  that  the  appellant
    failed to establish that merely being a Gulenist  is  determinative  of
    risk on return, noting the appellant's own evidence  that  her  brother
    was a Gulenist and  had  been  detained  by  the  authorities  but  was
    released on bail and the family expect his name  to  be  cleared.   The
    response goes on to  state  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the  alleged  detention  of  her  father  and
    brother did not take  place.  The  Judge  referred  to  inconsistencies
    around her father's detention and the appellant's  failure  to  provide
    reasonably  available   corroborative   evidence   of   her   brother's
    detention/bail/ court proceedings.

The Hearing

 5. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the Judge did not engage  with
    the appellant's risk on return as she is a specific Gulenist  and  this
    is accepted.  She submitted that  Gulenist  members  are  detained  and
    tortured and in the COI report Gulenist members have  been  accused  of
    the coup in Turkey.

 6. She submitted that the Judge states that  membership  of  the  Gulenist
    Movement is not enough for real risk but this is an appellant  who  was
    studying in the United Kingdom and had a scholarship from  the  Turkish
    government which was taken away  from  her.   She  submitted  that  the
    appellant is awaiting the outcome of her  appeal  to  the  court  about
    this.

 7. Counsel submitted that there is  nothing  in  the  decision  about  the
    appellant being at risk on return but she must be at  risk  on  return,
    because she is on a government list,  along  with  a  number  of  other
    students whose scholarships have been withdrawn.   She  submitted  that
    the appellant's mother and father were detained but the Judge does  not
    accept this and finds that the appellant will not be at risk on return.
    The judge states that this is because there is no arrest warrant.   She
    submitted that what the Judge states is not sufficient  and  the  Judge
    has not dealt with the  country  evidence  which  states  that  100,000
    people and more have been detained for the same reasons.

 8. Counsel made reference to the  witness  who  attended  the  hearing  to
    support the appellant and submitted that he is on the same list as  the
    appellant and was granted asylum after being interviewed and explaining
    his risk on return.  Another friend returned and was  detained  for  14
    weeks and she submitted that even if the Judge does  not  believe  that
    the appellant's father and brother were detained, proper findings  have
    not been made on this appellant's risk on return and this  must  be  an
    error of law.

 9. The Presenting  Officer  made  his  submissions,  submitting  that  the
    grounds are merely a disagreement with the findings made by the  Judge.
    I was referred to paragraphs 7.6 to 7.8 of the decision  in  which  the
    Judge assesses the appellant's  individual  circumstances  and  accepts
    that the appellant was involved in the Gulen Movement while she was  in
    Turkey.  The Judge states that  there  is  no  evidence  that  she  has
    continued that involvement in the United Kingdom with the exception  of
    two seminars for which the appellant did not produce any  evidence  and
    the Judge notes that there is no evidence of her  being  high  profile.
    The Judge refers to the appellant's ByLock account and her bank account
    with Bank Asya and the appellant stating that the bank account has been
    frozen.  Again she has produced no evidence of her bank account  or  it
    being frozen and no evidence of her  ByLock  account.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Judge  has  given  proper  reasons  for  his
    decision.  It is correct that corroboration is  not  required  but  the
    Judge points out that the evidence produced is not satisfactory.   This
    finding is explained at paragraph 7.7 of the decision. There is nothing
    before the Judge to connect the appellant to the people  named  in  the
    court documents and there is nothing about the appellant's father's  or
    brother's detention and nothing to identify any  of  them.   The  Judge
    states that as the court documents  were  sent  to  the  appellant  via
    WhatsApp they could have sent the identity documents in the  same  way.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge  was  entitled  to  the
    findings of fact he made and gives proper reasons for these findings in
    the decision.

10. I was then referred to paragraphs 5.9, 5.10 and 5.25 of  the  decision.
    Reference is  made  to  the  appellant's  brother  being  detained  and
    released on bail and the statement that he is expected to  be  cleared.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that the decision is well written  and
    reasoned and more than sufficient  reasons  have  been  given  for  the
    Judge's findings to be upheld.  He submitted that there is no  material
    error of law in the Judge's decision and that it should stand.

11. Counsel made further submissions  referring  to  the  bank  and  ByLock
    accounts referred to at 7.6 of the decision and she submitted that  the
    Judge has made no finding as to whether the appellant did have a ByLock
    account or not.  I was referred to pages 7  and  13  of  the  objective
    evidence which  states  that  those  with  ByLock  accounts  will  have
    difficulties on return and could be detained. There was no evidence  of
    the Bylock account before the Judge apart  from  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence. He refers to this and clearly did not believe she had one.

12. Counsel submitted that the Judge  did  not  engage  with  risk  to  the
    appellant on return, he just states that she has not  been  subject  to
    any surveillance or monitoring.  The  Judge  refers  to  her  level  of
    education but Counsel submitted that this is not a central issue in the
    appeal.  She submitted that risk on return is the issue and there is no
    proper finding on this.

13. I was asked to find that this must be a material error of law and I was
    asked to remit the case back to the First-Tier Tribunal for rehearing.

    DECISION and REASONS

14. The Judge is clearly not satisfied with the evidence which  was  before
    him.  Although corroboration  is  not  required  in  asylum  cases,  if
    evidence supporting the  appellant's  statements  can  be  obtained  it
    should be obtained and the Judge found that the appellant had failed to
    provide sufficient evidence for the burden of proof  that  she  was  at
    risk on return to be discharged.

15. The Judge refers to inconsistencies and a lack  of  credibility  around
    the appellant's father's detention and refers  to  failure  to  provide
    reasonably available corroborative evidence of her brother's  detention
    and his proceedings.

16. I find  that  the  Judge  did  consider  risk  on  return  and  did  so
    adequately.  The  background  evidence  does  not  show  that  everyone
    involved in the Gulen Movement will be at risk and the Judge  has  made
    his findings based on the background  material,  which  indicates  that
    everyone on the list is not at risk of persecution.

17. The Judge has not given weight to the witness's evidence.  The  witness
    has been granted asylum but there is insufficient  evidence  about  his
    claim and his circumstances to sway the Judge. The  only  matter  which
    the Judge does accept is that they are on the same list but  the  Judge
    does not find the appellant to be credible. He  found  that  there  was
    nothing in the evidence showing that the appellant would be  wanted  by
    the authorities in Turkey.  The Judge objected to the  translations  of
    the court documents, finding that they did not make sense and  he  also
    found that there was nothing to connect the  appellant  to  the  people
    referred to in the documents.

18. With regard to credibility and the application to the Commission,  this
    was made on 24 August 2017 and the date  of  the  relevant  law  is  23
    January.  The Judge rejected the account of  the  appellant's  father's
    detention and gave proper reasons for doing so.   The Judge also  found
    the  evidence  about  the  appellant's  brother  to  lack  credibility.
    Something could have been produced to support this and must  have  been
    available if it is true.

19. In the decision the Judge  has  clearly  considered  all  the  evidence
    before him including the objective evidence.  At paragraph 7.4  of  the
    decision the Judge states that the COI Report confirms that  actual  or
    perceived  involvement  in  the  Gulen  Movement  can  be  regarded  as
    political opinion but that establishing such membership does not equate
    to refugee status.  Trials have begun of those suspected of involvement
    in the coup attempt.  The appellant was  not  involved  in  this.   The
    appellant states she is on the list of the  people  whose  scholarships
    have been taken away from them.  At 7.6 the Judge refers to there being
    no evidence of either the ByLock account of the appellant or  her  bank
    account.  Evidence of these must be available to her.   The  Judge  was
    dissatisfied with the fully translated documents put before him and the
    decision from the constitutional court where the appellant is the  sole
    named applicant but the subject matter is not  relevant  to  her.   The
    Judge finds there is no reliable translation of  the  court  documents.
    In spite of this at 7.10 the Judge deals with what the consequences for
    the appellant will be if he accepts that her name is on the  list.   He
    notes that the appellant did not apply for asylum  straight  away  once
    her name appeared on the list.  At 7.12  the  Judge  explains  why  the
    appellant's chronology does not make sense.  At 7.13  the  Judge  gives
    proper reasons for not believing that her  father  was  detained.   The
    Judge goes into detail in this paragraph, giving  his  reasons  and  at
    7.14 he notes that the letter supposedly from her  father  contradicted
    the appellant's evidence.

20. The Judge therefore found the central facts of the appellant's claim to
    be unreliable.  The Judge found that the mere appearance of her name on
    the list is not sufficient for her to succeed in an asylum claim.   She
    claimed only after her father's second detention which the Judge  found
    did not occur.  She is awaiting a decision  from  the  Commission.   At
    7.16 the Judge notes that the appellant does not assert that her friend
    has been killed or that any threats have been made against her and  her
    evidence is that anyone she knows who was detained has been released on
    bail.

21. At 7.17 the Judge deals with risk on return.  He points out that  there
    is no warrant  for  the  appellant's  arrest  and  that  at  worst  her
    scholarship has been cancelled and perhaps her  prior  academic  record
    annulled.  There was no evidence that her passport has  been  cancelled
    and she has never  previously  been  arrested  or  ill-treated  by  the
    authorities. She left on her passport for legitimate  reasons  and  has
    returned to Turkey on several occasions.  When she returns to the  next
    time she will do so on her own passport and will not be  flagged  as  a
    failed asylum seeker.  She  has  not  been  engaged  in  any  political
    activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  has  not  been  subject   to
    surveillance or monitoring and although she states her family in Turkey
    are Gulenists her evidence is that they  have  not  been  subjected  to
    torture.

22. This is a well thought out decision and reasons are given for  all  the
    Judge's findings.  There is no material error of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision.




Notice of Decision

As there are  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal's
decision  the  decision  by  Judge  Norris  of   the   First-Tier   Tribunal
promulgated on 23 May 2018 must stand.

Anonymity has been directed.


Signed                                  Date 20 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

