
                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04774/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2019                           |On 11 March 2020              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     HS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Dolan, Counsel, instructed by Shawstone
                    Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal K Swinnerton (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on
         12 September 2019, dismissed the appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
         protection  and  human  rights  appeal  against  the   respondent's
         decision of 9 May 2019 to refuse her protection  and  human  rights
         claim and her claim for humanitarian protection.


Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Yemen. At the date of the First-tier
         Tribunal decision she was 31 years old.   She  was  born  in  Saudi
         Arabia and had lived in  Jeddah  all  her  life.  I  summarise  the
         appellant's claim.

      3. The appellant lived with her maternal aunt after her  mother  moved
         to the UK in 2003/4. The appellant has two maternal aunts who  work
         in Saudi Arabia and who are both Saudi Arabian  nationals.  Another
         maternal aunt, uncle and grandmother also live in the UK. She has a
         sister who lives in Germany and another sister and brother who live
         in the United Arab Emirates (UAE).

      4. The appellant graduated from medical College  in  2012.  She  began
         working for the Laperle Perle Dental Spa in 2015.  She  claims  the
         dental practice changed  its  name  to  'Dr  Susan  Banjar'  around
         December 2017/January 2018. On 2 May 2017 the appellant was  issued
         with a multi-entry visitor entry clearance. She arrived in  the  UK
         by plane on 13 October 2018 pursuant to her entry clearance.  Prior
         to her arrival in the UK,  but  in  the  same  month,  an  Egyptian
         colleague in the same dentistry practice was made redundant.

      5. A few days after her arrival in the UK she received an  email  from
         her employer in Saudi Arabia informing her that her employment  had
         been  terminated.  She  believes  her  redundancy  was  part  of  a
         'Saudisation' policy through which Saudi businesses are required to
         ensure that their workforce is comprised of Saudi nationals  up  to
         certain levels.

      6. The appellant claimed asylum on 27 November 2018. She  feared  that
         she would be persecuted if removed to Yemen, and that if removed to
         Saudi Arabia, the Saudi  authorities  would  remove  her  to  Yemen
         because she had been made redundant  and  had  lost  her  right  to
         reside, and because of the 'Saudisation' policy.

      7. The respondent rejected both the appellant's  claim  to  have  been
         made redundant from her job as a dentist in Saudi Arabia,  and  her
         claim that her Saudi Arabian  residence  permit  had  expired.  The
         respondent believed the appellant could return to Saudi Arabia  and
         continued in her profession and renew  her  residence  permit.  The
         Reasons  for  Refusal   Letter   referenced   background   evidence
         indicating that there was a non-deportation policy for Syrians  and
         Yemenis living in Saudi Arabia,  and  that  there  were  more  than
         603,000 Yemeni nationals living in the country who were  considered
         visitors and not officially recognised refugees.

      8. Although the respondent accepted that the  appellant  would  be  at
         real risk of persecution in Yemen, and that she would face  a  real
         risk of a breach  of  her  ECHR  rights,  the  respondent  was  not
         satisfied that  the  appellant  had  established  a  real  risk  of
         persecution or breach of ECHR if she was returned to  Saudi  Arabia
         and considered that the appellant could be removed to Saudi Arabia.

      9. The appellant exercised her right  of  appeal  under  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     10. The appellant provided two bundles of documents for her appeal. The
         first bundle ran to 482 pages and included, inter alia, a statement
         from the appellant dated 16  August  2019,  a  statement  from  her
         maternal aunt resident in the UK, a country expert report and Saudi
         Arabia written by Dr Imranali Panjwani dated 17 July 2019,  medical
         records relating to the appellant, documents  relating  to  the  La
         Perle dental practice, several media reports and articles  relating
         to  the  Saudization  policy,  some  with  specific  reference   to
         dentists, and various human rights reports relating to  both  Yemen
         and Saudi Arabia. The 2nd bundle ran  to  50  pages  and  included,
         inter alia, a witness statement  from  the  appellant's  mother,  a
         medico-legal report authored by Dr Syed Zia  Ali  dated  22  August
         2019, and a Wikipedia entry on Saudi Arabian nationality law.  Also
         produced to the judge was a skeleton argument authored by Mr Dolan.




     11. The appellant gave oral evidence. The judge indicated that he would
         treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness for the purpose of  the
         hearing. The judge noted that the appellant was  taking  medication
         to help with sleep and an antidepressant that had  been  prescribed
         two days prior to the hearing. The judge also heard  oral  evidence
         from the appellant's aunt and mother.

     12. In the section  of  her  decision  headed  'findings  of  fact  and
         reasons', the judge found  that  the  appellant  had  not  given  a
         truthful and accurate account of events that caused her to make her
         protection claim. The  judge  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence,
         given during her  substantive  asylum  interview,  that  she  never
         thought that the Saudization policy  would  include  "professionals
         like doctors and  engineers  and  high  profile  professionals"  in
         circumstances where her Egyptian colleague had been made  redundant
         a short time before the appellant came to the UK  [21].  The  judge
         found that  the  expulsion  of  the  appellant's  Egyptian  dentist
         colleague from the practice "would have been  the  most  clear  and
         direct form of evidence to her that  it  did  apply  to  people  in
         exactly the same situation as the appellant and that she would have
         been acutely aware of this prior to leaving Saudi Arabia in October
         2018."

     13. At [22] the judge stated that no evidence of the change of name  of
         the dental practice from 'Laperle Perle Dental Spa'  to  'Dr  Suzan
         Banjar' had been provided. The judge referred to undated  documents
         from Laperle  Perle  Dental  Spa  detailing  the  dentists  at  the
         practice, including the Egyptian dentist, but  noted  that  neither
         the name nor details nor photograph of the appellant were  included
         in the team of professionals. The judge agreed with the  respondent
         that the email document submitted by the appellant  which  attached
         the letter of redundancy was not in  an  email  format.  The  email
         document included a 'from and to' bar indicating that it  was  sent
         on   24   October   2018   at   6:59:50   2   PM   GMT   +1    from
         'accountant@laperlemedical.com'. The judge noted that  it  was  not
         sent from 'Dr Suzan Banjar', the claimed new  name  of  the  dental
         practice, and that no explanation for this was provided. The  judge
         stated, "I fail to see why the  letter  upon  which  the  Appellant
         relies is not from Laperle Dental when the Appellant has provided a
         termination  e-mail  sent   to   her   from   the   accountant   at
         Laperlemedical and undated pages detailing the dentists at  Leperle
         Dental. Regardless of the issue  as  to  the  name  of  the  dental
         practice, I do not place much weight upon the documents provided by
         the Appellant to evidence her termination of employment in  October
         2018."


     14. At [23] the judge found  that  no  evidence  was  provided  by  the
         appellant that her Saudi Arabian residency  had  ended.  The  judge
         noted that in her screening interview conducted  in  November  2018
         the appellant claimed her Saudi residency  expired  in  July  2019,
         that in her substantive asylum interview in April 2019  she  stated
         that her residence permit had already expired because she had  been
         made redundant and because she did not return  within  a  specified
         period, and in her witness statement she stated that her  residency
         card was valid until 23 August 2020, but that as she was no  longer
         employed as a dentist she  would  be  unable  to  return  to  Saudi
         Arabia.

     15. At [24] the judge noted that the appellant answered 'no' when asked
         in both her screening interview and  substantive  asylum  interview
         whether she had any medical conditions or mental  health  problems.
         The  judge  noted  that   the   appellant   had   been   prescribed
         antidepressant medication two days prior to the appeal hearing  and
         that the report by Dr Ali was based  upon  an  examination  of  the
         appellant on 17 August 2019. The judge found that Dr Ali's  opinion
         that  the  appellant  presented  with  symptoms  indicating  severe
         depression and PTSD were at odds with the content of the GP medical
         records provided and that Dr Ali gave little by way of analysis  or
         reasoning to support his opinion.

     16. At [25] the judge considered  the  report  from  Dr  Panjwani,  the
         country expert. The judge noted the country expert's opinion  that,
         although the appellant had a valid residence permit,  she  did  not
         have secured employment or a sponsor  to  guarantee  her  residence
         permit and would  be  charged  financial  penalties  and  could  be
         deported, but found that this differed from the appellant's account
         that, as she no longer holds her dentist role, she cannot return to
         Saudi Arabia.

     17. At [26] the judge indicated that she weighed up her  concerns  with
         the appellant's credibility with the contents of the expert reports
         from Dr Ali and Dr Panjwani. At  [27]  the  judge  found  that  the
         appellant was not a credible witness, that her employment  had  not
         been terminated, and that even if her  employment  was  terminated,
         she would nonetheless be able to return to Saudi Arabia  where  she
         could continue to live with her  aunt  and  seek  to  obtain  other
         employment.

     18. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     19. The grounds raise several challenges to the judge's decision.  They
         contend  that  the  judge  misdirected  herself  on  the  issue  of
         subsidiary protection, with reference to both  paragraph  339C(iii)
         of the immigration rules and the definition of 'a  person  eligible
         for subsidiary  protection'  in  Article  2  of  the  Qualification
         Directive  (Council Directive 2004/83/EC), as the judge should have
         asked herself whether the appellant  could  avail  herself  of  the
         protection  of  Yemen.  The  judge  should  have   considered   the
         distinction in Article 2 between "country of origin"  and  "country
         of habitual residence". The  grounds  contend  that  the  appellant
         could not avail herself of the protection of Saudi Arabia and Saudi
         Arabia is not a signatory to the 1951 Refugee Convention  and  that
         the judge failed to consider the content  and  conclusions  of  the
         country expert report and  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting Dr Panjwani's evidence.


     20. The grounds further contend that the judge failed to give  adequate
         reasons for rejecting the expert report from Dr Ali and  failed  to
         consider the diagnostic criteria supporting the medical  diagnosis.
         The grounds further contend  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
         consider the appellant's claimed vulnerability, with  reference  to
         the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and the  decision
         in AM (Afghanistan) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123.  The  grounds  finally
         contend that the judge failed to determine  whether  the  appellant
         would face very significant obstacles to her integration  in  Saudi
         Arabia.


     21. In granting Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bristow noted that the
         judge considered whether the appellant could avail herself  of  the
         protection of Saudi Arabia and that it was arguable that she should
         have considered whether the appellant could avail  herself  of  the
         protection of Yemen. Permission was granted on all grounds.

     22. Mr Dolan adopted the grounds at the  'error  of  law'  hearing.  He
         submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  assess   the   appellant's
         credibility in light of the evidence  that  she  was  a  vulnerable
         individual, and that she met the  definition  of  vulnerability  in
         footnote 2 on page 1 of the Joint Presidential Guidance note as she
         was receiving healthcare. Mr Dolan submitted that the judge  failed
         to engage with the opinion of the country expert in respect of  the
         appellant being able to look for  work  as  a  dentist,  failed  to
         adequately consider the evidence of  Saudisation  detailed  by  the
         country expert, and failed to consider the  expert's  opinion  that
         the appellant's aunts could  not  act  as  her  sponsors  in  Saudi
         Arabia. Even if the appellant was  still  employed,  her  residence
         permit expired on  23  August  2020  and  the  background  evidence
         suggested that she would be unlikely to be able to remain  employed
         as a dentist.

     23. Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the  immigration  rules  relating  to
         subsidiary protection were clear and that the "country  of  return"
         in the present case was Saudi Arabia  and  not  Yemen.  He  further
         submitted  that  the  "country  of  origin"  in  the  Qualification
         Directive was also clearly Saudi Arabia given  that  the  appellant
         was born there and always lived in  that  country.  The  fact  that
         Saudi Arabia was not a signatory to the 1951 Refugee Convention was
         not strictly material to the outcome of the appeal. The issue I had
         to determine was whether there was a real risk the appellant  would
         be removed to Yemen from Saudi Arabia. There was no  evidence  that
         someone in her position, who was born and  lived  in  the  country,
         would be removed to Yemen. The expert report failed to consider the
         appellant's particular characteristics and failed to breakdown  the
         circumstances of different returnees  who  had  been  removed  from
         Saudi  Arabia,   and   the   statistics   were   advanced   without
         consideration  of  their  relevant  context  and  were  of   little
         evidential value. With respect to the adverse credibility  findings
         and the psychiatric report, it was  submitted  that  the  appellant
         gave a similar account of her  mental  health  in  her  substantive
         asylum interview on 8 April  2019  as  she  did  in  her  screening
         interview on 20 November 2018, and that there was an absence of any
         reference to any mental health issue in the GP records. Mr  Lindsay
         submitted that the reasons given by the judge for  discounting  the
         appellant's evidence did  not  depend  on  the  vulnerable  witness
         guidance.

Further directions following the hearing

     24. Following the hearing  the  Upper  Tribunal  became  aware  of  the
         decision of the Vice-President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Abunar
         (Para 339C: "Country of return") [2018] UKUT  00387  (IAC).  On  22
         January 2020 the Upper Tribunal  issued  directions  requiring  the
         appellant to provide further written submissions  relating  to  the
         applicability of Abunar, to be served on  the  respondent  and  the
         Upper  Tribunal  no  later  than  Thursday  30  January  2020.  The
         respondent was directed to file  any  further  written  submissions
         concerning the  applicability  of  Abunar,  to  be  served  on  the
         appellant and the Tribunal no later than 5 February 2020. The Upper
         Tribunal received further submissions from  the  appellant's  legal
         representatives on 29 January 2020. The Upper Tribunal received  no
         further submissions from the respondent.

Discussion

     25. I am not persuaded  that  the  judge  either  erred  on  her  legal
         approach to the psychiatric report prepared by Dr Ali, or that  the
         judge failed to take into account  the  appellant's  vulnerability.
         The judge  was  rationally  entitled,  at  [24],  to  consider  the
         appellant's answers in both her screening interview and her  asylum
         interview indicating that she had no mental  health  problems,  the
         absence of any specific mention of any recent mental health  issues
         in the appellant's GP  medical  records,  and  the  fact  that  the
         appellant was only prescribed anti-depressants two days before  the
         hearing. The psychiatric report was based on  information  provided
         by the appellant  and  there  was  no  assessment  of  whether  the
         appellant  could  be  feigning  her  symptoms.  I  note  that   the
         psychiatrist considered  the  position  for  those  suffering  from
         mental health in both Yemen and Saudi Arabia, but this was  outside
         the scope of his expertise. The judge nevertheless agreed to  treat
         the appellant as a vulnerable  witness  and  there  is  nothing  to
         indicate that she did not apply  this  approach  in  practice.  The
         judge's adverse credibility findings were not of a kind that  could
         be attributed to any of the symptoms considered in the  psychiatric
         report. For example, the judge  found  incredible  the  appellant's
         claim that she did not appreciate that she may be  subject  to  the
         Saudisation policy following the alleged expulsion of her  Egyptian
         colleague  from  the  practice.  This  is  not  the  result  of  an
         inconsistency or any problems with memory. The judge also relied on
         the absence of any evidence that the dental practice changed  name,
         as claimed by the appellant, and concerns identified with the email
         format of a document upon which the appellant relied.


     26. Nor am I persuaded that the judge erred in law in his  approach  to
         the expert country report. The judge  found  that  the  appellant's
         employment in  Saudi  Arabia  had  not  been  terminated,  and  the
         appellant accepted that she held a residence permit valid until  23
         August 2020. Much of the  expert  report  was  concerned  with  the
         difficulties the appellant may encounter in trying to  find  a  new
         dentist job, but the judge found that the appellant still  had  her
         job. The extracts upon which the expert relied (at page 99) did not
         support his contention that dental contracts had been terminated as
         a consequence of the Saudisation policy.  The  lack  of  any  clear
         evidence that the Sauidsation policy caused dentists  to  be  fired
         from their jobs further undermined the appellant's  credibility.  I
         additionally accept the criticism mounted by  Mr  Lindsay  that  Dr
         Panjwani   failed   to   consider   the   appellant's    particular
         circumstances in determining what will happen to her on  return  to
         Saudi Arabia, particular the fact that the appellant had been  born
         in Saudi Arabia and lived there all her life, and that she has  two
         family members (her two aunts) who are Saudi nationals. Given  that
         the appellant would have two family members who are Saudi nationals
         who could assist and support her on her return, and given that  the
         appellant was found to still have  a  job  and  a  valid  residence
         permit,  and in light of  the  judge's  findings  relating  to  the
         appellant's  mental  health,  there  was  no  arguable  breach   of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

     27. I turn now  to  the  grounds  relating  to  subsidiary  protection.
         Paragraph 339C(ii) of the immigration rules  provides that a person
         will qualify for international protection  if  substantial  grounds
         have been shown  for  believing  that  the  person  concerned,  "if
         returned to the country of return",  would  face  a  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm and is  unable,  or,  owing  to  such  risk,
         unwilling to avail themselves of the protection  of  that  country.
         The definition of a 'person eligible for subsidiary protection'  is
         contained in Article 2(e)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.  This
         reads,

             (e) person eligible for subsidiary protection' means  a  third
             country national or a stateless person who does not qualify as
             a refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds have been
             shown for believing that the person concerned, if returned  to
             his or her country of origin, or in the case  of  a  stateless
             person, to his or her country of  former  habitual  residence,
             would face a real risk of suffering serious harm as defined in
             Article 15, and to whom Article 17(1) and (2) do not  apply,
             and is unable, or, owing to  such  risk,  unwilling  to  avail
             himself or herself of the protection of that country.

             (k) 'Country of Origin' means  the  country  or  countries  of
             nationality or, for  stateless  persons,  of  former  habitual
             residence."

     28. There is a difference between 'country of return' in paragraph 339C
         and 'country of  origin'  in  the  Directive.  The  Upper  Tribunal
         considered this difference in Abunar. Mr Abunar (the claimant)  was
         a Syrian national who had lived for many years in  Egypt  since  he
         was 6 years old. The claimant had, or had  had,  a  valid  Egyptian
         residence permit. He did not leave  Egypt  fearing  persecution  in
         that country and would not be in danger on his return to Egypt. The
         Secretary of State accepted that the circumstances  in  Syria  were
         such as to engage Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. The
         Secretary of State's position however was that the  claimant  could
         be removed to Egypt. The judge allowed the appeal  on  humanitarian
         protection grounds. The Secretary of State was  granted  permission
         to appeal on the basis that the judge failed to consider  that  the
         claimant could potentially return to Egypt.


     29. Having set out the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules and
         the Qualification Directive the Vice-President found that the issue
         of  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  could  refuse  humanitarian
         protection to the claimant on the ground that he could  be  removed
         to Egypt was "a matter  of  potential  difficulty"  [6].  The  Vice
         President's analysis is contained in [9] and [10].

             9.     It is therefore right to say,  as  Judge  Phillips  did
             say, that paragraph 339C does not  refer  to  the  country  of
             nationality. However, the phrase  used  in  the  Directive  is
             "country of origin", but the phrase used in paragraph 339C  is
             "country of return". The latter phrase does not appear  to  be
             defined in the Immigration Rules, and  it  must  therefore  be
             assumed that it applies  to  a  country  of  proposed  return,
             whether or not that  country  is  the  claimant's  country  of
             origin. It appears to follow  that  paragraph  339C  does  not
             correctly transpose the relevant provisions of the Directive.
             10.     Mrs O'Brien did not ask us to  apply  the  Immigration
             Rules rather than the Directive. There is no  doubt  that  the
             wording of the determination is unfortunate: the judge had  no
             power to grant the claimant humanitarian  protection.  It  is,
             however, clear from her findings that the claimant was, on the
             basis of those findings, entitled to a grant  of  humanitarian
             protection. We therefore  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
             appeal. With great assistance from Mrs O'Brien, we  were  able
             to satisfy ourselves during the course of  the  day  that  the
             claimant had access to housing and  other  assistance  in  the
             light of his successful claim.
     30. The Vice-President found that  paragraph  339C  did  not  correctly
         transpose the relevant provisions of the Directive. A person,  such
         as the appellant, will be entitled to  humanitarian  protection  if
         they would face in their 'country of origin', that being, according
         to the Qualification Directive, their  country  of  nationality,  a
         breach of Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive,  even  if
         they were not going to be removed there. The respondent accepted in
         her Reasons for Refusal Letter that the appellant would face a real
         risk of Article 15(c) if she  were  removed  to  Yemen.  The  CPIN,
         January  2019,  confirms  this  at  2.3.4   to   2.3.12.   As   the
         Qualification Directive is directly effective, and in light of  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal in Abunar, I am satisfied  that  the
         appellant was, at the date of the judge's decision, and at the date
         of this error of law decision, entitled to a grant of  humanitarian
         protection, and that the judge  was  wrong  in  law  in  concluding
         otherwise.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
humanitarian protection.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                                  10 March 2020
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


