
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04871/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 February 2018                    |On 7 March 2018                   |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Thirumaney, Counsel instructed by Shervins
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant and proceedings

 1. The appellant is an Iranian citizen. He appeals with permission granted
    at the First-tier Tribunal, a decision of Judge Morris  promulgated  on
    20 November 2017 in which the judge dismissed his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of international protection.  The  judge  found  that  when  he
    previously voluntarily returned to Iran from the UK, travelling on  his
    own passport and following a failed asylum claim and appeal, he did not
    come to the adverse attention the attention  of  the  authorities.  The
    judge rejected his account that his attendance in the audience of a  TV
    programme during the earlier  period  of  residence  in  the  UK  as  a
    student, had led to his being detained and subsequently released on his
    father's recognisance of property, when he had fled back to the UK with
    an agent from Iran, on credibility issues. The judge gave numerous  and
    cogent reasons for those conclusions which are not challenged in  these
    grounds.

 2. The appellant also raised a sur place  claim  based  on  his  face-book
    activity. It was the treatment of  this  part  of  his  claim  that  Mr
    Thirumaney submitted revealed error. The appellant had posted links  to
    other people's photos, videos and  such  like,  without  any  editorial
    comments, but said he had selected them because they represented  anti-
    government views close to his own. The face-book evidence  showed  that
    he had had about 2000 views. The judge found that the face-book entries
    did not give rise to a real risk of persecution on return.

 3. Mr Thirumaney complains that the assessment of risk did not follow  the
    approach of AB and others (internet activity -state  of  the  evidence)
    Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) paragraphs 469 to 470. He  referred  me  to
    para 467 which deals with those who have been in the UK for a prolonged
    period. The appellant had given his passport to the agent and  so  does
    not have it.  It may lead to added  scrutiny.  If  it  does  result  in
    interrogation then risks arise with the  production  of  the  face-book
    password. The appellant would be asked for his face book  password  and
    the posts would be viewed, and the authorities would  take  an  adverse
    view which would result in persecutory ill-treatment.

 4. Ms Ahmed submitted that AB is not country guidance. The headnote  shows
    that the import of the case is that the state of  the  evidence  as  to
    what happens on return is lamentably lacking because there are  so  few
    involuntary returns.  In that  context  the  summary  to  which  I  was
    referred provides little by way of guidance to judges.

Discussion

 5. I find no merit in the grounds. The judge found that the appellant  was
    an ordinary passport holder who had left Iran lawfully.  The  appellant
    had  previously  come  to  the  UK  with  permission  of  the   Iranian
    authorities as a student in January 2009, he had enjoyed  short  visits
    to Iran in 2010. He left the UK in December  2011  following  a  failed
    asylum claim and appeal, withdrawing a pending appeal to the UT. He was
    able to go back to Iran on his own  passport  in  2011,  and  faced  no
    difficulty.  He remained in Iran until December 2012 when he again left
    lawfully, on his own passport, and travelled to the UK. He  is  neither
    an  activist  or  someone  who  exited  illegally.  The  appellant  was
    unsuccessful  before  the  judge  in  establishing  that  his  internet
    activity would have come to the attention of the  Iranian  authorities.
    The challenge posed in the submission to me is that  following  AB  the
    judge should have  given  greater  consideration  to  the  question  of
    whether on return it would  become  known  via  the  airport  screening
    processes, from his own disclosure of his face book  activity  and,  if
    revealed whether it would give rise to risk.

 6. In AB and Others (internet activity - state of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]
    UKUT 257 (IAC) it was held that the material put  before  the  tribunal
    did not disclose a sufficient evidential basis for  giving  country  or
    other guidance upon what, reliably, can be expected  in  terms  of  the
    reception in Iran for those returning otherwise than with  a  "regular"
    passport  in  relation  to  whom  interest  may  be  excited  from  the
    authorities  into  internet  activity,  as  might  be  revealed  by  an
    examination  of  blogging  activity  or   a   Facebook   account.   The
    determination is reported so that the evidence considered by the  Upper
    Tribunal is in the public domain.

 7. Mr Thirumaney submitted that the appellant had established that he does
    not have his passport by his evidence that he handed it to  his  agent,
    and so the judge should have assessed him, with reference to AB,  as  a
    person who would be returning without a passport,  i.e.  on  a  special
    travel document which would subject him to  enhanced  scrutiny,  giving
    rise to the risk that he might have to give his face-book details,  and
    that the authorities might impute an oppositional political opinion  to
    him because of the links and posts of others that he had re-posted.

 8. The submission is not sustainable. On the findings of  the  judge  (see
    para [42]) the appellant did not leave Iran with the assistance  of  an
    agent, and so plainly did not establish that he had handed his passport
    to an agent. To the contrary the judge found that he left  on  his  own
    passport and left lawfully, and there  is  no  evidence  or  reason  to
    suppose that he would not be able to return on his own passport.

 9. Further the appellant is not helped by Mr Thirumaney' s reliance on the
    reference in AB to the position of someone who  has  been  out  of  the
    country for a long time as it does no more than canvass the possibility
    of risk in the context of a lack of information/evidence one way or the
    other. The appellant did not bring forward evidence. The appellant  has
    not established that he would  receive  any  enhanced  scrutiny  or  be
    detained for a second stage interrogation, so as to  make  the  judge's
    conclusions unsustainable.

10. AB is not a country guidance case and any findings made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal were necessarily made on the basis of the evidence before  it.
    In the  context  of  political  dissent  (including  through  sur-place
    blogging), the Upper Tribunal in SSH (which is a country guidance case)
    effectively reached the opposite view on  the  evidence  before  it  at
    [30]:

         "We can understand the sensitivity that the Iranian authorities may
         have towards perceived slights against their own state in the  form
         of untruthful allegations about  the  conduct  of  the  state,  but
         equally one can expect  a  degree  of  reality  on  their  part  in
         relation to  people  who,  in  the  interests  of  advancing  their
         economic circumstances, would make up a story in  order  to  secure
         economic betterment in a wealthier country."

11. AB is not authority to submit  that  all  an  appellant  need  show  is
    internet activity,  here  limited  to  re-positing  other's  posts  and
    providing links to other's pages broadly oppositional  in  nature,  and
    that risk cannot be excluded were that to become known by the appellant
    providing his face book details.  Nor is the case authority for showing
    that someone who has been in the UK from 2012 to  2018,  having  exited
    lawfully on his Iranian passport, and able to  return  on  his  Iranian
    passport, and having made another failed  asylum  claim  and  lost  his
    appeal, much as previously, would be at  any  real  risk.   Whilst  the
    standard is low, the onus is on the applicant to establish his claim.

12. The decision reveals no error of law.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeal  reveals
    no error of law and stands.



Signed                                  Date 16 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
