
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA041912016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 22 May 2017                             |On 30 May 2017             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                              NIRUJA VIGNARAJA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr E MacKay of McGlashan Mackay, solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated on 23  February  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 11 June 1982 and is a national  of  Sri  Lanka.
On 14 April 2016 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Fox ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  25  April  2017  Judge
Nightingale gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

   2. The grounds argue that the  Judge  failed  to  make  findings  on  the
   appellant's claim and failed to consider the evidence in the  round.  The
   Judge gave undue weight to peripheral matters and failed to  engage  with
   the facts of the claim.


   3. It is arguable that the Judge failed to make findings on  the  central
   aspect of the claim; namely that her husband was  an  LTTE  operative  in
   India. It is also arguable that the Judge erred in finding that exit from
   Sri Lanka through the airport indicated a lack of risk  in  view  of  the
   country guidance. These grounds are arguable.


   4. It  is  also  arguable  that  the  Judge  gave  undue  weight  to  the
   appellant's immigration history and failed to make clear findings on  the
   substance of the claim.

   5. Permission is granted on all grounds pleaded.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Mackay moved the grounds of appeal. He told  me
that the Judge had failed to  make  findings  on  submissions  and  evidence
about the approach the Sri Lankan authorities take to  diaspora  activities.
He told me that the appellant's time in India with her late husband  was  of
relevance, and that evidence been placed before the Judge  of  the  interest
Sri Lankan authorities had in Tamil communities in India. He  told  me  that
the Judge took as his starting point  the  appellant's  immigration  history
and (despite the fact that this  is  an  asylum  claim)  at  [13]  rehearses
section 117 of the 2002 Act, finding that  immigration  control  is  in  the
public interest.

(b) Mr Mackay told me that  the  Judge  did  not  make  findings  about  the
plausibility of the appellant's claim. He took me to [22]  of  the  decision
and told me that there the Judge engages in speculation rather  than  making
evidence-based findings of fact. He referred me to [29] of the decision  and
told me that although the Judge declares that the appellant  does  not  fall
within a risk category, the Judge fails to  set  out  adequate  reasons  for
reaching that conclusion, particularly in the face of the  large  amount  to
background materials placed before him.

(c) Mr Mackay relied on SS v SSHD [2017] UKUT  164  (IAC).  He  referred  to
paragraph 33 of that decision and told me that  the  Judge  failed  to  take
account of the finding  there  that  the  state  machine  of  Sri  Lanka  as
extremely paranoid. He urged me to allow the appeal  and  set  the  decision
aside.

6. (a) For the respondent, Mr Matthews told me that the  decision  does  not
contain errors,  material  or  otherwise.  He  told  me  that  the  decision
contains findings which are  directly  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
appellant's claim.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge  carried  out  a  careful
assessment of every aspect of the appellant's claim and finds  between  [20]
and [23] that the appellant has no LTTE profile, and  neither  she  nor  her
family have any involvement with the LTTE. Mr Matthews told  me  that  after
correctly considering each aspect of the appellant's claim, the Judge  finds
at [35] of the decision that the appellant's claim is just a fabrication.

(b) Mr Matthews told me that there is no  merit  in  the  second  ground  of
appeal, which amounts to a disagreement with the Judge's findings  of  fact.
He reminded me that  at  both  [3]  and  [31]  of  the  decision  the  Judge
considers the background materials. Turning to the third ground  of  appeal,
Mr Matthews told me that it was just an attempt to re-argue  the  merits  of
the case and a disagreement with the facts as the Judge found  them  to  be.
Mr Matthews told me that the grounds of appeal amount to nothing  more  than
a disagreement with the Judge's overall rejection of a claim which has  been
found to be incredible. He argued that no matters of law have raised in  the
grounds of appeal. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the  decision
to stand.

Analysis

7. The thrust of this appeal is that the Judge  has  not  engaged  with  the
central aspect of the appellant's claim and has not made clear  findings  on
the substance of the claim. Between [1] and [4] of the decision,  the  Judge
sets out the background to the appeal. At [5] the Judge correctly  sets  out
the burden and standard of proof and then between  [6]  and  [8]  the  Judge
summarises the appellant's case, before summarising  the  respondent's  case
at [10].

8. The core issues of the appellant's claim  are  that  in  March  2000  she
moved to India with her husband and remained there  till  2008.  She  claims
that her husband helped LTTE by sending them money, acting  as  their  agent
in the purchase of land and smuggling medicines to  Sri  Lanka  from  India.
The appellant's husband died in 2007. The appellant returned  to  Sri  Lanka
in 2008. In August 2009, the appellant claims that she learned that the  Sri
Lankan authorities were searching for her and her husband, she avoided  them
by coming to the UK in March 2010 as a student. The  appellant  claims  that
if returned to Sri Lanka she would face persecution because of  her  imputed
political opinion and her ethnicity.

9. The Judge summarises the appellant's claim at [6], [7]  and  [8]  of  the
decision. At [20] the Judge records that the  appellant  did  not  work  for
LTTE, and knew nothing of her husband's activities for that group.  At  [23]
the Judge takes the appellant's claim at its highest. After  analysing  each
source of evidence between [11] and [28] of the decision,  the  Judge  finds
that the appellant's name will not appear on a stop list. A fair reading  of
the decision makes it clear that the Judge made clear findings on  the  core
aspects of the appellant's claim before coming to his  conclusion  that  the
appellant will not feature on a stop list.

10. At [31] the Judge makes it clear that he has considered  the  background
materials and taken  account  of  what  is  disclosed  there.  He  considers
whether or not the appellant would come to the adverse attention of the  Sri
Lankan authorities. At [35] the  Judge  specifically  records  that  he  has
considered the core of the appellant's  account  and  found  that  it  lacks
credibility and is a fabrication.

11. It is clear from a fair reading of the Judge's decision that  the  Judge
has engaged with  the  core  elements  of  the  appellant's  claim.  He  has
considered each source of evidence and, after  taking  a  balanced  look  at
each source of evidence, has reached conclusions which were well within  the
range of reasonable conclusions open to the Judge.

12.  In GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
00319 (IAC) the Tribunal held that the  current  categories  of  persons  at
real risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in
detention or otherwise, are: (a) Individuals who are, or  are  perceived  to
be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  because  they
are, or are perceived to have  a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-
conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or  a   renewal   of
hostilities within Sri Lanka. (b) Journalists  whether  in  print  or  other
media) or human rights activists, who, in either case, have  criticised  the
Sri Lankan government, in particular its human rights  record,  or  who  are
associated with publications critical of  the  Sri  Lankan  government.  (c)
Individuals  who  have  given  evidence   to   the   Lessons   Learned   and
Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri Lankan security forces,  armed
forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged  war  crimes.   Among  those
who may have witnessed war crimes during the conflict, particularly  in  the
No-Fire  Zones  in  May  2009,  only  those  who  have  already   identified
themselves by giving  such  evidence  would  be  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities and therefore only they are at real risk  of  adverse  attention
or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes witnesses. (d)  A
person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list  accessible  at  the
airport, comprising a list of those against whom there is  an  extant  court
order or arrest warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on  a  "stop"  list
will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the  appropriate  Sri
Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

13. Although [27] and [29] of the  decision  both  contain  a  typographical
error, it is obvious that the Judge took guidance from the case  of  GJ.  On
the facts as he found them to be, the appellant did not fall within  a  risk
category. There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact-finding exercise.

14.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

15.  The decision does not contain an error of law. It is for the  Judge  to
decide what weight to  place  on  the  evidence.  There  is  no  justifiable
criticism  of  the  fact-finding  exercise.  The  Judge   directed   himself
correctly in law. The Judge sets  out  adequate  reasons  for  reaching  the
conclusion that he reaches. The  decision  reached  by  the  Judge  is  well
within the range of reasonable conclusions available to the Judge.

16. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

CONCLUSION

17. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

18. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 25 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


