
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04182/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2020                   |On 29 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                 LILIAN [F]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Cameroon, appeals with permission  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge S T Fox) dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent on 25 April 2019 refusing
    her protection claim.

 2. Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted by Judge Foudy of the
    First-tier Tribunal in a decision dated 1 May  2020.   Having  reviewed
    the file I considered that this appeal was likely to be appropriate for
    determination of the question whether there was an error of law and, if
    so, whether the determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set
    aside, without a hearing.  In response to the directions I made, I  now
    have before me written representations by Mr Tim Jebb BL on  behalf  of
    the appellant and by Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,
    on behalf of the respondent.  Nothing in them gives me  any  reason  to
    suppose that the interests of justice  or  any  other  relevant  factor
    demand that a hearing be held in this case.

 3. I have considered the material before me  and  the  representations  of
    both parties, and I have reached the conclusion that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside for error of law and that the
    appeal must be re-heard in full before a  different  judge.   For  that
    reason I express no view on the merits of the  appellant's  substantive
    case, and the terms in which this decision is written are  deliberately
    non-committal in respect of it.  In what follows I  explain  why  Judge
    Fox's decision cannot stand.

 4. The appellant's basic immigration history is that she left Cameroon  in
    2008, after completing a Bachelor's Degree.  She continued her  studies
    in South Africa until 2012.  In 2012 she came  to  the  United  Kingdom
    from South Africa, with a visa as a student.  Her studies in the United
    Kingdom continued for a number of  years.   In  2014  she  visited  her
    family in Cameroon  and  stayed  there  for  about  six  weeks,  before
    returning to the United Kingdom and her studies.  In 2016  she  applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of a relationship.   That  application
    was refused, and it appears that the relationship has now broken  down.
    In 2018 she claimed asylum on the  basis  of  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Cameroon.  At the  hearing  of  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's  refusal  of  that  decision,  she  gave  oral
    evidence and was cross-examined.  There was documentary evidence  about
    the situation in Cameroon.  The hearing was on 3 December 2019.   Judge
    Fox's decision was sent out on 18 February 2020.

 5. It seems to me that the grounds of appeal against  that  decision  have
    clear merit in two separate areas.

 6. The first relates to the  form  of  the  decision  itself.   There  are
    numerous  typographical  areas,  including  one  paragraph   which   is
    formatted differently from all the others, and a number of occasions on
    which the judge refers to the appellant as male.  If those had been the
    only problems,  I  doubt  whether  this  appeal  would  be  before  the
    Tribunal.  They are not, however, the only  problems.   Paragraph  [16]
    reads as follows:

         "I have had regard to the objective information  provided  by  both
         parties  and  also  I  have  noted  the  Tribunal's  decisions   in
         Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ.11; Tanveer Ahmned IAC  [2002]  00439*;
         JT Cameron-v-The Secretary of State for The Home Department  [2008]
         EWCA Civ.878 (28 July 2008; Januzi [2006] UKHL 5;  AH  [2007]  UKHL
         49; and for the avoidance of doubt I have had regard Section  8  of
         the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.)  Act  2004
         where applicable with regard to assessing credibility  relevant  to
         paragraphs 339L and 339N of the Immigration Rules  as  well  as  to
         Sections 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D of the  Nationality  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)."

 7. That, presumably, is a standard paragraph used by  the  judge  in  many
    decisions.  Although the list of  decisions  is  referred  to  as  "the
    Tribunal's decisions", only one of them is a decision of the  Tribunal,
    the others being decisions of the Court of  Appeal  and  the  House  of
    Lords.  The only decision of the Tribunal which is  mentioned,  Tanveer
    Ahmed, is one which has no relevance to the present case.   It  is  far
    from clear why the other cases, and no more recent cases, are  selected
    for reference.  The reference to  Januzi  shares  a  problem  with  the
    reference to sections 117A - 117D of the 2002 Act,  in  that  they  too
    appear to  have  no  application  to  the  present  case.   Indeed,  at
    paragraph [48] the judge specifically indicates that those sections are
    not relevant; and at  paragraph  [55]  he  finds  that  Januzi  is  not
    relevant.   In  these  circumstances,  one  is  left  with  the   clear
    impression that the judge's self-direction on the law was  ill-focused,
    or seriously defective, or probably both.

 8. At paragraph [45]  there  is  what  again  appears  to  be  a  standard
    observation, in the following form:

         "The Appellant is not a good witness as to  fact  and  truth.   His
         evidence may not be relied  upon.   The  Appellant  may  be  safely
         returned to her home country, without fear of  misfortune,  adverse
         attention or otherwise."

 9. At paragraph [47], similarly apparently a standard paragraph, is this:

         "On the evidence before  me  today  am  satisfied  [sic]  that  the
         Appellant is an economic migrant and has not come to United Kingdom
         [sic] to seek international protection.  I am satisfied that  these
         are not the actions of  the  person  truly  and  genuinely  seeking
         international protection."

10. What "these" actions are is unspecified.  Further,  there  is  not  the
    slightest trace of an economic motive in any of the evidence  to  which
    the judge refers.

11. At paragraph [65] the judge's conclusion on humanitarian protection  is
    recorded as follows:

         "On the evidence before me  today  and  for  the  same  reasons  as
         recorded above I am satisfied that the Appellant has not shown that
         there are substantial grounds for believing that he  faces  a  real
         risk of suffering serious harm on return to Iraq and that  he  does
         not qualify for Humanitarian  Protection  refused  under  paragraph
         339F of the Immigration Rules."

12. Despite the judge's conclusion expressed in this way, the appellant is,
    as I have said, a national of Cameroon, and female.

13. There is another difficulty to which I need to refer under  this  head.
    The judge's decision  appears  to  confuse  the  SCNC,  the  anglophone
    separatist  movement  in  Cameroon,   with   the   NCNC,   an   extinct
    Nigerian/Cameroonian political party.  The judge  records  the  country
    evidence with a focus on the SCNC, presumably on the  basis  that  that
    was related to the claim the appellant put before him.  But he  records
    the appellant's own case as based  on  her  father  being  currently  a
    member of the NCNC (which ceased to exist in the late  1960s),  and  at
    paragraph [31] appears to count the appellant's ignorance of  the  NCNC
    against her.

14. Mr Avery's written submissions valiantly  attempt  to  argue  that  the
    judge's errors are merely superficial.  I  do  not  accept  that.   The
    areas which I have identified show at  an  absolute  minimum  that  the
    judge failed to check his determination before signing it and having it
    sent out.  In my judgment they also show signs  of  serious  confusion,
    apparent on the face of the decision itself.  These  are  matters  that
    demanded resolution before the judge could properly be  confident  that
    he had given the necessary attention to the  appellant's  case.   As  a
    result, as it appears to me, these errors demonstrate a failure of  the
    judicial  process.   It  was  the  judge's  task  to  bring  care   and
    professional expertise to the appellant's appeal, and he failed  to  do
    that.

15. The appellant's other  ground  of  complaint  relates  to  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility.  As this will have to be considered again, I
    am not going to go into the evidence in detail.  It is of course  clear
    that the appellant needed to explain why, if her fear of  Cameroon  was
    genuine and dated from 2008, she was able  to  visit  that  country  in
    2014, and did not make her claim until 2018.  Having indicated that  he
    proposed to take s 8 of the 2004 Act into account, the judge  concluded
    both at [46] and [49] that the factors set out in  that  section  count
    against her.  At [46] he wrote as follows:

         "I find that the Appellant's failure to claim asylum when she could
         have first claimed while travelling through countries that may have
         been signatories to the 1951  Convention,  without  a  satisfactory
         explanation, undermines the credibility of the Appellant's claim to
         have come to the United Kingdom to escape persecution."

16. The appellant's travel to the  United  Kingdom  appears  to  have  been
    directly from South Africa.  No doubt she could have claimed  in  South
    Africa, but that is not  a  judge's  point:  she  was  not  "travelling
    through" other countries on the way between South Africa and the United
    Kingdom.  At [49] the judge says this:

         "The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2012.   She
         did not claim asylum upon entry.  She claims this was  because  she
         had a student Visa.  It is clear, from  the  facts  recorded  above
         that she believed that a departure for [sic] Cameroon was essential
         in 2008 because of fears generated [sic].  Claim [sic] to have  had
         a valid visa is inconsistent and mitigates [sic]  strongly  against
         her overall credibility.   She  claims  that  the  crisis  did  not
         develop until 2016.  I believe this  is  a  statement  designed  to
         garner support for her claim to international protection."

17. I said above that the appellant needed to deal with  these  aspects  of
    her history.  It is clear from the grounds, and not  challenged  by  Mr
    Avery, that the appellant did provide  an  explanation,  based  on  the
    history of the anglophone separatist  movement  in  Southern  Cameroon.
    The last two sentences of the extract above is the total of the judge's
    reference to that explanation.

18. A judgment on credibility has to be  made  on  the  basis  of  all  the
    available evidence, accurately represented.  Again, despite Mr  Avery's
    submissions, I cannot accept that the judge has simply made unimportant
    slips, leaving the substance of his assessment unimpaired.  On at least
    two respects (the NCNC history and the countries where she might  claim
    asylum between South Africa and the United Kingdom) the  judge  counted
    against the  appellant's  credibility  matters  which  appear,  on  the
    evidence, to have no bearing on it.   On the other hand, he  failed  to
    take  any  proper  account  of  the  full  explanation  going  to   the
    respondent's attack on her credibility.

19. To sum up, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows a general lack
    of attention, and a number of clear mistakes on important matters.   It
    cannot stand as an assessment of the  appellant's  appeal.   I  set  it
    aside for error or law, and  direct  that  the  appellant's  appeal  be
    decided afresh by a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton

                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 26 October 2020

