
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04974/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London      Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 19th November 2018    On the 29th November 2018

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                  Mrs H.T.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jones (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Sweet promulgated on the 29th May  2018,  in  which  he
      dismissed the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal.   Judge  Sweet  stated  at
      paragraph 33 that "taking all this further evidence into  account  and
      with regard to the country and  information  guidance  report  of  May
      2016,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  has  provided  any
      substantive new evidence which will  justify  my  departing  from  the
      earlier decision promulgated on the 3rd April 2017".

   2. The Appellant in this case had made a previous asylum appeal that  had
      been heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bennett on the 10th March 2017
      with a decision promulgated on the 3rd April 2017 in which her  asylum
      appeal had been dismissed.  Judge Bennett had previously accepted  the
      Appellant was an Ahmadi by birth, but did not find the Appellant to be
      a truthful witness and was not satisfied that it was reasonably likely
      that she engaged in any preaching activities of  the  sort  which  she
      described whilst in Pakistan even within the privacy of her  own  home
      or in any other.  Judge Bennett had previously not accepted  that  she
      had any encounters with KN whilst she was  in  Pakistan  or  she  left
      Pakistan for the reason that she  gave  and  that  the  Appellant  was
      prepared to say whatever she  thought  would  achieve  her  objective,
      irrespective of whether it accorded with  the  truth.   Judge  Bennett
      found  and  accepted  that  the  Appellant  engaged  in  a  number  of
      activities with the Ahmadi community since her arrival in  the  UK  as
      was set out in two letters from  the  Ahmadiyya  Association,  but  he
      found that he did not accept that it was reasonably  likely  that  she
      would wish to continue any of those activities in Pakistan or that she
      was reasonably likely to engage in any paragraph  2(i)  behaviour  for
      the purposes of the country guidance case of MN (Ahmadis -  Conditions
      - Risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 389 nor did Judge Bennett accept  that
      it was reasonably likely she would have abstained from  any  paragraph
      2(i) behaviour because she feared that she would be persecuted and  he
      was not satisfied that it was reasonably likely that her  interest  in
      those activities arose from anything other than  a  desire  to  obtain
      rights of residency in the UK.

   3. In the decision under appeal of Judge Sweet, Judge  Sweet  noted  that
      the previous decision of first-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bennett  was  the
      starting point for the purposes of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702,  and
      found that the Appellant had given evidence  in  accordance  with  the
      witness statement and noted that the Appellant  stated  that  she  had
      attended different prayers and speeches and sport days and spoke about
      the Khalifa and that she had attended  and  distributed  leaflets  and
      stories at paragraph 19.  Judge Sweet noted  that  the  Appellant  had
      been referring to the hearing on the 10th March 2017 and the fact that
      the previous Judge had not found her credible, that she said that  she
      had told the truth and what had  changed  was  that  circumstances  in
      Pakistan were getting worse.  She said there were no new  problems  in
      the UK but there were problems in Pakistan and that she was in contact
      with her husband and had spoken to him the previous night.

   4. Judge Sweet noted that he had now been provided with further  evidence
      from the Ahmadi community in the UK in the form of  a  further  letter
      dated the 26th September 2017 at paragraph 29 but  the  first  of  the
      three letters in the bundle had  been  previously  considered  at  the
      previous determination and Judge Sweet found that the latest letter of
      the 26th September 2017 did not refer to any religious activities  the
      Appellant participated in whilst in Pakistan, but confirmed  that  she
      had engaged  in  activities  in  the  UK  which  had  previously  been
      accepted.  He said that the Appellant had conceded  in  evidence  that
      she did not carry out any preaching activities,  but  had  handed  out
      leaflets and stories.  Judge Sweet then referred to  the  headnote  of
      the country guidance case of MN and the risk posed to the Ahmadis  and
      in particular set out the guidance at paragraph 2(i).  The Judge  went
      on to note and take account of the further evidence  provided  by  the
      Appellant's family members, but went on at paragraph 33 to  find  that
      even taking all of that evidence into account in regard to the country
      and information guidance report of May 2016 he was not persuaded  that
      the Appellant had provided any substantive new information which would
      justify his departing from the earlier decision promulgated on the 3rd
      April 2017.  The Judge did therefore  not  allow  that  matter  to  be
      relitigated and did not make further findings  contrary  to  those  of
      Judge Bennett.

   5. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge failed to provide any reasoning  for  the  decision  and  simply
      relied wholly on the decision of the previous Judge  and  provided  no
      reason as to why he was not prepared to depart from  the  findings  of
      the previous Judge which is argued to be a strong  arguable  error  of
      law.  It is said that under paragraph 353  the  Respondent  considered
      that the further evidence was new and created a realistic prospect  of
      success such that the claim had been  considered  as  a  fresh  asylum
      claim which created a realistic prospect of success and that the Judge
      had gone behind the concessions of the Respondent.  It is argued  that
      Devaseelan provided guidance which said that the first decision was  a
      starting point and not binding on the second Judge and that the  Judge
      is required it is argued to conduct a holistic assessment of  the  new
      and old evidence and apply the  relevant  principles  of  the  country
      guidance case of MN.  It is argued within the new  Grounds  of  Appeal
      that the Judge had not engaged with the  new  evidence  and  that  the
      Judge had failed to engage with what was now a sur place  claim  which
      the Respondent it is argued conceded creating a realistic prospect  of
      success by providing a right of appeal.

   6. In his oral submissions, Mr Jones relied upon the Grounds  of  Appeal,
      and further argued that the Judge had failed to  appreciate  that  the
      claim was on the basis of sur place religious activities, not  on  the
      basis that such activities will become known  to  the  authorities  in
      Pakistan, but they were indicatively argued of the importance of those
      activities to her religious identity.  He argued that since the  first
      Judgment further evidence had been  provided  both  in  terms  of  the
      submissions dated the 5th February 2018 contained within Section A  of
      the Respondent's bundle, but further in addition the evidence  of  the
      Appellant herself in terms of her statement and her oral evidence, and
      the further witness evidence provided  and  that,  together  with  the
      additional letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Association  dated  the  26th
      September 2017 he said that that had addressed the activities  of  the
      Appellant in the UK since the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  in  March
      2017.  He argued that the  scope  and  persistence  of  her  religious
      activities in the UK showed that this was a genuine  exercise  of  her
      religious faith rather than a simple embellishment  of  the  claim  as
      found by the original First-tier Tribunal Judge, and that Judge  Sweet
      should have properly considered that evidence.  He argued that handing
      out of leaflets is proselytising, even if not face to face.  Mr  Jones
      conceded that the activities set out in the  latest  letter  from  the
      Ahmadiyya Association were the same activities as  conceded  by  Judge
      Bennett but argued that the length of time  the  activities  had  been
      undertaken for was a factor that the Judge should have  taken  account
      of in considering  whether  or  not  the  activities  were  a  genuine
      reflection of her faith.  He argued that the Respondent had considered
      the new evidence as a new claim and  that  Devaseelan  had  only  been
      taken as a starting point.

   7. In her submissions on behalf of the Respondent Ms Pal argued the Judge
      has not materially erred and had properly considered the new  evidence
      including  the  evidence  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Association  and   the
      Appellant's own  oral  evidence  which  included  the  fact  that  the
      Appellant had not preached but simply  handed  out  leaflets  and  the
      Judge had considered the statements from family  members  in  Pakistan
      and the fact that her husband had been able to live  in  Pakistan  and
      had not received threats.  She noted that the Judge  had  referred  to
      the Appellant's statement and asked me to  find  that  the  Judge  had
      properly taken account of all the  evidence  and  that  there  was  no
      substantive new evidence following Judge Bennett's decision such as to
      justify the Judge departing from that decision.  She argued there  was
      no material error and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  should
      stand.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   8. Although the Respondent had accepted the Appellant's claim was a fresh
      claim for the purposes of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules,  and
      under the wording of that paragraph such submissions will only  amount
      to a fresh claim if they are  significantly  different  from  material
      that was previously being considered and that only to be  held  to  be
      considered significantly different if the content had not already been
      considered and taken  together  with  previously  considered  material
      created  a  realistic  prospect  of   success,   notwithstanding   its
      rejection.

   9. However, the fact that the Respondent allowed  a  fresh  claim  to  be
      brought does not amount to a concession that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge had to conduct a full analysis of all of the  evidence  for  the
      purposes of Devaseelan.  No concession had been made in  that  regard,
      all that had been allowed by the Respondent was a  fresh  claim  under
      paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  It was not a concession  that
      related to how the Judge should deal with the evidence before  him  on
      appeal from the Respondent's decision, when conducting the  appeal  in
      the First-tier Tribunal.

  10. The established case law of Devaseelan (Second Appeals,  ECHR,  Extra-
      Territorial Effect) [2002] UKIAT 702 is still good law regarding how a
      First-tier Tribunal should conduct an appeal against the  decision  of
      the  Respondent  in  circumstances   where   there   is   a   previous
      determination by a Judge.

  11.  It  was  noted  in  paragraph  37  of  Devaseelan  that  "the   first
      adjudicator's determination stands (unchallenged or  not  successfully
      challenged) as an assessment of  the  claim  the  Appellant  was  then
      making, at the time of that determination.  It is not binding  on  the
      second adjudicator; but, on the other hand, the second adjudicator  is
      not hearing an appeal against it.  As an  assessment  of  the  matters
      that were before the first adjudicator it should simply be regarded as
      unquestioned.  It may be built on, and, as a result,  the  outcome  of
      the hearing before the second adjudicator may be quite different  from
      what  might  have  been  expected  from  the  reading  of  the   first
      determination only.  But it is not the second  adjudicator's  role  to
      consider arguments  intended  to  undermine  the  first  adjudicator's
      determination.

      38. The second adjudicator must, however, be careful to recognise that
      the issue before him is  not  the  same  that  was  before  the  first
      adjudicator.  In particular, time has passed; and the situation at the
      time of the second adjudicator's determination  may  be  shown  to  be
      different from that which obtained previously.  Appellants may want to
      ask the second adjudicator to consider arguments on  the  issues  that
      were not - or could not be - raised before the first  adjudicator;  or
      evidence that was not - or could not have  been  -  presented  to  the
      first adjudicator".  It was further stated at paragraph 41(6) that "if
      before the second adjudicator the Appellant relies on facts  that  are
      not materially different than those put to the first  adjudicator;  or
      proposes to support the claim by what is in essence the same  evidence
      as  that  available  to  the  Appellant  at  that  time,  the   second
      adjudicator  should  regard  the  issues  as  settled  by  the   first
      adjudicator's determination and make his findings in  line  with  that
      determination rather than rely on the matter to be relitigated".

  12. Although this case is almost just over  a  year  apart  and  it  is  a
      previous decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bennett,  Judge  Sweet
      noted and set out the reasons why Judge  Bennett  had  not  found  the
      Appellant previously to be a credible witness, and noted at  paragraph
      29 that the Appellant had provided further evidence  from  the  Ahmadi
      community in the UK in the form of a further  letter  dated  the  26th
      September 2017.  He noted that the  first  three  of  the  Association
      letters had been considered in the previous determination and that the
      latest letter confirmed that she had been engaging  in  activities  in
      the UK which had previously been accepted.

  13. Mr Jones before me conceded that the activities  set  out  within  the
      latest letter from the Ahmadiyya Association were the  same  as  those
      referred to in the previous letters considered by  Judge  Bennett,  in
      respect of her sur place activities within the  UK.   However,  as  Mr
      Jones conceded, he was  not  seeking  to  argue  that  the  sur  place
      activities since the date of the previous decision would have come  to
      the light of the authorities in Pakistan, which would give rise  to  a
      risk upon return, but was simply arguing that the fact  that  she  had
      continued with those activities for a year post-dating the decision of
      Judge Bennett showed the genuineness of those activities  as  being  a
      true reflection of her religious beliefs.

  14. However, in that regard, although time had passed, the evidence sought
      to be relied upon in that regard was seeking simply to  undermine  the
      previous findings of Judge Bennett, that exactly the  same  activities
      were not genuine, when he considered the claim in April  2017.   Judge
      Sweet had taken account of the fact that those  activities  continued,
      but was entitled to find that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  any
      substantive new evidence which would justify him  departing  from  the
      earlier determination promulgated on  the  3rd  April  2017  by  Judge
      Bennett.  In light of the evidence provided by the Appellant, that was
      a finding open to him.  He was not  required  to  conduct  a  complete
      analysis of all the evidence afresh, simply  on  the  basis  that  the
      Respondent had treated the claim as a fresh claim.  Clear guidance was
      given in the case of Devaseelan, which Judge  Sweet  followed.   There
      were no new activities which were said to put the Appellant  at  risk,
      it was the same activities said to be continuing, and  quite  properly
      it was open to him to find that that matter should not be  relitigated
      in light of the evidence that had  been  presented  as  there  was  no
      substantive new evidence which would justify him  departing  from  the
      previous decision.  The Grounds of Appeal in that regard simply amount
      to a disagreement with  those  findings,  rather  than  revealing  any
      material error of law.

  15. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet does  not  reveal  any
      material errors of law and is maintained.




Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet  does  not  reveal  any
material errors of law and is maintained.

I do order anonymity in this case, given the nature  of  the  protection  of
the claim.  No record  or  transcript  or  note  of  these  proceedings  may
identify the Appellant or any member of her family directly  or  indirectly.
This direction  applies  to  both  the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
Failure to comply  with  this  direction  can  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 19th November 2018
