
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04990/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 20th of December 2017               |On 26 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on [ ] 2002 and is now aged  16
    years. He appeals  against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cohen sitting at Taylor House on 23rd of June  2017  in  which
    the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 12th of May 2017. That decision was refused  to  grant
    the Appellant asylum and humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The Appellant's claim was that his father and a Mr [K], the husband  of
    his mother's cousin, were arguing over a land  dispute.  The  Appellant
    began a relationship with Mr [K]'s daughter, N, about a year before  he
    left Iran. The Appellant and N were found together by  N's  mother  who
    threatened to call Mr [K],  N's  father.  The  Appellant  escaped.  The
    Appellant's father and Mr [K] were subsequently involved in a fight and
    the Appellant's father was arrested. The authorities were  now  looking
    for the Appellant. The  Appellant  feared  he  would  be  arrested  and
    imprisoned upon return or killed either by his own father,  Mr  [K]  or
    the Iranian police. The Judge had before him an expert report  from  Dr
    Khaki indicating the level of risk that the Appellant would  face  upon
    return to Iran due to his relationship with N.

The Proceedings in the First-tier

 3. The Judge found the Appellant's account was vague and lacking in detail
    and pointed to a number of inconsistencies in the  determination  which
    undermined the Appellant's credibility. He dismissed the appeal.


 4. The Appellant appealed against that  decision  on  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who had represented the Appellant at  first  instance  and  who
    appeared before me. The grounds submitted that the Judge's focus on the
    issue of the Appellant's credibility was not compatible with the  Court
    of Appeal decision in AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 handed down
    on 27th of July 2017 a month after the hearing in this case. The  Judge
    had noted that  the  Appellant  was  still  a  minor  but  insufficient
    account, the grounds  complained,  had  been  taken  of  the  Appellant
    circumstances. The text of  the  determination  was  criticised  for  a
    number of typographical errors which gave it the appearance of being an
    uncorrected draft. The Judge should  have  asked  himself  whether  the
    discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's  evidence  pointed   out   in   the
    determination could have been explained by the Appellant being 14 years
    old at the time of the hearing and substantially younger than  that  at
    the initiation of the relationship with Mr [K]'s daughter.


The Onward Appeal


 5. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 19th of October  2017.  In
    granting permission to appeal she found it arguable that the Judge  had
    misdirected himself by failing to: (a) properly determine the appeal in
    accordance with AM (Afghanistan) endorsing the 2008 practice  direction
    and the 2010 Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  and  (b)  give  clear
    findings of fact particularly at [22, 23, 24, 25 and 28].


 6. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  7th
    of November  2017  submitting  that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately. There may have been spelling errors but such were  minor
    and did not undermine the findings of fact made by the Judge. The Judge
    properly considered the core of the Appellant's claim and  found  there
    were discrepancies in the evidence.

The Hearing Before Me

 7. At the hearing before me it was conceded by the Presenting Officer that
    there  were  indeed  material  errors  of  law  in  the   determination
    particularly the treatment of the Appellant's  evidence  by  the  Judge
    given that the Appellant was 14 years old at the date of hearing.  Both
    the Appellant and the Respondent urged on me that the appeal should  be
    remitted back to the First-tier to be heard de novo.

Findings

 8. The Judge was dealing with a vulnerable witness, given the  Appellant's
    age at the date of hearing. Prior to the decision in AM Afghanistan  it
    may well be that the Judge's approach to the case would not  have  been
    criticised. However, the common law operates retrospectively and so the
    Judge's  determination  falls  to  be  criticised  for  not   following
    authority which had not been handed down when this case was before him.
    What AM Afghanistan was underlining was that guidance on  how  to  deal
    with vulnerable witnesses was already in existence  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal was emphasising  how  that  guidance  should  be  followed.  The
    treatment by the Tribunal of vulnerable witnesses such as the Appellant
    must be in accordance with the case law  and  the  Practice  Directions
    cited therein.


 9.  The  Appellant  had  had  a  lengthy  interview  with  the  Respondent
    consisting of some 193 questions and had submitted a statement for  the
    hearing which ran to 8 pages. There was little if any need for  further
    oral evidence save perhaps where the Appellant  wished  to  proffer  an
    explanation for discrepancies. If the Respondent did wish  to  ask  the
    Appellant further questions they could have been submitted  in  writing
    in advance.


10. In the first place, the burden is on the Appellant's representatives to
    indicate what they say the arrangements and/or  adjustments  should  be
    made to take into  account  the  Appellant's  vulnerability  to  ensure
    access to justice. This must be right since vulnerabilities  will  vary
    from Appellant to Appellant and  the  Appellant's  representatives  are
    best placed to identify them. In this case the  vulnerability  was  the
    Appellant's very young age and, potentially, the trauma alleged.


11. It is not apparent from the determination that that was  done  in  this
    case but the more difficult question is how the  Tribunal  should  have
    gone about the assessment of the merits of the case taking into account
    the Appellant's vulnerability. At [19] of the determination  the  Judge
    noted that the Appellant was still a minor and attached "a lower burden
    of proof applicable to the assessment of his evidence". The  difficulty
    was that the Judge needed to explain in more detail how he intended  to
    do this.


12. Some guidance can be gleaned from  Paragraph  351  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which provides that "account should be taken  of  an  applicant's
    maturity and in assessing the claim of a child more  weight  should  be
    given to objective indications of risk than to  the  child's  state  of
    mind and understanding of his situation. An asylum application made  on
    behalf of the child should not be refused solely because the  child  is
    too young to understand his situation or to have formed a  well-founded
    fear of persecution. Close attention should be given to the welfare  of
    the child at all times".


13. The Judge found at [32] that the Appellant had fabricated his claim  in
    its entirety. That was not of itself a conclusion that  the  Judge  was
    prevented from  coming  to  simply  because  of  the  Appellant's  age.
    However, in arriving at that decision it was necessary to have  ensured
    that proper arrangements for the hearing  had  taken  place,  that  the
    Appellant's evidence had been looked at in a holistic way and  that  it
    could be demonstrated that more attention had been  paid  to  objective
    indicators of risk (such as those set out in the expert's report) than,
    for example, the Appellant's understanding of  his  situation.  He  was
    younger than 14 when he first became involved in a relationship with Mr
    [K]'s daughter, N.


14. I therefore set this decision aside and remit the appeal  back  to  the
    First-tier to be heard at Taylor House de novo by any Judge other  than
    Judge Cohen, on the first available date.  The  Appellant's  solicitors
    should write to both the Respondent and  the  Tribunal  at  least  four
    weeks before the date of hearing indicating: (a) what further  evidence
    they  intend  to  submit  and  (b)  what  particular  arrangements  are
    considered suitable for the fresh hearing bearing in mind the  guidance
    in AM Afghanistan. It will be a matter for the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    decide whether to make further case management directions upon  receipt
    of the Appellant's indications.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside. I direct that the matter be  remitted  back  to
the First-tier for a de novo hearing before any Judge except Judge Cohen.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed to that limited extent.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for  so  doing
no such order was made at first instance.


Signed this 19th of January 2018
.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 19th of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
