
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04991/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 November 2017                       |On 30 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     N K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Razzaq-Siddiq of Counsel instructed by
Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kainth promulgated on 11 July 2017.


2.   The Appellant claims to be a Bihari  formerly  habitually  resident  in
    Bangladesh, and has claimed to be stateless.  The Respondent  considers
    that he is a citizen of Bangladesh.  His date  of  birth  is  16  April
    1981.


3.   The Appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraph  9  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature  of  the  issues
    before the Upper Tribunal it  is  not  necessary  to  go  into  further
    detail.  Suffice it to say that this was an asylum claim and I have  it
    in mind that the standards of fairness and scrutiny that  are  required
    in consequence are of the highest order.


4.   The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 22 June 2017 at Harmondsworth.  He was represented on  that
    occasion by Mr A Khan of  Universal  Solicitors.   Mr  Khan  sought  an
    adjournment on the basis of the Appellant's non-attendance, and also on
    the basis that his firm had only very recently been instructed  by  the
    Appellant.  The matter is rehearsed in the Decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in this way at paragraph 11:

         "The appellant was initially represented by Mr  Khan  of  Universal
         Solicitors.  The appellant was not in attendance.  Mr Khan made  an
         application for an adjournment citing two grounds namely:


         (1)  that his firm had only recently been instructed as of 19  June
             2017 and had not had sight of papers nor had they  been  in  a
             position to take instructions from the appellant;


         (2)  that the appellant was not in  attendance,  a  friend  of  the
             appellant's had sent Mr Khan a text message stating  that  the
             appellant was in an unknown hospital.  Mr Khan stated that  he
             had a photograph on his mobile telephone of the appellant on a
             hospital bed."




5.   The application for an adjournment was opposed  by  the  representative
    for the Respondent.


6.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  refused  the  application   for   an
    adjournment and proceeded with the  hearing.   Mr  Khan  had  indicated
    during the course of the submissions  in  respect  of  the  adjournment
    application that he was not instructed to represent the Appellant on  a
    substantive appeal - his instructions and representation  were  limited
    to the purpose of requesting the adjournment.  The  adjournment  having
    been  refused,  Mr  Khan  withdrew  from  further  involvement  in  the
    proceedings.  In this regard I note that the Judge records at paragraph
    17: "Mr Khan was advised that the Tribunal was more than content to put
    the matter back until  the  afternoon  in  order  that  he  could  take
    instructions" and that Mr Khan "declined the offer."  The Judge went on
    to consider the substantive issues in  the  appeal  and  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  human
    rights grounds.


7.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds in support of the application in the main  part  focus  on  the
    issue of procedural unfairness by reference to the decision  to  refuse
    the application for an adjournment.  It  was  also  argued  -  in  very
    general terms - that the substantive decision was also flawed.


8.   Permission to appeal was refused in the  first  instance  on  3  August
    2017 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan.   However,  on  a  renewed
    application Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted permission to appeal
    on 14 September 2017.  Judge McWilliam considered that it was  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  "did  not  consider  the  issue  of
    fairness  in  respect  of  the  adjournment  application  claim,   with
    reference to difficulties in making  contact  with/obtaining  documents
    from the previously instructed solicitors".  In this context the  grant
    of permission to appeal includes the following:

         "The Appellant and his representative are expected  to  attend  the
         hearing with  evidence  relating  to  the  issue,  preferably  from
         Blakewells Solicitors, but also from the  current  representatives,
         in order to determine what efforts they/the Appellant has  made  to
         contact Blakewells and whether the Appellant  has  cooperated  with
         the  preparation  of  his  case  e.g.  whether  Blakewells  took  a
         statement of evidence from him prior to the hearing before the FtT.
          There should be ample time to allow the representatives to  obtain
         the Appellant's file from Blakewells before the hearing as this may
         assist the UT to decide whether or not there has been unfairness."




9.   I pause to note that  Judge  McWilliam  did  not  grant  permission  in
    respect of that aspect of the  application  for  the  adjournment  that
    related to the Appellant's non-attendance, nor was  permission  granted
    in respect of those aspects of the grounds of challenge  that  -  as  I
    have said above, in a general  and  non-specific  way  -  purported  to
    attack the Judge's substantive conclusions  on  the  appeal.   In  this
    latter regard  I  note  in  particular  that  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant, in the absence of  any  evidence  further  to  the  evidence
    contained in the Respondent's bundle, and in the absence  of  any  oral
    submissions, whilst it was not inevitably the case that the  First-tier
    Tribunal would uphold the Respondent's decision it is hardly surprising
    that it did so.  In any event it seems  to  me  quite  clear  that  the
    grounds of challenge raise no arguable error of law in this regard, and
    to that extent Judge McWilliam was quite right not to grant  permission
    to appeal in that regard.


10.  Similarly, for completeness and for the avoidance of  doubt,  it  seems
    to me that there could be no meaningful challenge to the aspect of  the
    adjournment decision to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the  Appellant.
    Paragraphs 15 and 16 of the Decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    particularly germane in this regard and are in the following terms:

         "15. The second ground for an adjournment was on the basis that the
             Appellant was in hospital.  Mr  Khan  was  unable  to  explain
             which  hospital,  for  what   reason   or   the   reason   for
             hospitalisation.  He was afforded the  opportunity  of  taking
             further instructions and the matter was  put  back.   When  Mr
             Khan returned, he stated that he was not in a position to  add
             anything further but repeated his request for an adjournment.


         16.  The Tribunal retired to consider  the  application  which  was
             refused.  There was a complete absence of credible information
             with respect to the absent Appellant.  He had earlier made  an
             application for an adjournment  which  was  refused.   He  was
             fully aware with respect to the reasons as to why that was the
             case.  This in my assessment of the application was  simply  a
             further attempt to frustrate the proceedings."


11.  In circumstances where even  the  Appellant's  own  representative  was
    unable to articulate the reason why the Appellant was unable to  attend
    the hearing beyond the general assertion that  he  had  been  taken  to
    hospital - and even that assertion articulated without  any  meaningful
    particulars  such   as   cause   of   hospitalisation   or   place   of
    hospitalisation - it seems to me uncontroversial  and  inevitable  that
    the Tribunal should have reached the conclusion that no  proper  reason
    for non-attendance had been provided and that in the  circumstances  it
    was appropriate to proceed in the absence of the Appellant.


12.  Moreover, it is to be noted that since the date of the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal no evidence has been  provided  to  verify  the
    Appellant's claimed incapacity on 22 June 2017.


13.  Be that as it may, as I have indicated, these matters - in  respect  of
    the substantive decision and in respect of the refusal  to  adjourn  in
    the absence of the Appellant - are not matters  with  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal  is  now  jurisdictionally  seized.  I  make   the   foregoing
    observations only by way of completeness and for the avoidance  of  any
    doubt that might remain in the Appellant's mind, or his advisers' mind,
    with regard to these issues.


14.  It is against this background that I turn to the challenge  upon  which
    Judge McWilliam granted permission to appeal.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge dealt with the adjournment request in this way, at paragraph 14:

         "With respect to the first ground requesting an adjournment,  after
         a short recess the application  for  an  adjournment  was  refused.
         This  was  because  the  Appellant  had  engaged  the  services  of
         Bakewell's Solicitors whose details appeared  on  the  appeal  form
         which was signed and dated 29 March  2017.   The  said  firm  under
         cover of 12 June 2017 requested an  adjournment  stating  that  the
         Appellant was a practising Muslim and was fasting in observation of
         the holy month of Ramadan.  That if he  was  to  give  evidence  it
         could be detrimental to his health.  They requested an  adjournment
         after 27 June 2017.  That application was refused on the basis that
         no evidence of ill-health had been produced and  that  fasting  did
         not require adjournment of the hearing.  Under cover 19  June  2017
         Universal Solicitors wrote to the Tribunal office stating that they
         were now representing the Appellant in substitution of his  earlier
         representatives Blakewell Solicitors.   Universal  Solicitors  made
         reference to the Appellant attempting on more than one occasion  to
         make contact with Blakewell Solicitors  but  with  little  success.
         There was an accompanying  witness  statement  from  the  Appellant
         dated 19 June 2017.  The Appellant was granted bail as of  16  June
         2017.  In the Appellant's witness statement he  made  reference  to
         not being aware as to whether or not Blakewell  had  submitted  any
         papers on his behalf.  As a consequence of not being able to  speak
         with Blakewells or obtain documentation from  them,  he  instructed
         Universal Solicitors.  He  came  to  be  aware  that  the  specific
         individual that he had been in contact with at Blakewells  was  now
         out  of  the  country  on  emergency  matters.   He  requested   an
         adjournment.  Mr Khan stated that he did not  have  a  Respondent's
         bundle.  A copy was provided on the day of  the  hearing  which  he
         subsequently returned.  Mr Khan was invited to explain why his firm
         had agreed to represent the absent Appellant when they were not  in
         possession of papers nor had  they  taken  instructions.   Mr  Khan
         explained that he had agreed to represent solely for  the  purposes
         of requesting an  adjournment.   The  application  to  adjourn  was
         refused."


15.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq acknowledges that no evidence has been  filed  in  the
    Tribunal pursuant to the directions of Judge McWilliam contained in the
    grant of permission to appeal.  Moreover, he indicated that he was  not
    in a position to offer to the Tribunal any explanation for the  failure
    to provide  any  of  the  evidence  that  Judge  McWilliam  so  plainly
    considered would  be  relevant  to  considering  the  fairness  of  the
    decision to refuse the adjournment.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq also acknowledged
    in due course that notwithstanding that Universal Solicitors  had  been
    instructed since 19 June 2017, nothing further had been filed with  the
    Tribunal at any point in respect of the substance  of  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim - and to that end nothing had been filed pursuant  to  the
    standard Direction issued in this case on 21  September  2017  alerting
    the Appellant that he should be prepared to proceed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal to a substantive remaking of the decision in the appeal in the
    event of a finding of error of  law,  and  that  any  further  evidence
    should be filed accordingly.


16.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq advanced a short and simple  point.   He  invited  the
    Tribunal to note that Universal Solicitors had only been instructed two
    days prior to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  invited
    the Tribunal to consider whether 48 hours was an adequate time in which
    to make preparations for  the  appeal.   He  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    conclude that it was not.


17.  In my judgment this submission is to miss the  point.   The  issue  was
    not whether  Universal  Solicitors  had  had  adequate  opportunity  to
    prepare  the  appeal,  but  whether  the  Appellant  had  had  adequate
    opportunity to prepare his case or otherwise to be represented  at  the
    hearing.  Clearly he had had the benefit of representation since  March
    2017 when his Notice of Appeal had been lodged.  In the ordinary course
    of events it might be expected that his representatives would have  set
    about preparing his appeal in  a  timely  and  diligent  fashion.   If,
    closer  to  the  hearing  date,  he  had   then   decided   to   change
    representatives then in the ordinary  course  of  events  it  might  be
    expected that  such  change  would  be  handled  fluently  and  without
    difficulty.


18.  It is the Appellant's suggestion that this was not the  case  and  that
    his initial representatives, Blakewells, had let him down; and that  in
    turn,  when  he  changed  representatives,  this   left   his   current
    representatives, Universal Solicitors, in a near  impossible  position.
    The difficulty is that the Appellant has singularly failed  to  provide
    any supporting evidence to establish  the  premises  of  his  argument.
    Indeed, Mr Razzaq-Siddiq not only acknowledges, as  I  have  indicated,
    that there is no such supporting evidence before the Tribunal, but also
    indicates that he is not in a position to offer any sort of explanation
    for the absence of such material.  This is remarkable.  Bearing in mind
    that Universal Solicitors continue to represent the Appellant it  might
    be thought that they at least would have been in a position to  provide
    something by way of response to the observations of Judge McWilliam  in
    respect  of  their  own  dealings  with  the  matter  and   their   own
    correspondence with Blakewells; but, as I say, nothing of that sort has
    been provided.


19.  I also note in this context Ms Willocks-Briscoe's observation, which  I
    consider to be well-made, that the fact that  Blakewells  had  made  an
    application for an adjournment on behalf of the Appellant  on  12  June
    2017 significantly undermines his claim not to have been able to be  in
    communication with them.  It is apparent that  he  instructed  them  to
    make an application on the grounds set out within that application  and
    rehearsed at paragraph 14 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision.
    This does not sit well with the claim that he was in  substance  unable
    to communicate with his solicitors.


20.  For all these reasons - and with all due respect to  Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq,
    whom it seems to me has presented the case as well as he is  able  with
    the limited materials available to him - I find that the Appellant  has
    quite simply failed to put anything before the Tribunal that reinforces
    the idea that he was  let  down  by  either  representatives.   In  the
    circumstances it seems to me absolutely clear that as of  the  date  of
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant had had  ample
    opportunity to prepare his case for appeal, with or without the benefit
    of representatives,  but  as  it  happens,  seemingly  throughout  with
    representatives.


21.  Accordingly, I can identify no procedural  unfairness  in  refusing  to
    adjourn the case, whether by reference to the preparedness or otherwise
    of the Appellant's representatives and documentation, or  by  reference
    to the Appellant's non-attendance.

Notice of Decision

22.  There was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
which, accordingly, stands.


23.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing


Signed:                                 Date: 29 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

