

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04617/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 July 2021                                |On 12 August 2021             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     NMW
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Harvey instructed by Kesar & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mt Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. Following a remote hearing on 21st January 2021 the  Upper  Tribunal  set
   aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal for the reasons  set  out  in
   the Error of Law decision dated 10 February 2021, a copy of which appears
   as an annex to this decision as it contains details of the  Crown  Courts
   sentencing remarks following the appellant's conviction at Croydon  Crown
   Court on 18 September 2015, following a guilty plea of importing Class  A
   drugs into the  United  Kingdom  from  Jamaica  [2],  the  basis  of  the
   Secretary of States challenge to the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
   [7-10], and analysis of the error of law on the one remaining issue,  the
   alleged failure of the Judge to have considered the country guidance case
   of AB  (protection-criminal  gangs-internal  relocation)  Jamaica  [2007]
   UKAIT 00018; reference to relevant sections of which is set  out  between
   [12 - 15] of the Error of Law finding.
2. The Resumed hearing was attended by the  advocates  only  (remotely)  who
   agreed the matter could proceed by way of submissions only.
3. As the First-tier Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
   grounds there was no consideration of the Humanitarian Protection  aspect
   although it is accepted by Ms Harvey that this stands  or  falls  on  the
   same issues, or the article 8 ECHR, which it was submitted by  Ms  Harvey
   stands alone for reasons which are discussed further below.
4. The Tribunal is also grateful to the advocates for the efforts that  they
   have made  in  trying  to  obtain  relevant  evidence,  including  making
   enquiries of professional associates in Jamaica.  The fact no  definitive
   evidence has been obtained from any such  source  or  from  the  Jamaican
   authorities themselves is not as a result of the lack of effort  made  by
   the advocates or professional advisers.

Appellants Skelton Argument

     5. A skeleton argument was received from Ms Harvey on the 2 July  2021
        in the following terms:

                  IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                  IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                  PA/04617/2019

                  BETWEEN:

             NW

             (Name anonymised for the purposes of this decision)

             Appellant

             v




             SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                      Respondent




             SKELETON FOR THE RESPONDENT







             Anonymity direction

          1. The Tribunal  is  asked  to  preserve  the  anonymity  of  the
             appellant and not to name G in the determination, as has  been
             done to date.




             Proceedings to date

          2. On 22 February 2021 Upper  Tribal  Judge  Hanson  allowed  the
             appellant Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  on
             First-tier tribunal Judge Cockrill of  25  February  2020  who
             allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  as  an
             exception to her deportation from the UK.  He held that First-
             tier Tribunal Judge  Cockrill  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
             consider the availably  of  the  witness  protection  and  the
             country guidance case  of  AB  in  the  absence  of  providing
             adequate reasons for not having done so. He also recorded  the
             lack of consideration and findings concerning any  prospective
             violation of a non-derogable human right.

          3. Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson set  aside  the  determination  of
             First-tier Tribunal judge Cockrill but preserved her  findings
             pertaining to:

          a. The appellant's experiences in Jamaica;

          b. Her immigration history;

          c. Family composition.

          4. Upper  Tribunal  judge  Hanson  also  preserved  the  positive
             finding from the National Referral  Mechanism,  subsequent  to
             the determination of First-tier Tribunal judge Cockrill.

          5. There was no challenge to the decision that the appellant  did
             not constitute a danger to the community for the purposes of s
             72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a
             matter which was not  pressed  by  the  Secretary  of  state's
             representative at the hearing before the First tier and  which
             in any event must now be viewed in the light of the finding in
             the national referral mechanism that the appellant is a victim
             of modern slavery for  the  purposes  of  forced  criminality.
             Although not expressly the subject  of  a  preserved  finding,
             this matter is understood not to be issue.

          6. Upper Tribunal judge Hanson held "It  may  be  that  a  proper
             examination of the evidence may result  in  the  appeal  being
             allowed but it cannot be established at  this  time  that  the
             outcome of the appeal will be the same".

          7. The appellant made an application under rule 15(2)  to  submit
             further evidence in the form of a 33-page  bundle  on  witness
             protection.  This was granted on 28 June 2021.




          8. On 1 July 2021 the Home Office Senior Presenting  Officer,  Mr
             Tan, confirmed that he did not require to cross-examine  [NW].
             The case  will  thus  proceed  by  submissions  only  and  the
             appellant is not required to attend:  as  envisaged  by  Upper
             Tribunal judge Hanson in his directions.




             The appellant's case

          9. The appellant maintains her case that to return her to Jamaica
             would be a breach of her rights:

          i) Under the 1951 Convention relating to the status of refugees;

         ii) To humanitarian protection because of the risk of violation of
             her rights under Articles 2 and 3 of the  European  Convention
             on Human Rights

        iii) Of her rights under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
             Human Rights,

             Facts

         10. The preserved facts are:

          a. The appellant is a victim of modern slavery

                   i. in Jamaica and the United Kingdom between 12/2013 and
                      21/01/2014  for  the  specific  purposes  of   forced
                      criminality

                  ii. in Jamaica between 1975 and 1983 (from  when  the  PV
                      was aged 8-9 until 15-16) for the  specific  purposes
                      of sexual exploitation (National  Referral  Mechanism
                      decision of 28 July 2020);

             Experiences in Jamaica

          b. As regards the core elements the appellant has basically given
             a true narrative

          c. The appellant was offered a taxi ride as described

          d. She went in this taxi with her daughter;

          e. A diversion took place;

          f. She was then subjected to a violent rape;

          g. This act of rape was one  designed  to  frighten  her  and  to
             coerce her therefore into carrying this unlawful drug into the
             United Kingdom in a bra that was provided.

          h. She had no alternative but to comply knowing that  those  that
             had assaulted her and had acted in that violent manner towards
             her knew where she was living and they knew about her family;

          i. She pleaded guilty (;

          j. She would be seen as someone who informed on G;

          k. She has been  subjected  to  a  number  of  deeply  disturbing
             experiences in her life. She has been repeatedly the victim of
             abuse and violence;

          l. She has a subjective fear of G and his criminal associates;

          m. People close to her have been murdered;

             Immigration history

          n. Given leave to remain as a student on 2 August 2002

          o. Granted indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a  British
             citizen on 18 January 2006

          p. 19 October 2015 notified of liability to deportation

             Family circumstances

          q. 1976-1983 Sexually abused by stepfather as a child

          r. 1976-1983         Sexually abused by  stepfather  as  a  child



          s. 2 December 1985 birth of son [R] by [RH] (abusive relationship

          t. 26 February 1987 birth of daughter [N] by [RH]

          u. C. 1989 son born by [T]

          v. Daughter [O] born 18 October 2002

          w. Married to [RW] 25 October 2003.

          x. Daughter [Z] born 2 October 2008

          y. Son [R] murdered in Jamaica in 2009.  His father died in 2019.

          z. The relationship with [RW] was abusive and they are no  longer
             together but her daughters maintain  their  relationship  with
             their father.




             Asylum

         11. The outstanding issue  is  that  of  internal  relocation  and
             whether there is anywhere in Jamaica that the appellant  could
             be safe as a result  of  State  protection,  specifically  the
             witness protection programme, in  the  light  of  the  country
             guidance  case  of  AB   (Protection-criminal   gangs-internal
             relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 00018.

         12. The headnote in AB records:

             [...] unless likely to be admitted  to  a  witness  protection
             programme a person  targeted  by  a  criminal  gang  will  not
             normally received effective protection in their home area.

         13. The evidence in the appellant's supplementary  bundle  attests
             that the appellant  would  not  be  admitted  to  the  witness
             protection  programme.   Senior  Deputy  Director  of   Public
             Prosecutions is reported on 24 October 2019 by  Radio  Jamaica
             as saying that

             "it is only law abiding people  that  the  witness  protection
             will take on.  If you have a charged or if you're suspected of
             being charged the protection is not  eager  to  take  you  on"
             [supplementary bundle at 2]

         14.  National  Security  Minister  Dr  Horace  Chang  subsequently
             acknowledged [supplementary bundle at 8] that

             "The system still has a problem dealing with those individuals
             [who are convicted already or in the system]. So, someone  who
             is convicted but provides critical information, that  poses  a
             challenge how to deal with them. We may have to look  at  some
             legal challenges to allow for induvial who have been convicted
             to be treated in a particular way. In fact, the whole question
             of plea-bargaining has to  be  examined  by  the  Ministry  of
             Justice.

         15. The appellant  has  been  convicted  and  thus  would  not  be
             admitted to the programme.

         16. This is tacitly acknowledged in the Home Office country policy
             and information  Note  Jamaica:  fear  of  organised  criminal
             groups of  August  2019  with  its  reference  to  "legitimate
             witnesses" (Appellant's bundle).




             Witness protection programme

             The Jamaica  Ministry  of  National  Security  stated  on  its
             website 'The Justice Protection Unit  is  a  covert  operation
             managed  by  the  Ministry  of  National  Security.  Its  main
             objective is to enlist legitimate witnesses  of  major  crimes
             whose safety and security is at risk. The Programme  seeks  to
             offer protection for these witnesses and provide  support  for
             the functioning of the wider criminal justice system'.

         17. Reports emphasize that the programme  is  designed  for  those
             "involved in  the  criminal  justice  process"  [supplementary
             bundle at 7 and passim.].  It is, as its  name  suggests,  for
             witnesses.  G is at  large.  There  are  no  live  proceedings
             against him in  Jamacia,  or  indeed  anywhere  since  he  was
             sentenced in absent in the UK.

         18. That the programme is for those involved in  "live"  cases  is
             also acknowledged in the Home  Office  bundle.   At  8.1.4  it
             records reports that  a  woman  and  child  were  evicted  and
             removed from the Witness Prevention Programme as soon  as  the
             case she testified in concluded.

         19. AB (Protection-criminal gangs-internal relocation) Jamaica  CG
             [2007] UKAIT 00018, has not been superseded.  It is summarised
             in  the  Home  Office  country  policy  and  information  Note
             Jamaica: fear of organised  criminal  groups  of  August  2019
             (Appellant's bundle country information thus:

             2.4.5 If a person is of  interest  or  vulnerable  to  an  OCG
             [organised  criminal  gang]  because   of   their   particular
             circumstances, decision makers must establish  that  an  OCG's
             behaviour and capabilities poses a real and serious threat  to
             the person which amounts to serious harm.

         20. The tribunal in  AB  (Jamaica)  at  paragraph  159  questioned
             whether criminal gangs would be able to  track  their  victims
             down.

         21. In the appellant's case the answer is yes given the  extensive
             coverage her case has received (see Appellant's bundle at 6).

         22. G's gang has been involved  with  the  import  of  significant
             amounts of cocaine,  based  simply  on  the  amount  that  the
             Appellant was carrying.   This  is  evidence  that  they  have
             significant funds.  G was able to  jump  bail  and,  it  would
             appear, return to  Jamaica,  evidence  again  of  considerable
             resources, possibly involving corruption.

         23. In  those  circumstances  he  is  well  placed  to  trace  the
             appellant.

         24. In AB (Jamaica) the tribunal held that criminal gang, at least
             the major ones,  are  well  organised  and  have  considerable
             resources and networks (paragraph 158).  It held  that  it  is
             not reasonably likely that they would be told to look out  for
             specific individuals except in high profile  cases  (paragraph
             158).  It emphasised that the precise question  of  protection
             for informers was not before it and that  lacked  evidence  on
             the point (paragraph 154).

         25. Not only is  this  a  "high  profile"  case,  as  witness  the
             extensive press coverage, it is a case in which G is still  at
             large, and wanted because he has been sentenced in absentia in
             the UK to 13  years  in  Rison.  The  tribunal  accepted  that
             Jamaica is a relatively small  country,  with  good  transport
             networks (paragraph 161).

         26. The tribunal identified that the witness protection  programme
             could provide effective protection (paragraph 159).  and  that
             it would be "very important" in Jamaican cases concerned  with
             criminal gangs to analyse  whether  the  individual  concerned
             will  be  able  to  receive  assistance  from  this  programme
             (paragraph 162-163).  As set out  above,  that  would  not  be
             available to the appellant: she would not be admitted to it.

         27. The tribunal did not rule out that  the  economic  and  social
             conditions faced by those in the witness protection  programme
             programme might make it unreasonable for person  with  unusual
             induvial circumstances  to  be  admitted  into  the  programme
             (paragraph 162)For all the reasons given below in the  section
             on Article 8 this is the case for  the  appellant:  given  her
             mental and physical health and her  history  I  Jamaica  which
             includes sexual abuse of her as a  child,  rape  at  different
             points in her life, and the murder of her son.  For those same
             reasons, if contrary to the submission above, it  is  accepted
             that she could relocate internally outside the  programme,  it
             would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect her to do  so
             (paragraph 165).

         28. The US Department of State Trafficking in  persons  report  of
             June 2019 (Appellant's bundle  at  5-1)  that  there  was  one
             conviction of  a  trafficker  in  the  reporting  period,  for
             trafficking for forced  begging  (Appellant's  bundle  5-110).
             Efforts to protect victims are described as "weak" Few victims
             were referred to shelters (5-12)




             Summary of the appellant's asylum case

         29. The appellant fears  resection  as  a  member  of  the  social
             group's former victim of modern slavery and former  victim  of
             gangs  in  Jamaica.  The  characteristics   of   having   been
             trafficked,  and  of  having  been  a  victim  of  gangs,  are
             immutable by reason of their historical permanence.  They  are
             part of a person's past and cannot  be  shaken  off,  whatever
             that person's future conduct (see In SB (PSG, Protection,  Reg
             6) (Moldova) [2008] UKAIT 2, Upper Tribunal judge Gill).

         30. The persecution  feared  is  harassment,  violence,  arbitrary
             detention, rape and torture, at the hands of G and his gang in
             Jamaica.

         31. Dr Jennifer Fleetwood has provided  expert  evidence  in  this
             case.  She is an expert ot he internal tonal  drug  trace  and
             drug mules (see appellant's bundle page 63).

         32. It is stated in the Home Office country policy and information
             Note Jamaica: fear of organised criminal groups of August 2019
             that Jamaica's high murder rate is  because  most  murders  in
             Jamaica are committed against those involved in  gang  related
             activities (2.2.4.4).

         33. [NW] has been involved  in  the  activities  of  an  organised
             criminal gang and, until he skipped bail, faced trial G.   She
             pleaded guilty.  Her case achieved considerable  notoriety  in
             the UK and  Jamaica,  perhaps  because  the  police  gave  the
             newspapers  phonographs  of  the  bra  stuffed  with   cocaine
             (Appellant's  bundle  before  the  first  tier  at  6).    She
             continues to pose a threat of exposure to G and to  the  gang.
             She lacks for associations and influence  that  might  protect
             her and therefore the simplest responses are to intimidate her
             through future ill-treatment, including rape, or to kill her.

             Humanitarian protection

         34. For all the reasons that  found  her  claim  for  asylum,  the
             appellant also qualifies for humanitarian protection.

         35. The prevalence of poverty in Jamaica is high  (19.3%  in  2017
             (page 7-23 Appellant's bundle). It is recorded that  the  2015
             Economic and Social Survey of Jamaica reported a 63.1% rate of
             labour force participation, falling to 56.3% for women (page 7-
             44, Appellant's  bundle).  Welfare  security  is  described  a
             "rudimentary" with the majority of the  low-income  population
             struggling to survive (Appellant's bundle at 7-50).

         36. In the light of all the above, in the  specific  circumstances
             of her case, the  appellant's  fear  of  persecution  s  well-
             founded; throughout  Jamaica  is  well  founded  the  Jamaican
             state,  through  a  combination  of  corruption  and  lack  of
             resources, will be either unwilling or  unable,  depending  on
             the particular instance, to protect her, and G's gang will  be
             in a position to  find  her  wherever  in  Jamaica  she  goes,
             because she is notorious.  It is  in  their  interests,  quite
             apart from questions of revenge, to silence her.

         37. G, sentenced to 13 years in absentia managed to leave  the  UK
             and  remain  at  large  in  Jamaica  ever  since,  the   value
             (�180,000) and purity of the cocaine the appellant was  forced
             to smuggle all attest to the power and influence of the gang.

         38. In paragraphs 181 to 187 of AB, the Upper  Tribunal  considers
             social and psychological factors that might render a  person's
             internal relocation options "unduly harsh".  These,  discussed
             under Article 8 below, apply in the appellant's case.




             Article 8

             Part 5A of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and
             s 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009

         53. Part 5A provides (insofar as material)

             117A Application of this Part

             (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

             (2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

             (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2).




             117B

             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to-

                   (a) a private life, or

                   (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

                   [...]




             117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

              (4) Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

              (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

             (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.




         54. The Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 provides  at
             s 55 (insofar as material)

                55 Duty regarding the welfare of children


                (1) The Secretary  of  State  must  make  arrangements  for
             ensuring that-

             (a) the functions mentioned in subsection (2)  are  discharged
             having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare
             of children who are in the United Kingdom, and

             (b) any  services  provided  by  another  person  pursuant  to
             arrangements which are made by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
             relate to the discharge of a function mentioned in  subsection
             (2) are provided having regard to that need.

                   (2) The functions referred to in subsection (1) are-

             (a)any function of the  Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to
             immigration, asylum or nationality;

             (b) any function conferred by or by virtue of the  Immigration
             Acts on an immigration officer; ...

             (3) A person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
             exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given  to
             the person by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  purpose  of
             subsection (1).

                  [...]

                  (6) In this section-

                      "children" means persons who are under the age of 18;

         55. The Immigration Rules cover the same ground as s 117A to  117E
             of the 2002 Act:

             A398. These rules apply where:

             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked.




             398. Where a person claims that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             [...]

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State  in
             assessing that claim will consider whether  paragraph  399  or
             399A applies and, if it  does  not,  the  public  interest  in
             deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors  where
             there are very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
             described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.




              This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
             if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life; and

             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported.

         56. The appellant has been found to be a victim modern slavery  by
             forced criminality.  Her offending was forced: the  result  of
             coercion and violence as described in her account, accepted by
             the  First-tier  tribunal  judge  whose  findings  have   been
             preserved.  This is a  compelling  circumstance  which  should
             lead to  her  offending  being  viewed  differently  from  the
             purposes of s 117C from that of other foreign criminals.

         39. The Appellant was a person of  good  character  prior  to  her
             conviction.  Since her offence she has  committed  no  further
             offences, whether in prison in the community.

         40. Her probation officer, Becky  Shepherd,  states  (Respondent's
             bundle at 106)

             "[NW] has engaged well in supervision and has  been  open  and
             insightful in discussing her circumstances.

             [...]

             I have  assessed  [NW]  as  presenting  a  very  low  risk  of
             reoffending and a  very  low  risk  of  harm  to  the  public,
             utilising the Probation Service assessment and risk management
             tool OASys, an actuarial and dynamic assessment which is  very
             thorough.

             [...] so she can be a good mother and a  productive  and  pro-
             social member of society, as her behaviour and attitude  since
             release from custody have given me every reason to expect from
             her future conduct.

         57. The appellant speaks English. Her older daughter, [O], is  now
             18 years old but her daughter [Z] remains a qualifying  child.
             She kept in touch with [Z] and  [O]  throughout  her  time  in
             prison.  Her  relationship  with  them  is  accepted  (refusal
             letter paragraph 121).

         58. [O] has provided a detailed statement, focusing in  particular
             on the effect of  her  mother's  deportation  on  her  younger
             sister.  The children's fears for their mother if she  returns
             to Jamaica are a relevant part of the impact upon them.   They
             will be in constant fear for her and the  stress  and  anxiety
             under which they currently labour, described very  clearly  by
             [O], will continue.

         59. The effect on children must be taken into account: Beoku Betts
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UK  HL  39
             and the starting point must be their best interest.

         60. In ZH (Tanzania) Lady Hale, giving the judgment of the  court,
             held:

             33. We now have a much greater understanding of the importance
             of these issues in assessing the  overall  well-being  of  the
             child. In making the proportionality assessment under  article
             8,  the  best  interests  of  the  child  must  be  a  primary
             consideration. This means that they must be considered  first.
             They can, of course, be outweighed by the cumulative effect of
             other  considerations.  In  this  case,   the   countervailing
             considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair
             immigration  control,  coupled  with  the  mother's  appalling
             immigration history and the  precariousness  of  her  position
             when family life was created. But,  as  the  Tribunal  rightly
             pointed out, the children were not to be blamed for that.  And
             the inevitable result of removing their primary carer would be
             that they had to leave with her. On the facts, it is as  least
             as strong a case as Edore v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2003] 1 WLR 2979, where Simon Brown LJ  held  that
             "there really is only room for one view" (para 26).  In  those
             circumstances, the Secretary of State  was  clearly  right  to
             concede that there could be only one answer.

         61. The case of Hesham Ali v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2016] UKSC 60 addresses paragraphs A398 to 399:

             29. Where children are involved, their best interests are said
             by the court to be of paramount importance (by which  it  does
             not mean to say that they  are  determinative:  see  Jeunesse,
             para 109). Whilst alone they cannot be decisive, they must  be
             afforded significant weight. Accordingly,  national  decision-
             making  bodies  should  in  principle  advert  to  and  assess
             evidence in  respect  of  the  practicality,  feasibility  and
             proportionality of any removal of  a  non-national  parent  in
             order to give effective protection and  sufficient  weight  to
             these best interests of the children directly affected  by  it
             (Jeunesse, paras 108-109) ....

         62. [Z] interests are a primary consideration and to cause her  to
             be separated from her mother and  to  suffer  because  of  her
             fears for her would be unduly harsh.

         63. If that the effect  on  her  would  be  unduly  harsh  is  not
             accepted, nonetheless in NA (Pakistan) v  Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department (2016)  EWCA  Civ  662  the  Court  of
             Appeal held at paragraph 111:

             111. In deciding that it should address itself to the question
             whether, despite the fact that  MY  could  not  bring  himself
             within  Exception  1  or   Exception   2,   "very   compelling
             circumstances" existed which  would  make  deportation  unduly
             harsh and hence disproportionate, the Upper Tribunal correctly
             rejected the primary submission made by counsel then appearing
             for the Secretary of State (Mr Richards),  recorded  at  para.
             [46], that if the requirements of neither  of  the  Exceptions
             could be satisfied, "that  is  the  end  of  the  matter"  and
             section 117C(3) mandates upholding the deportation order. That
             is an interpretation of section 117C(3) which Mr Tam  conceded
             before us must be wrong. We have explained above  the  correct
             interpretation to be given to section 117C(3),  in  line  with
             para. 398 of the 2014 rules.

         64. The effect on [O] must be  considered  cumulatively  with  the
             effect on her minor sister.

         65. The  effect  on  the  appellant  herself  must  be  considered
             cumulatively with the effect on her children. It  is  accepted
             that the appellant has lived in the UK since 2002.  Article  8
             encompasses the physical, moral and psychological integrity of
             a person  Bensaid v. The  United  Kingdom (Application  No.
             44599/98, Judgment of 6 February 2001).

         66. If the appellant returns to Jamaica,  she  will  be  extremely
             fearful of G and his gang.  Her experiences in  Jamaica  since
             childhood have been traumatic and have given her no reason  to
             consider that the police will be able to protect her.

         67. For the appellant to live  in  fear  in  Jamaica  would  be  a
             flagrant breach of her rights under Article 8 of the  European
             Convention on Human Rights and bring her within the  ambit  of
             Article 8 in accordance with the judgment of the Supreme Court
             R(Ullah) v Special Adjudicator R(Do) v Secretary of State  for
             the Home Department [2004] UKHL 26.

         68. Not only through her relationship with her family but  through
             her work and study, the appellant is integrated into the UK.

         41. The appellant is mentally ill. There are expert  reports  from
             psychologist Mirjam Klann Thulesse who has specialised in work
             with survivors of human trafficking  since  2007  (Appellant's
             bundle 2-33 to 2-35), Psychiatrist  Dr  Abigail  Seltzer,  who
             specialises in traumatic stress.

         42. Dr Seltzer diagnoses post-traumatic stress disorder (paragraph
             89 of her report, Appellant's bundle at 2-7). She relates this
             to the rape (paragraph 96 page 2-17). She states "There is  no
             doubt that she has developed PTSD as a result of her  rape  by
             the taxi driver in  Jamaica",  although  she  attributes  [NW]
             overall  low  mood  to  the  results  of  her  conviction  and
             immigration situation (Appellant's bundle at  2-22,  paragraph
             117).

         43. The psychologists in HMP Bronzefield  assessed  the  appellant
             (pages 2-88 to 2-89, Appellant's bundle)

         44. Dr Seltzer describes her daily functioning as poor because  of
             "pain and low mood"  (paragraph  116,  page  2-22  Appellant's
             bundle before the first-tier).  She identifies that there  Isa
             psychosomatic element to Ms Williams' pain which is because of
             her belief hat  it  is  linked  to  the  trauma  of  her  rape
             (paragraph 118 at -23).

         45.  Dr  Seltzer  identifies  that  the  appellant   was   not   a
             particularly able scholar and raises the questions of learning
             disability  and  dyslexia,  although  without  being  able  to
             comment on these (paragraph 94 2-17).

         46. The cumulative effect on the appellant and her children of her
             departure, set against the lack  of  public  interest  in  the
             removal  of  the   appellant,   constitute   very   compelling
             circumstances militating against the appellant's deportation.

         47. Ms Thullesen identifies the appellant to be at risk of  future
             exploitation (paragraph 122 at page 2-67  of  the  Appellant's
             bundle).  She  considers   that   she   requires   long   term
             intervention to address her multi-faceted psychological  needs
             (paragraph 123).  The psychotherapists n HMP  Bronzefield  had
             similar identified a likelihood of ongoing  needs  related  to
             trauma  (Appellant's  bundle  at  2-89).  The  appellant   was
             prescribed sertraline (tab 3-1, Appellant's bundle)

         48.  To  these  must  be  added  the  pain  that  the   appellants
             experiences.  That it may have a psychosomatic element, as  Dr
             Seltzer concedes, makes it no less real pain.

         49. The appellant is at risk of exploitation  in  Jamaica  because
             she is at risk of poverty and will  have  few  resources.  The
             documents at tab 7 in the Appellant's bundle before the First-
             tier evidence the poverty in the area where her children  live
             and in Jamaica as a whole.

         50. These factors must be assessed cumulatively.  The  appellant's
             children would be petrified for her if she returned.  She  too
             would be terrified and this will affect both  her  mental  and
             physical health. She is integrated within the UK where she has
             lived for 20 years, brought up a family, worked and studied.

         51. On the Article 8(2) side of the scales,  in  addition  to  the
             offence constituting forced criminality must  be  placed  that
             she has served her sentence and is now assessed as  presenting
             a "very low" risk, both of reoffending and of harm.

         52. In all the circumstances, deportation is not proportionate. It
             would be a breach of the Appellant's rights and those  of  her
             family members under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
             Human Rights and thus contrary to s 6 of the Human Rights  Act
             1998.




             Summary

         53. The appellant fears persecution as  a  member  of  the  social
             groups formerly  trafficked  persons  and  former  victims  of
             gangs.  Her account should be accepted.

         54. The evidence demonstrates a risk from G and  his  gang  and  a
             lack of State protection against this.  The  appellant's  case
             has received widespread publicity and she  is  known  to  have
             pleaded guilty.  She is easy to  identify  and  the  gang  has
             reason to seek her out to silence her.  There is  no  internal
             relocation open  to  her  and  no  effective  protection.  Her
             physical and mental health is poor  and  she  is  at  risk  of
             exploitation.

         55.  For  the  same  reasons  she   qualifies   for   humanitarian
             protection.

         56. There are very compelling circumstances militating against the
             deportation of the appellant: that her criminality was  forced
             in circumstances of modern slavery, her relationship with  her
             children, mental and physical health and length  of  residence
             in the UK.  She and her children would live in fear  were  she
             returned. She is  at  risk  of  exploitation  because  of  the
             extreme poverty she would face in Jamaica.

         57. It would be a breach of the rights of the  appellant  and  her
             children under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
             Rights to remove the appellant from the UK  and  separate  her
             from her children.

         58. The decision to deport the appellant is  not  necessary  in  a
             democratic society, is not proportionate under  Article  8  of
             the European Convention on Human Rights and is in breach of  s
             6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.




             Alison Harvey

             No5 Chambers, London

             1 July 2021




Discussion

     6. The protection claims: there is no suggestion the appellant faces a
        real risk of persecution from the state authorities in Jamaica  her
        fear, as outlined above, being from nonstate  actors,  specifically
        the criminal gang of which G was an associate/member, who  involved
        her in the importation of the Class A drugs to the United  Kingdom,
        more particularly set out in the skeleton argument above.
     7. The question to be considered is therefore  whether  the  appellant
        will be able to benefit from a sufficiency of protection  from  the
        authorities within Jamaica.
     8. Ms Harvey's submission is that as the appellant's home area  is  in
        Kingston, where a lot of the drug gangs are based and  where  drug-
        related gang-related violence is prevalent, her presence living  in
        the community will  be  discovered,  leading  to  a  risk  of  harm
        specifically  following  G's  conviction  and   sentencing   to   a
        substantial period  of  imprisonment  in  absentia,  following  his
        "jumping bail".
     9. Although it was acknowledged there is no specific  evidence  G  has
        returned to Jamaica as that is the country from which he originates
        and as there is no evidence he  has  been  located  in  the  United
        Kingdom by the police, I have approached this matter on  the  basis
        that, notwithstanding he was on bail from the criminal courts for a
        serious offence in the UK, he was somehow able to leave the  United
        Kingdom and has returned to Jamaica.
    10. There is no  evidence  of  a  request  or  otherwise  from  the  UK
        authorities to the Jamaican authorities to  locate  G  in  Jamaica,
        which, in light of the fact his biometrics would have been taken at
        his arrest, including fingerprints, would have made  identification
        by the authorities relatively straightforward if  he  was  located,
        although it is not likely any such inter-governmental communication
        regarding such an issue will be available in the public domain.
    11. With relation to the question of  whether  the  appellant  will  be
        admitted to the  Witness  Protection  Programme  (WPP)  if  she  is
        returned to Jamaica; the mechanics regarding how the WPP  works  is
        referred to in summary at [17 -  21]  the  error  of  law  decision
        below. The name of the programme clearly indicates it is to protect
        witnesses who  have  come  forward  to  the  authorities,  who  the
        authorities deem require protection.
    12. Ms Harvey on behalf of  the  appellant  argued  she  would  not  be
        admitted to the WPP as it only provides protection for witnesses in
        live cases and there are no live cases relevant to this  appellant.
        Whilst that statement may be correct at the  date  of  hearing  the
        reason there is no live case involving the appellant  is  that  she
        has not yet made a complaint to  the  authorities  in  Jamaica.  As
        noted at [16] of the error of law finding, the claim of  a  similar
        nature made at that stage was not made out as the  appellant  is  a
        witness to the attempted importation of drugs to the UK by G and/or
        his associates, being trafficked by a gang for such purposes by the
        use of  violence,  and  being  a  victim  of  rape,  all  of  which
        contravene the criminal law of Jamaica. It was  not  made  out  the
        appellant's complaint to the police would not be accepted and acted
        upon which will result in the creation of a live case.
    13. It is not made out that if the appellant was returned to Jamacia in
        the normal course of a deportation removal, that G or  any  of  his
        associates will be aware that she had been returned. The key  event
        is for the appellant to make contact with the  police  in  Jamaica,
        which it has not been made out she would not be able to do  as  she
        will be aware of the date she was being returned, and  so  able  to
        make a formal complaint at that point when the process set out from
        [17] of the error of law finding will be activated.
    14. Although the material provided by the appellant for the purpose  of
        this hearing refers to funding issues, that is a  common  complaint
        of many involved in the criminal justice system of  most  countries
        with an effective programme but has not been shown to undermine the
        effectiveness of the WPP per se, when all the available information
        is considered as a whole. The evidence does not  suggest  that  the
        WPP, even if under financial constraints, is not  able  to  deliver
        effective protection for those deemed to require it.
    15. In relation to the submission the appellant would not  be  able  to
        take advantage of the  WPP  as  she  herself  has  been  convicted,
        referred to as the requirement to only protect those  genuinely  in
        need who could come to the criminal courts with "clean hands",  one
        assumes to maximise the chances of conviction and any action to  be
        taken, insufficient material was made available to the Tribunal  to
        show that whilst this may be an issue of concern to the authorities
        in Jamaica in relation to others convicted  in  Jamaica,  that  the
        principles and constraints that may arise have equal application to
        an individual convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  an  offence
        committed here.
    16. There is no evidence  the  appellant  has  committed  any  criminal
        offence in Jamaica. The offence for which she was convicted was  of
        importing a substantial amount of Class A drugs into the UK.
    17. As Mr Tan submitted, the issue in relation to  the  feasibility  of
        appellant's return and protection  offered  through  the  WPP  also
        needs to be considered in light of evidence concerning the reach of
        the gang the appellant fears.
    18. There is no evidence the appellant has ever been involved  in  gang
        activities. In relation to gang activities since  the  promulgation
        of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in AB, Mr Tan referred to the
        CPIN, August 2019, Jamaica: Fear  of  Organised  Crime  Groups,  at
        section 2.2.5 and section 7  in  support  of  his  submission  that
        measures have been put in place to deal with gang activities.
    19. At 2.5.3 to 2.2.5 it is written:

        2.2.3     In the Country Guidance case of  AB  (Protection-criminal
             gangs-internal relocation)  Jamaica  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00018,
             heard on 19 December 2006 and promulgated on 22 February 2007,
             the Tribunal found that the  authorities  in  Jamaica  are  in
             general willing and  able  to  provide  effective  protection.
             However, unless reasonably likely  to  be  admitted  into  the
             Witness Protection Programme (WPP), a  person  targeted  by  a
             criminal gang will not normally receive  effective  protection
             in their home area [headnote].
        2.2.4     When referring to persons being 'admitted' into the  WPP,
             the Tribunal did not consider that the test can  be  what  the
             person's preferences are or whether there are  hardships  that
             will be involved (for example, having to  live  for  at  least
             some period of time in difficult circumstances). The  test  is
             simply whether, if they sought access to  it,  they  would  be
             admitted to it (para 163).
        2.5.4     The Tribunal in AB also found that: 'So far as the likely
             economic and social  conditions  faced  by  those  within  the
             Programme, whilst we do not rule out that  unusual  individual
             circumstances may make it unreasonable for them to be admitted
             into the programme, there is nothing to suggest that programme
             participants are generally exposed to  destitution  or  unduly
             harsh living conditions' (para 162).
        2.5.5     Since AB was promulgated the government has introduced  a
             number of legislative and policy measures  to  strengthen  the
             rule  of  law  and  combat  general  and  OCG-specific  crime,
             including  the  'Anti-Gang  Act'  2014   which   defines   and
             criminalises  OCGs.  As  of  November  2018,  there  had  been
             reportedly 448 cases of  arrest  under  the  act  but  only  2
             convictions (see Government response).


    20. In relation to the WPP it is written in that same document:

8.   Witness protection programme

        8.1.1     The Jamaica Ministry of National Security stated  on  its
             website 'The Justice Protection Unit  is  a  covert  operation
             managed  by  the  Ministry  of  National  Security.  Its  main
             objective is to enlist legitimate witnesses  of  major  crimes
             whose safety and security is at risk. The Programme  seeks  to
             offer protection for these witnesses and provide  support  for
             the functioning of the wider criminal justice system'.
        8.1.2     The Gleaner reported in  an  August  2018  article  that:
             'Citizens who sign up for  the  witness  protection  programme
             must follow the rules set down by the experts in order to have
             their safety guaranteed, attorney Peter Champagnie  has  said.
             "All in all, it is a  good  programme,  and  it  ought  to  be
             encouraged. The witness-protection programme in Jamaica is one
             where a  threatened  witness,  who  can  be  harmed  makes  an
             application for protection. That protection  comes  under  the
             auspices of the Ministry of National Security, and it is  very
             safe, except for one  or  two  instances  in  the  past  where
             witnesses leave the programme and were harmed afterwards...
        8.1.3     The Jamaica Observer reported in an April  2018  article,
             that a witness who testified against a murder committed by his
             nephew was 'supposedly' kicked out of the  programme  for  not
             complying with the progarmme's  rules,  which  prohibited  him
             from visiting Kingston. The witness stated that the  programme
             did not provide enough  money  for  him  and  his  family  and
             therefore needed to take  a  job  driving  into  Kingston.  He
             described the programme as 'bad' and 'horrible'.
        8.1.4     A report by a Jamaican news website, The Star, stated  in
             December 2017 that a woman and child were evicted and  removed
             from the Witness Prevention Programme as soon as the case  she
             testified in concluded.
        8.1.5     The USSD  Jamaica  2017  Human  Rights  report  observed:
             'There is a witness  protection  program,  but  many  eligible
             witnesses either refused protection or violated the conditions
             of the program. While the JCF reported that no participant  in
             the witness protection program was ever  killed,  the  program
             suffered from a number of problems. The  government  allocated
             approximately $1 million in additional funds for  the  program
             in February.'
        8.1.6     The Gleaner observed in an article published in  February
             2017, that 12 million dollars was planned to  be  invested  in
             the Witness Protection Programme for  the  upcoming  financial
             year. This was expected to strengthen the programme  in  order
             to improve the prosecution of crimes  and  organised  criminal
             networks.
        8.1.7      There  is  no  information  on  the  witness  protection
             programme in the USSD 2018 Human Rights report for Jamaica.
        8.1.8     Regarding witness protection, The Office of the  Director
             of Public Prosecutions (DPP) in  Jamaica  sets  out  mentioned
             that there are 'several  ways  to  protect  witnesses',  which
             include:
             . Criminal proceedings can be taken against  the  intimidators
             who could then face jail; and
             . In extreme circumstances witnesses can be relocated.'
        8.1.9     The same source stated: 'The principle  of  open  justice
             can  sometimes  act  as  a  bar  to  successful  prosecutions,
             particularly in homicides,  organised  crime  and  gun  crime.
             Witnesses may fear that if their identity is revealed  to  the
             defendant, his associates or the public generally then they or
             their friends and family will be at risk of serious harm.  'In
             most cases the police will establish whether a witness  is  in
             fear and should inform the prosecutor. Ideally,  a  discussion
             about the type of 'protection' that should be applied for will
             take place between the police and the prosecutor  at  the  pre
             charge stage. Occasionally information about a  witness  being
             in fear may come from another source. 'When  informed  that  a
             witness is fearful of giving evidence, prosecutors must liaise
             closely  with  the  Justice  Support  Unit  and  the   Justice
             Protection Unit to consider the range of options available  to
             them both at common law and by virtue of statute.  Prosecutors
             should seek to ensure that, wherever possible,  the  witness's
             fear  is  allayed  and  that  they  are  given  the  requisite
             protection. Prosecutors must also ensure  that  the  witness's
             rights under the ECHR are acknowledged and protected.'
        8.1.10     Furthermore,  the  DPP  mentioned:  'There  are  certain
             situations where proceedings can be heard in camera,  i.e.  in
             private, when the public are excluded and  the  doors  of  the
             court-room are closed. Thus in cases  of  sexual  offences  or
             cases where a gun is used, those matters  are  dealt  with  in
             camera... '


             The question for the court to decide is whether a  sitting  in
             private is necessary for the administration  of  justice,  for
             example if there is a possibility of disorder. A  decision  to
             sit in camera is not justified merely on  the  ground  that  a
             witness would find it embarrassing to testify.'


    21. It is understandable  and  not  irrational  that  if  a  person  is
        admitted to a protective scheme but fails to comply with the  terms
        of that scheme, that their continued involvement in the scheme  may
        be deemed to be inappropriate.  If a person  is  told  they  cannot
        enter a specific area as part of the WPP but chooses to enter  that
        area they must face the consequences; but that does  not  establish
        that if the appellant was admitted to the programme the same  would
        apply to her.
    22. In relation to the observation of  one  individual  being  released
        from the programme after the conviction of the person against  whom
        she testified, this  appears  to  relate  to  one  person  with  no
        evidence of the nature of the case concerned or whether  there  was
        any assessment that she will continue to  face  ongoing  risk  from
        those against whom she testified. The volume of evidence shows that
        if protection is required it will  be  provided,  and  the  country
        information does not indicate that all  those  who  enter  the  WPP
        seeking to benefit from the assistance and  support  provided  will
        loose the same once the cases ended, unless there is no longer  any
        need for it. The material clearly indicates a desire  to  encourage
        individuals to assist the prosecuting authorities in Jamaica, which
        must include an  acceptance  by  those  who  come  forward  of  the
        credibility  of  the  protection  the  scheme  offers  which,   the
        information as a whole  shows,  has  been  established.  There  was
        nothing to show that even if  the  appellant  is  admitted  to  the
        witness protection programme once  any  charges  arising  from  her
        claim against G or the taxi driver who was involved in her rape had
        been  disposed  of  by  the  criminal  courts,  that  she  will  be
        effectively  without  any  further  ongoing  protection  from   the
        authorities in Jamaica.
    23. As noted above, there  is  insufficient  evidence  to  support  the
        appellant's contention that just because she has been convicted  in
        the United Kingdom this will exclude her from being accepted  as  a
        credible complainant  in  relation  to  the  criminal  events  that
        occurred within Jamaica.
    24. Whilst the appellant claimed that details of her family were  taken
        from her in Jamaica there is no evidence of any action being  taken
        against family in the United Kingdom, notwithstanding the appellant
        pleading guilty and being involved in the proceedings  relating  to
        the conviction of G.
    25. As noted in  AB,  protection  is  available,  and  it  is  for  the
        appellant to establish that  she  would  not  be  admitted  to  the
        witness protection scheme. I find on the evidence the appellant has
        not discharged the burden upon her to show that  she  will  not  be
        admitted to the WPP on return to Jamaica or that  the  scheme  will
        not be able to provide her with adequate protection from those whom
        she fears. I do not find the appellant  has  established  that  she
        will be abandoned by the programme once admitted, in the absence of
        any deliberate breach by her of the conditions of her admission and
        protection, or that she will be placed in a position of  harm  once
        the proceedings had been concluded.
    26. As Mr Tan noted, the country information shows  that  most  of  the
        criminal gangs operate in Kingston and the urban  areas  where  the
        appellant has family ties. It was not made out they will  be  aware
        of her return to other areas, especially if she was relocated  with
        the assistance of the authorities.
    27. I find  that  as  there  is  a  viable  sufficiency  of  protection
        available to the appellant within the WPP her protection claim must
        fail. The appellant has failed to establish a real risk  sufficient
        to entitle her to a  grant  of  international  protection  for  the
        reasons claimed on the basis of the reach of  those  she  fears  in
        Jamaica or upon her assisting the Jamaican authorities in  relation
        to their conviction.
    28. The next question therefore is whether it is reasonable in all  the
        circumstances to expect the appellant to make use of  what  is,  in
        effect, an internal relocation option away from her home area.  The
        appellant argues it is not reasonable partially on the basis  of  a
        disagreement with the availability of  protection  from  those  she
        fears, who it is argued are clearly a gang of  resources  with  the
        appellant having been convicted of  having  approximately  �180,000
        worth of cocaine in her bra and the publicity that  was  generated,
        including photographs, in relation to the same.
    29. Within the WPP consideration  will  be  given  to  the  ability  to
        protect the appellant which, according to the information, can even
        include a placement abroad. It was not  made  out  the  ability  of
        those she fears to physically  identify  the  appellant  is  a  new
        factor, as involvement with G as recorded in the papers is that  he
        travelled to the UK with her and  was  clearly  one  piece  of  the
        jigsaw that originated in Jamaica and ended  with  the  appellant's
        arrest in the UK.
    30. The country material relied upon by the  appellant  speaks  of  the
        structure of the drug gangs being that those such as the  appellant
        being the "mules" who will have no contact with  the  hierarchy  of
        the drug gang other than with their "minder"  who  is  specifically
        tasked to ensure that they do what they are being paid or asked  or
        made to do, i.e. import the drugs to the UK. There  is  a  positive
        finding in  the  appellant's  case  that  she  was  trafficked  and
        therefore made to act as she did.
    31. The evidence indicates that G is more likely than  not  to  be  the
        "minder" who may be in contact with a person higher up  within  the
        drug gang if he returned Jamaica, but it  was  not  establish  they
        would have  any  awareness  that  the  appellant  was  returned  to
        Jamaica, or where she was if she was in the WPP,  even  though  the
        appellant's conviction had been highlighted in the newspapers.  The
        appellant was convicted in 2014 and it is not made  out  that  news
        articles published at that time will be  available  in  Jamaica  to
        enable individuals to locate the appellant per se.
    32. I do not find it made out that the evidence supports a finding that
        objectively, whatever her subjective beliefs, the  appellant  is  a
        person who will be  of  interest  or  vulnerable  to  an  organised
        criminal gang as a result of her particular  circumstances.  It  is
        not made out that the gang of which G may be part has been shown to
        pose a real and serious threat to  the  appellant  within  the  WPP
        which amounts to serious harm.
    33. The asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  Article  2  and  3  ECHR
        aspects of the appellant's claim, based as they are upon  the  core
        assertion of real risk that has not been found to be made out,  are
        dismissed.
    34. The UK Borders Act 2007,  section  33,  provides  exceptions  to  a
        decision to deport an  individual  from  the  United  Kingdom,  the
        relevant parts of which are in the following terms:


        33   Exceptions

        (1)  Section 32(4) and (5)-

             (a)  do not apply where an exception in this  section  applies
                  (subject to subsection (7) below), and

             (b)  are subject to sections 7 and 8 of  the  Immigration  Act
                  1971 (Commonwealth  citizens,  Irish  citizens,  crew  and
                  other exemptions).

         (2)  Exception 1 is  where  removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
             pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

             (a)  a person's Convention rights, or

             (b)   the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
         Convention.




    35. Whilst the claim under  the  Refugee  Convention  and/or  claim  to
        entitlement to a grant of humanitarian protection or to Article 2/3
        ECHR leave on the basis of the protection issues has not been shown
        to assist the appellant, it is necessary to carefully  examine  the
        other aspect of the claim, namely whether returning her to  Jamaica
        even within the protection of  the  WPP  would  breach  her  rights
        pursuant to article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights or
        those of her family members.
    36. Ms Harvey referred to the chronology, showing  that  the  appellant
        had been sexually abused by her stepfather and later by her partner
        in Jamaica, that her son was murdered in Jamaica in 2009,  although
        not in connection with G or by any of his known associates. It  was
        argued  the  level  of  violence  generally  in   Jamaica   is   an
        understandable concern for the appellant who has  one  daughter  of
        her own still in Jamaica.
    37. In relation to the impact of past experiences upon  the  appellant,
        reliance is placed upon a number of expert reports.
    38. The first of these is a letter from Central and North  West  London
        NHS Foundation Trust, written by a trainee  Clinical  Psychologist,
        but countersigned by Dr  Rebecca  Lockwood,  a  Chartered  Clinical
        Psychologist, dated 2  September  2014  following  the  appellant's
        referral to the Mental Health In-reach Team at HMP Bronzfield.  The
        appellant was assessed on 21 July 2014, which  concluded  that  the
        appellant was likely  to  continue  to  have  ongoing  difficulties
        associated with trauma.
    39. A second report, written by Dr Jennifer  Fleetwood,  based  at  the
        Department of Criminology of the University of  Leicester  dated  4
        June 2015 was commissioned to provide background knowledge  on  the
        subject to drug mules and drug trafficking,  rather  than  to  deal
        with the appellant's individual  psychological  presentation.  This
        report refers to drug mules and minders who travel  alongside  them
        to control them, such as G, which following assessment  led  to  it
        being concluded that it is common  practice  in  the  international
        drug trade regarding the management of drug mules and  the  use  of
        coercion and force, that  the  appellant's  version  of  events  in
        Jamaica is  plausible,  drawing  on  available  knowledge  of  drug
        trafficking, that the appellant's experiences were consistent  with
        the definition of her being a victim of trafficking to the UK.  She
        was transported against her will and raped in order to  gain  power
        and control over her leading  to  her  being  forced  to  commit  a
        criminal act, namely trafficking cocaine into the  United  Kingdom,
        due to the use of force.
    40. A psychological report has been provided written by a Dr Thullesen,
        dated 5 June 2015.  In  the  heading  entitled  'Psychological  and
        health effects' the author confirmed she does not intend to make  a
        psychological diagnosis of the appellant but found it was clear she
        had been greatly affected by her traumatic experiences  and  agreed
        with an earlier report that prison has  had  a  detrimental  impact
        upon the appellant's mental health.  Dr Thullesen's  conclusion  at
        [126 - 127] are in the following terms:

        126.      In conclusion, I find indicators of trafficking, for  the
             purposes  of  financial  gain,  within  []'s  account  to   be
             plausible and consistent with other victims  I  have  assessed
             and supported. This is based on my knowledge of assessing  and
             working with  victims  of  trafficking  whilst  at  the  Poppy
             Project, the Refugee Council and as an Independent Consultant.
             It is also based on the particulars of []'s case, taking  into
             consideration all the evidence available to me. I consider  it
             plausible  that  she  fulfils  the  key  elements   known   to
             constitute  trafficking.  Namely,  (i)  the  action  of  being
             abducted and recruited by F, by (ii) means of force, coercion,
             abuse of power and of her vulnerability. Using for her for the
             (iii)  purpose  of  exploitation   enforced   criminality/drug
             smuggling and thus for financial gain.

        127.      My recommendation is,  therefore,  that  her  significant
             vulnerability, and the level of risk to her and her family, be
             taken  into  consideration  when  making  a  decision  on  her
             criminal case.

    41. A psychiatric report,  commissioned  from  Dr  Abigail  Seltzer,  a
        Consultant Adult Psychiatrist, dated 6 January 2020,  contains  the
        author's opinion from [84 - 119]  (setting out the questions  asked
        by the appellant's solicitors and  Dr  Seltzer's  replies)  in  the
        following terms:

Opinion

        84.  Likely causation of any mental health  conditions  our  client
             suffers. Particularly in regard to whether or not the symptoms
             the client displays could be consistent with  her  account  of
             the abuse she experienced at the hands of her  traffickers  in
             Jamaica (and her other abusers in Jamaica and in the UK); and

85.  There are a number of likely antecedents. They are as follows:

85.1 History of childhood sexual abuse by stepfather from the ages of  8  to
15
85.2 Rape in Jamaica
85.3 Imprisonment in UK
85.4 On-going immigration situation
85.5 To a lesser extent, domestic violence she suffered in the UK.

        86.  However, it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  mental  health
             conditions are multi-factorial in origin, and  none  of  these
             should be considered as sole causes.
        87.   The  symptoms  she  describes  and  displays  are   generally
             consistent with her account of  rape,  domestic  violence  and
             childhood sexual abuse.
        88   The diagnosis and prognosis of any mental  health  conditions,
             including  learning  disabilities,  our  client  is  currently
             suffering from.
        89.  She describes symptoms consistent with the diagnosis  of  PTSD
             (ICD 10 F 43.1; see Appendix 3 for diagnostic  criteria).  She
             clearly describes  flashbacks  to  the  rape  and  to  earlier
             instances of violence,  with  accompanying  physiological  and
             psychological response, namely, rapid heartbeat and  distress.
             She describes avoiding reminders of traumatic  events,  namely
             turning off the TV when there are guns, men shouting or  women
             screaming or other representations of violence. She  describes
             the distress and rapid heartbeat  at  reminders  of  detention
             such as keys. She describes an alteration in  her  self-image,
             seeing her life as a blighted.
        90.  She also describes low  mood,  reduced  motivation,  disturbed
             sleep and appetite as well as thoughts that she would like  to
             fall asleep and not wake up.
        91.  This is consistent with a  diagnosis  of  adjustment  disorder
             with depressive features (ICD 10  F43.2  see  Appendix  4  for
             diagnostic criteria). This is arisen  as  a  reaction  to  her
             conviction, ongoing pain and the threat of deportation.
        92.  It is difficult to predict  the  prognosis  for  her  PTSD  as
             recovery depends on many factors, including treatment  and  is
             partially dependent on the outcome of her immigration case. It
             is likely that if her life became more stabled in secure,  her
             symptoms would lessen over time, although they may  not  remit
             entirely.
        93.  The adjustment disorder with depressive symptoms is  far  more
             dependent on her to immigration situation  and  is  likely  to
             improve if she is given leave to remain.
        94.  There is no clear evidence of  learning  disability,  but  she
             appears not to have been a particularly able scholar  and  she
             reports that her reading and writing skills are limited. It is
             not within my experience, to assess whether she has a specific
             learning disability such as dyslexia.
        95.  Whether our client's current mental health situation is likely
             related to any past trauma in her country of origin, and/or in
             the UK as a victim of trafficking and sexual exploitation,  or
             if she has any undiagnosed trauma -related illness.
        96.  She describes symptoms of PTSD, which is related to  the  rape
             by the taxi driver in  Jamaica  and  which  has  caused  other
             traumatic memories to resurface.
        97.  The likely effect of returning to  Jamaica  and  any  negative
             effect this will have on her mental health and support  system
             in place in the UK, including on any  suicide  risk  that  she
             presents with.
        98.  It is difficult to form a firm opinion on  this,  as  she  was
             unable to give a clear and convincing account of the impact of
             return of her mental health. When this was explored,  she  was
             more concerned about how she would manage given  the  physical
             pain she suffers. She did not describe  a  support  system  as
             such in the UK, but she does seem to have a  larger  and  more
             involved social network as she was  called  several  times  by
             friends and relatives during the assessment.
        99.  She does not present with active suicidal ideation, i.e. clear
             intent or plans, and did not  give  a  convincing  account  of
             increased suicidal risk if returned, although she reports that
             if it were not for her daughters, her life would not be  worth
             living. When asked about intent or plans, she  said  she  just
             wanted to go to sleep and not wake up but had  no  methods  in
             mind. The prison medical  records,  notes  that  she  did  not
             express suicidal ideation at any point during detention.
        100. Whether our client is likely to be malingering or exaggerating
             any mental health symptoms presented.
        101. I do not think she was malingering,  as  she  did  not  report
             unusual symptoms or combinations of symptoms  and  did  report
             less common symptoms that are not universally present in PTSD,
             ie pseudo-hallucinations. However, I have  concerns  that  she
             exaggerates some  of  her  symptoms  of  PTSD.  She  initially
             described her flashbacks as one of the reason she cannot  care
             for her daughters, yet on the exploration, while frequent, her
             flashbacks are of relatively  short  duration,  never  lasting
             more than ten minutes at most. She described herself as having
             no friends or social contacts, but was called several times by
             friends during the  assessment.  She  described  her  mood  is
             constantly low,  but  at  times  she  presented  as  animated,
             energised and even angry in a way that was not consistent with
             her description.
        102.  Our  client's  current  treatment  needs  and  likely  future
             treatment needs, and the consequences of interruption to  this
             treatment.
        103. At present, she will be best served by supportive counselling,
             as she does not appear to be ready for trauma focused therapy.
             She was seen the counsellor but has stopped attending  as  she
             was in too much pain to go, so her treatment has already  been
             interrupted and she does not appear motivated to resume it.
        104. Whether the trauma she has experienced and the  mental  health
             illness. She  presents  with,  could  impact  her  memory  and
             ability  to  accurately  and  consistently  recount  her  past
             experiences of abuse to authorities and professionals.
        105. I consider that the trauma she experienced, and the PTSD  that
             she suffers likely to  only  have  a  limited  effect  on  her
             recall. With support, she was able to give me a  detailed  and
             vivid account of the childhood sexual abuse she suffered,  and
             she needed little prompting to give me details of the physical
             abuse she suffered from her husband or a previous  partner  in
             Jamaica or the rape by the taxi driver  in  Jamaica.  However,
             her account of events following her arrival in the UK and  her
             explanation of why her number was on G's  phone  was  somewhat
             confused and confusing, but not in a way that  is  typical  of
             someone whose memory is patchy due to the effect of trauma. If
             anything, I would have expected her recall  of  the  traumatic
             events itself, i.e. the rape, to be  less  detailed  than  her
             recall of events after arrival, as it is common for  traumatic
             events to be patchily recalled,  in  contrast  to  the  events
             several hours before and after. While she gives an account  of
             being in a highly traumatised state throughout the flight  and
             afterwards, which is clinically plausible,  I  found  it  less
             clinically plausible that she could not recall any details  at
             all of the flight, even with prompting, whereas she  was  able
             to give me a vivid account of the rape.
        106. Whether our client suffers from any mental  health  conditions
             that would impair her memory and/or lead to  later  disclosure
             of abuse she suffered.
        107. PTSD can affect memory for details of a traumatic  event,  and
             can affect concentration so that it appears that the memory is
             impaired for long traumatic events. However, she was  able  to
             give a very detailed and vivid account of  all  the  traumatic
             events she has experienced in her life, and the symptoms.  She
             described, and the way she presented were not consistent  with
             a typical picture of late disclosure.
        108. Our client's fitness to  give  evidence  in  relation  to  her
             immigration appeal (which will  require  her  to  recount  her
             early life in her home country, and the trafficking and sexual
             abuse. She was subjected to in Jamaica and the  UK,  including
             any traumas), both in court proceedings and in interview  with
             either her solicitors and/or the Home Office, including:
        108.1     What effect doing so will have  on  her  existing  mental
             health conditions (could they trigger deterioration)  and  any
             suicide;
        108.2     It is very likely to cause distress, but I do  not  think
             it is likely to lead to a clinical deterioration as such. I do
             not think that it is likely to lead to an increase in suicidal
             ideation.
        108.3     Whether her mental health conditions would impact on  her
             ability to give a clear and coherent account of her past:
        108.4     With support, she was able to give a clear  and  coherent
             account of her past, although this did  require  patience  and
             considerable clarification on the part of the interviewer.  In
             view of the need for such support,  I  would  consider  her  a
             vulnerable witness. She is likely to need questions  presented
             in simple language; she may become distressed when questioned,
             and require breaks while giving evidence; it  should  also  be
             borne in mind that she naturally expresses herself in Jamaican
             patois, and this may need to be clarified.
        108.5     Whether her mental health conditions would impact on  her
             ability to make informed decisions regarding  her  immigration
             matters.
        108.6     I do not  think  that  the  symptoms  of  PTSD  that  she
             describes  would  impair  her  capacity   to   make   informed
             decisions. But because of her negative statement of  mind,  in
             part attributable to the pain she suffers, she may choose  not
             to engage with the process.
        109. Our client's capacity to instruct solicitors in regards to her
             case, in light of the symptoms being presented.
        110.  Again,  I  believe  that  she  is  capable   of   instructing
             solicitors, provided she is given appropriate  support  to  do
             so, but it may be that she does  not  fully  engage  with  the
             process because she has not grasped the  importance  of  doing
             so. I do not think that her symptoms in  themselves  are  such
             that they would impair her capacity to instruct.
        111. An assessment of how our client's mental health condition  may
             have impacted her ability to give a clear account of her  past
             when she was interviewed for her asylum claim initially, on 13
             January 2014 and again on 7 June 2016 and 8 November 2016.
        112. I cannot give a firm opinion as I can only  speculate  on  her
             mental health at those times in the absence of contemporaneous
             assessments.
        113. Our client was invited for a further interview on 6 April 2018
             and on 10  December  2018  but  was  unable  to  attend  those
             interviews. Her representatives submitted to the  Home  Office
             that they were extremely concerned about the client being made
             to undertake further interviews and considered  that  she  was
             too vulnerable to be made to go through the process again.  We
             would  appreciate  the  expert's  view,  insofar  as   it   is
             practicable, as to whether she would have been fit for further
             interviews during this period.
        114. I am not in a position to form an  opinion  on  this  for  the
             reasons outlined above.
        115. Any other information you think relevant.
        116. My overall impression of [NW], based on the history, she  gave
             me, my mental state examination and the documents provided  to
             me is that she had a difficult childhood marred  by  childhood
             sexual abuse from the ages of 8 to 17, which impacted  on  her
             ability to benefit from education. An incident  when  she  was
             hit by the police  when  she  was  9,  has  contributed  to  a
             lifelong fear of the  police.  Despite  this  difficult  early
             start in life, she reports long periods of her life  from  the
             ages of 18 to her late 40s, when she was not  unduly  hampered
             by poor  mental  health,  despite  several  traumatic  events,
             including experiencing domestic violence at the hands  of  her
             first partner and finding out that  he  cheated  on  her;  the
             death by drowning of a subsequent partner; the murder  of  her
             son; and domestic violence at the hands of her partner in  the
             UK. She reports episodes  of  intense  mental  distress  as  a
             result of these, with what sounds like a severe grief reaction
             after her son's murder. However, she  also  reports  that  she
             'got over' all of these to the extent that  she  was  able  to
             pick up the threads of her life, even  if  she  still  becomes
             severely depressed when she thinks of the loss of her son  and
             the abuse she had suffered, but again, not in a way that  has,
             till her rape and arrest, impacted upon her daily functioning.
             At present, her daily functioning appears to be poor,  largely
             because of pain and low mood, the latter being connected  with
             her immigration situation and having served a prison sentence,
             rather than because of her symptoms of PTSD.
        117. There is no doubt that she has developed PTSD as a  result  of
             the rape by the taxi driver in Jamaica, but as  stated  above,
             her overall low mood is largely a reaction  to  the  situation
             she now finds herself in. i.e. she has a conviction and  faces
             deportation, and is in constant pain. In passing, I note  that
             she no longer takes painkillers regularly as she does not like
             the side effects, but has not raised this with the GP.
        118. However, although she currently describes  symptoms  of  PTSD,
             such as flashbacks, psychological arousal, dysregulated  sleep
             and appetite and avoidance  of  reminders  of  past  violence,
             including rape, the pain that she attributes to damaged nerves
             as a result of the taxi drivers rape appears to cause  her  to
             suffer more  than  her  psychological  symptoms.  It  is  well
             recognised that subjective experience of pain  and  disability
             is affected by emotional state, and because she believes  this
             pain to be as a result of an injury  during  her  recent  rape
             (medical notes do not show that she has as severe an injury as
             she believes she has)  she feels  the  pain  more  keenly;  in
             other words, there is a psychosomatic component to  this  pain
             in that her subjective experiences  affected  by  her  beliefs
             about its traumatic origin.
        119. As a final note, I was unable to clarify  certain  aspects  of
             her history, in particular why she no longer  lives  with  her
             husband and daughters. She cites domestic violence, but by her
             own account, after he went on an anger management  course,  he
             was not violent again and she took him back. She became  quite
             aroused and indignant  when  I  tried  to  explore  the  exact
             sequence of events  after  her  arrival  in  the  UK,  and  in
             particular the evidence presented in court that she  had  made
             contact with G prior to that time.
        .
    42. There is also within the appellant's appeal  bundle  evidence  from
        her GP, including  a  letter  dated  16  April  2019,  stating  the
        appellant is  suffering  severe  anxiety  with  depression  who  is
        receiving prescriptive medication and who has been  referred  to  a
        psychologist for assessment. The GP states that the  appellant  has
        been offered a higher level  of  psychological  input  due  to  her
        complex mental health needs and that she is known to  be  suffering
        from knee pain. A further letter from the GP  dated  24  July  2018
        indicates the appellant was  due  to  start  treatment  by  way  of
        psychological therapy that day of between  6  and  12  sessions  of
        depending upon her needs. There is also within the bundle copies of
        the appellant's medical records.
    43. Evidence of the nature of the appellant's family and  private  life
        in the United Kingdom includes confirmation of the grant of ILR  on
        18 January 2006, following the  grant  of  leave  to  remain  as  a
        partner  ending  on  22  January  2006,  copies  of  her   marriage
        certificate and birth certificates.
    44. The appellant has also worked and studied in the United Kingdom and
        there is a reference to her attending church here, having lived  in
        the United Kingdom for 20 years, brought the family up, worked  and
        studied here.
    45. Although the appellant claims she will be at risk  of  exploitation
        and poverty if returned to Jamaica, this appears to  be  predicated
        on the claim she will not be able to access the WPP, one stated aim
        of which is to ensure those on it do not suffer  less  in  economic
        and social terms than they  would  if  they  had  not  entered  the
        programme.
    46. In relation to  the  appellant's  family  life,  the  appellant  is
        divorced from RW but has two children, OSW born on 18 October  2002
        , who is now an adult, and ZW born 22 October 2008 who, at the date
        of the hearing, was still a minor.
    47. In considering very compelling circumstances in the refusal letter,
        which is dated 1 May 2019 and therefore reflects the  ages  of  the
        children at that date it is written:

        116.      You claim  to  have  family  life  in  the  UK  with  two
             children. You have provided their details as follows:

              . OSW, British-born in the UK on 18 October 2002, and
              . ZW, British, born in the UK on 22 October 2008.

        117.      The Home  Office's  duty  to  safeguard  the  welfare  of
             children as set out in section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
             and Immigration Act 2009  has been taken into account  in  the
             best  interests  of  your  children  have   been   a   primary
             consideration in  making  this  decision.  However,  the  best
             interests  of  the  child  are  not  the  only,  or  paramount
             consideration, and must be  balanced  against  other  relevant
             factors, including the public interest  in  deporting  foreign
             criminals,  to   determine   whether   your   deportation   is
             proportionate. Paragraph 398 399 of the Immigration Rules take
             into account that a child's  best  interests  are  capable  of
             outweighing  the  public  interest  and  set   out   in   what
             circumstances that will be the case.

        118.      It is noted that both your daughters, O and Z,  now  aged
             15 years old and 10 years old, were born in the  UK  and  have
             lived in the UK since birth.  They  are  British  citizens  as
             their father is British and the  younger  child,  Z  was  born
             after you are granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

        119.      It is also noted that you have adult children in  Jamaica
             and that your son was tragically shot in Jamaica at the age of
             24.

        120.      It is noted that O and Z remained in the  care  of  their
             father and  paternal  grandmother  during  the  time  of  your
             imprisonment and that following your release from prison, your
             daughters remained in the care of their  father.  It  is  also
             noted that you resumed contact with your  daughters  and  your
             daughter wrote during your incarceration, stating how much she
             and her sister missed you.

        121.      It  is  accepted,  you  have  a  relationship  with  your
             daughters, O, 15 years old and Z aged 10 years  old.  However,
             it is noted that you were sentenced to  4  years  imprisonment
             and therefore spent a long time during their young  lives,  in
             prison. It is considered that their father is their main carer
             and that the children could remain in the UK in  the  care  of
             their father and grandmother.  It is also  considered  that  O
             and Z are at ages where they could visit you  in  Jamaica  and
             also to maintain contact through modern media.

        122.      In order to outweigh the very significant public interest
             in deporting you, you would need to provide evidence of a very
             strong Article  8  claim  over  and  above  the  circumstances
             described in the exceptions to deportation. No  such  evidence
             has been provided.

        132.      Therefore, having considered the facts of your  case,  it
             is not accepted that there are very  compelling  circumstances
             which outweigh the public interest in seeing you deported.

    48. The appellant in her evidence describes both  girls  continuing  to
        live with their father as she was in no state to  look  after  them
        herself, but that she sees them every week and they  remain  close.
        It was not disputed before the  Upper  Tribunal  that  family  life
        recognised by Article 8 exists with Z and O as a  result  of  their
        biological relationship of mother and daughter, demonstrated by way
        of ongoing contact. It is not made out that  if  the  appellant  is
        deported  the  children  will   have   to   leave   their   current
        accommodation or caring arrangements. Although it is accepted there
        will be an emotional impact upon the children if  their  mother  is
        deported,  and  that  the  appellant  states  Z  in  particular  is
        terrified of her mother having to return to  Jamaica  in  light  of
        what happened to her in the past, it  is  not  made  out  the  best
        interests of the children are the  determinative  element  in  this
        appeal.
    49. It is not made out that work  could  not  be  undertaken  with  the
        children  by  those  within  the  family  or   professionals,   and
        particularly by the appellant on return, to reassure  the  children
        that the difficulties experienced  in  the  past  recorded  in  the
        evidence have not re-occurred.
    50. I find the children's best interests are to be able to maintain the
        current contact they have with their mother and to live with  their
        father. Their ability to remain with their father is  a  consistent
        element which continued even though their mother was in prison.
    51. The reference to visits to Jamaica has to be considered in context.
        Once the appellant has been taken into the WPP, it will no doubt be
        a condition of that scheme that she does not disclose her  location
        to anybody outside the scheme, but it is not made out she will  not
        be able to maintain indirect contact with the children  or  anybody
        else in the UK even if she is within the scheme, provided  that  in
        dong so she does  not  breach  of  the  terms  of  the  scheme,  by
        disclosing her location. It is accepted that  that  may  become  an
        issue if the children propose to visit her in Jamaica, but  it  was
        not made out that appropriate arrangements could not be  made  with
        the assistance of those  administrating  the  WPP  to  enable  such
        visits to occur. It was not made out that same are likely to  occur
        in the near future in any event, on the evidence.
    52. Whilst I accept it may  be  harsh,  I  do  not  find  it  has  been
        established that the effect on the minor child Z has been shown  to
        be unduly harsh, when considering the child as  an  individual,  on
        the evidence that has been provided.
    53. I also accept the  appellant  as  a  private  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom, where she had lived lawfully for about 20 years, where she
        would have formed ties in the  workplace,  the  neighbourhood,  and
        friendships, which will be disrupted if she is  deported  from  the
        United Kingdom. Whilst it is  accepted  that  within  the  WPP  the
        appellant will  not  be  able  to  freely  associate,  such  as  to
        reinstate ties with individuals in Jamaica to the  same  extent  as
        she has been able in the United Kingdom, it is  not  made  out  the
        appellant will not be able to reform and enjoy a private life  with
        new friends and associates. The appellant has experience of  living
        within Jamaica and will not be an outsider within that society. She
        herself refers to having older daughters in  Jamaica  and  although
        she could not reveal to them where she lives  this  indicates  that
        she is not so separated from society in Jamaica that  it  would  be
        unreasonable and disproportionate to expect her to return there.
    54. In summary I accept the appellant  was  lawfully  resident  in  the
        United Kingdom for a substantial period of time,  that  he  had  an
        established private and family life in the UK and is  socially  and
        culturally integrated, but do not find that to be the determinative
        factor although I accept it is a further piece of the balance sheet
        exercise that needs to be conducted.
    55. I also take into account the  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
        functioning in the reports. I note the psychosomatic element to the
        appellant's pain connected with the  trauma  of  rape  and  do  not
        undervalue the potential subjective impact upon her of  facing  the
        prosect of being retuned to Jamaica, the  country  where  the  rape
        occurred.
    56. What is not established, however, is that there is a real  risk  of
        the appellant being subjected either to the abuse she suffered as a
        child, the abusive relationships she has endured  in  marriage,  or
        finding herself in the specific circumstances  she  was  in  before
        which made her vulnerable to  the  exploitation  and  the  rape  in
        connection with the desire to  coerce  her  into  transporting  the
        drugs. This was  situation specific scenario.
    57. Ms Thullesen in her report at [122], dated 5 June 2015, writes:

        122.      It  is  my  professional  experience  that  the  recovery
             process of survivors of trafficking  is  usually  complex  and
             long term. This is not only due to the serious  and  degrading
             impact of trafficking experiences, but can also  relate  to  a
             woman's personal history. As discussed,  it  is  evident  from
             [NW] account that having  been  subjected  to  oppression  and
             domestic violence prior to trafficking is likely to have  left
             her   vulnerable   to   exploitation.   Taking   her   current
             presentation and background  evidence  into  consideration.  I
             would furthermore suggest that [NW] is at significant risk  of
             further exploitation, whether from  her  previous  exploiters,
             her husband or other members of the community.

    58. I note that the report is now six years old. The evidence shows the
        appellant has had access to medical care and support to assist with
        her needs. It was not made out that any further assistance she  may
        require will  not  be  available  in  Jamaica  within  the  WPP  or
        elsewhere to meet any of her ongoing needs relating to the accepted
        past  trauma.  The  author  also  seems  to  equate  risk  to  NW's
        vulnerability, which may be the case if she was  returned  to  live
        alone within Jamaica, but if she was within the WPP, she would  not
        be as isolated or vulnerable as may be suggested.
    59. The argument on the appellant's behalf that risk of exploitation in
        Jamaica will increase as the appellant faces a real risk of poverty
        and will have few resources fails  to  factor  in  to  account  the
        evidence relating to the  WPP,  that  an  individual  will  not  be
        permitted to fall below the  standard  of  living  she  will  enjoy
        outside the WPP. I do not find the appellant has made out she faces
        a real risk of poverty  in  Jamaica  as  a  result  of  a  lack  of
        resources.
    60. The relevant provisions of the immigration rules are set out above.
    61. Whilst it is accepted the appellant has served her sentence and  is
        now assessed as presenting a "very low"  risk  of  reoffending  and
        related harm, rehabilitation cannot in  itself  constitute  a  very
        compelling circumstance and the cases in  which  it  could  make  a
        significant contribution are  likely  to  be  rare-  see  Velasquez
        Taylor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
        845 [�21].
    62. I note however that  the  Court  Appeal  did  treat  the  issue  of
        rehabilitation as a relevant  factor  capable  of  attracting  some
        weight in HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
        (Rev 1) [2020] EWCA Civ 117 [132-142], and so have considered  this
        element as part of the overall cumulative assessment of the matters
        relied upon by the appellant when assessing whether  they  outweigh
        the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting  a  foreign   criminal
        sentenced to 4 years imprisonment for drug related offences.
    63. As the appellant was sentenced  to  4  years  imprisonment  she  is
        required to demonstrate "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
        above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 ": s117C(6) NIAA 2002.
    64. Those exceptions, which the Secretary of State accepts if met  will
        outweigh the public interest in deportation are as follows:

        Exception 1 applies where-

        a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of
           C's life,

        b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom,
           and

        c) there would be very significant  obstacles  to  C's  integration
           into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

        (5)Exception 2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
        parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
        C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

        (6)In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced  to  a
        period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
        requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
        circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
        2.

    65. I have considered the arguments relating to the appellant  relative
        to her ability to satisfy  either  Exception  1  or  2  but  whilst
        accepting it would be harsh for  Z  and  other  family  members  to
        remain in the United Kingdom if the appellant is deported, I do not
        accept it has been established that it would  be  unduly  harsh.  I
        also do not accept it has been shown  there  are  very  significant
        obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into Jamaica as  it  has
        not been shown she will not be admitted to the WPP and be  able  to
        live as near a normal life as she can, albeit within  the  confines
        of that scheme. Those matters  the  appellant  relies  upon  is  in
        support of the claim as very significant obstacles  have  not  been
        shown to be sufficient to enable the  appellant  to  discharge  the
        burden of  proof,  to  show  there  are  such  obstacles  ,  having
        conducted the broad evaluative judgement  -  in accordance with the
        guidance provided by the Court of Appeal in  Secretary of State for
        the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813. It is  not  made
        out the appellant will be an outsider such that she will be  unable
        to integrate into society in Jamaica. The  appellant's  ability  to
        meet either or both s117C  Exceptions  in  conjunction  with  other
        factors collectively is not made out.
    66. This is a case, however, in which the appellant has been  sentenced
        to 4 years imprisonment and so even if it was unduly harsh  upon  Z
        for her mother  to  be  deported  or  they  were  very  significant
        obstacles  to  reintegration,  the   appellant   is   required   to
        demonstrate very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
        described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
    67. The seriousness of the offence is relevant  to  whether  there  are
        very compelling circumstances as  found  in  MS  (s.117C(6):  "very
        compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 122  at  [49-52]
        and Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  PF  (Nigeria)
        [2019] EWCA Civ 1139. The  issues  the  appellant  relies  upon  in
        support of her case in this jurisdiction as warranting  a  decision
        permitting her to remain in the United Kingdom will have all formed
        part of the mitigation before the Crown Court her  advocate  during
        the course of the sentencing exercise. The sentencing remarks  show
        this to be the case and I must not overlook the fact the  appellant
        pleaded guilty, a recognition of her culpability for the offence to
        the higher standard of proof required by the criminal law.
    68. I do not underestimate the impact upon anyone suffering abuse as  a
        child then and in later life, which  although  it  ended  when  the
        appellant was 16 years of age is  likely  to  have  had  a  lasting
        effect upon her. Similarly, the abusive relationships  she  entered
        into as an adult and the rape in Jamaica as noted above.
    69. The error of law hearing sets out the  sentencing  remarks  but  is
        worth repeating one specific paragraph which is  in  the  following
        terms:
        "It has been said on your behalf  that  you  committed  this  crime
        because you are effectively forced in a  way  that  fall  short  of
        affording you with the defence of  duress.  You  have  mentioned  a
        number of times to various authorities that you were raped while in
        Jamaica and that that was the reason why you were then forced to...
        or that is linked to the decision you made to bring the drugs  back
        into the country. As against that I have also been told that  there
        is telephone evidence and I  have  seen  it  myself  that  you  are
        contacted by G on a number of occasions by telephone  in  December,
        the month before you went out to Jamaica. I cannot  decide  on  the
        information I have the truth or otherwise of what happened  to  you
        in Jamaica as you allege, although I note that your application  to
        be considered as  a  victim  of  trafficking  was  rejected.  I  am
        prepared to accept that you were used by others  more  capable  and
        sophisticated than you and I have no doubt that you were chosen  as
        someone easily persuaded, no doubt with the temptation of financial
        reward to bring drugs back into the country.
    70. It is accepted there has since been a positive finding in  relation
        to the appellant being trafficked,  but the Modern Slavery Act 2015
        is only applicable to offences committed after 31  July  2015,  and
        the defence provided by section 45 of that Act was not available to
        the appellant on the facts of this appeal.
    71. There is no indication  the  appellant  has  sought  permission  to
        appeal to the Court of  Appeal  (Criminal  Division)  to  secure  a
        finding that her conviction is unsafe on the basis of the law as it
        stood as the  date  of  the  commission  of  the  offence  in  2014
        following the decision of the Competent Authority. Although whether
        that would have reasonable prospects of success may be debatable.
    72. It is the conviction leading to a sentence of 4 years  imprisonment
        which is the basis of the decision to deport the appellant from the
        United Kingdom. On the available evidence, even with  the  positive
        finding of the Competent Authority that the appellant is  a  victim
        of trafficking (which is not an absolute defence) it would still be
        necessary for the appellant to establish that a reasonable  person,
        with the same characteristics, would have no realistic  alternative
        to doing that act.
    73. The appellant fails to establish,  even  taking  into  account  the
        appellant's personal history, the history of  childhood  abuse  and
        that in later adult life, as revealed  in  the  evidence,  and  the
        events in Jamaica in which the appellant claims to have been  raped
        and robbed of her cash, that she could not have reported  what  had
        occurred and what she was being asked to do to the  authorities  at
        the airport in Jamaica who would have been able to provide her with
        protection which would have meant  the  offence  of  importing  the
        drugs into the UK would not  have  occurred.  I  do  not  find  the
        appellant has established that a reasonable person  with  the  same
        characteristics  did  not  have  a  realistic  alternative  in  the
        situation faced by the appellant.
    74. This aspect was also considered by the Sentencing Judge, albeit  in
        a different form. Although at  that  time  there  was  no  positive
        finding by the Competent Authority the factual basis on which  that
        later positive finding was based  was  communicated  to  the  Crown
        Court as part of the appellant's mitigation. The  decision  of  the
        Competent Authority is recognition of the  fact  that  the  factual
        matrix relied upon by the appellant is sufficient  to  satisfy  the
        definition of a victim of trafficking as set out  in  the  relevant
        Convention. It does not add anything to the factual  matrix  relied
        upon by the appellant before the Criminal Court.
    75. Based upon those facts,  the  Sentencing  Judge  makes  a  specific
        finding that they do not afford the appellant the  benefit  of  the
        defence of duress to the charge of importing the Class A  drugs  to
        the United Kingdom. This is an important finding as  the  Court  of
        Appeal, in R v Graham,  74  Cr.App.R.  235,  when  considering  the
        defence of duress, posed the following two questions in relation to
        duress:
        Was the Defendant impelled to act because, as a result of  what  he
        reasonably believed the coercer had said or done,  he  had  a  good
        cause to fear death or serious injury?
        Have the prosecution proven  that  a  sober  person  of  reasonable
        firmness, sharing the Defendant's characteristics, would  not  have
        responded in the same way?
    76. The second of these questions, which was clearly answered in favour
        of the prosecution, reflects the theme running through the question
        posed above, which is that to be found in section 45 of the  Modern
        Slavery Act 2015 which is the provision that does provide a defence
        to those charged in criminal proceedings if the commission  of  the
        criminal act is as a direct result of their having been trafficked,
        and it being established that they could not reasonably have  acted
        in any  other  way.  The  finding  of  the  Crown  Court  is  that,
        notwithstanding what occurred to  her  in  Jamaica,  it  was  still
        appropriate to sentence the appellant to 4 years imprisonment.
    77. On the other side of the balancing exercise, a powerful  factor  in
        favour of the Secretary of State is the legitimate public  interest
        in deterring serious crime and in sending  a  powerful  message  to
        foreign nationals who might be minded to  commit  crimes  involving
        drugs. The weight to be given to the importance of deterring others
        from committing such crimes is a matter that cannot be ignored  and
        is considerable.
    78. Having undertaken the necessary  holistic  assessment  of  all  the
        relevant facts and having undertaken a balancing  exercise,  taking
        into account  those  matters  relied  upon  by  Ms  Harvey  on  the
        appellant's behalf, and taking into account the submissions made by
        Mr Tan on behalf of the Secretary of State, I find it has not  been
        made out, despite the appellant's tragic history, that  there  does
        exist very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
        in Exceptions 1  and  2  of  section  117  C  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
    79. I have not interpreted the phrase "very  compelling  circumstances"
        literally; adopting the guidance provided by the  Court  of  Appeal
        that it just means there are circumstances that are more compelling
        than the existing exceptions Akinyemi v The Secretary of State  for
        the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 236 (04  April  2017)  at  [14]
        considered. Whilst the  appellants  circumstances  are  compelling,
        they are not compelling enough.
    80. I have also taken into account the further guidance from the  Court
        of Appeal that the use of the  word  "Very"  imports  a  very  high
        threshold. "Compelling" means circumstances which have a  powerful,
        irresistible and convincing effect  -  see  Secretary  of  State  v
        Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ 1225.  I  do  not  find  the  appellant  has
        established that  the  circumstances  she  relies  upon  meet  this
        threshold.
    81. I have also taken into account that  the  public  interest  "almost
        always"  outweighs  countervailing  considerations  of  private  or
        family life in a case involving a 'serious offender'. The appellant
        clearly satisfies the  definition  of  being  a  serious  offender.
        Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC
        6 at [46] and KE (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1382 at [34] considered.
    82. I have undertaken the necessary holistic evaluation of all relevant
        factors including those which might have already been  assessed  in
        the context of the 'exceptions' and despite it being  an  extremely
        demanding test, have nevertheless  undertaken  the  required  wide-
        ranging examination of the facts and assessment exercise so  as  to
        ensure that Part 5A produces a result compatible with Article 8. NA
        (Pakistan) v SSHD & Ors [2016] EWCA  Civ  662  and  MS  (s.117C(6):
        "very compelling circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]  UKUT  122  -
        including  application  of  the  principles   in   the   Strasbourg
        authorities considered.
    83. Having done so, I find the Secretary of State has established  that
        it is proportionate in all the circumstances for the  appellant  to
        be deported from the United Kingdom, even in light of  the  adverse
        impact upon her and the members of her family  who  have  expressed
        their personal views, on the evidence that has  been  provided  and
        taken into  account  in  this  appeal.  I  find  that  in  all  the
        circumstances the appellant's case is just  not  strong  enough  to
        overcome the very strong public interest in her deportation.
Decision
    84. I dismiss the appeal.
   Anonymity.
    85. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
    86. I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


        Signed.......................................................
        Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
        Dated 6 August 2021


                                   Annex A

                            Error of Law finding:

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04671/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)               |Decision promulgated         |
|On 28 January 2021                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NMW
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Harvey instructed by Kesar & Co Solicitors
(Bromley)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Cockerill who  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
        grounds as an exception to the order for NMW's deportation from the
        United Kingdom.



Background


     2. NMW is a citizen of Jamaica born on 5  November  1967  who  is  the
        subject of an  order  for  her  deportation  as  a  result  of  her
        conviction by the Croydon  Crown  Court,  on  a  guilty  plea,  and
        sentencing on 18 September  2015  for  committing  the  offence  of
        importing Class A drugs into the United Kingdom from Jamaica.
     3. In his sentencing remarks Mr Recorder B Kelleher stated:


        NW, you are 49 years of age and you must  be  sentenced  today  for
        importing a large amount of  cocaine  into  this  country,  a  kilo
        almost in weight. You know, I am sure  and  always  have  done  the
        damage that cocaine causes to our society.  It  turns  people  into
        addicts particularly when converted into  crack  cocaine  and  that
        ruins their lives and the lives of their families.  It  also  ruins
        the lives of people who are the  subject  of  crime,  committed  by
        people addicted to drugs who need to find payment for it.  That  is
        why the courts in this country punish importers of drugs severely.


        You travelled out to Jamaica where you have family  and  where  you
        were originally from in January of last year and  you  returned  on
        21st January with a kilo of cocaine concealed in your bra. You were
        clearly accompanied by a conspirator in this offence, named [G]. He
        denied the charge when he was arrested,  fought  the  matter  at  a
        trial and was sentenced - I am told in his absence because  he  has
        absconded - to 13 years imprisonment. The Prosecution say -  and  I
        accept - that he was clearly the prime mover in this crime and  his
        role I have no doubt was to ensure that you passed through  Customs
        and delivered the consignment of cocaine safely to people for  whom
        he was working.


        It has been said on your  behalf  that  you  committed  this  crime
        because you were effectively forced in a way that  falls  short  of
        affording you with a defence of duress. You have mentioned a number
        of times to various  authorities  that  you  were  raped  while  in
        Jamaica and that that was the reason why you were then forced to...
        or that is linked to the decision you made to bring the drugs  back
        into the country. As against that I have also been told that  there
        is telephone evidence and I have  seen  it  myself  that  you  were
        contacted by [G] on a number of occasions by telephone in December,
        the month before you went out to Jamaica. I cannot  decide  on  the
        information I have the truth or otherwise of what happened  to  you
        in Jamaica as you allege although I note that your  application  to
        be considered as  a  victim  of  trafficking  was  rejected.  I  am
        prepared to accept that you were used by others  more  capable  and
        sophisticated than you and I have no doubt that you were chosen  as
        someone easily persuaded, no doubt with the temptation of financial
        reward to bring drugs back into this country.


        Bearing  in  mind  the  amount  that  you  brought,  applying   the
        guidelines as I must, there can be no doubt that this is a Category
        2 case. The question then is whether I consider that you have had a
        lesser role or a significant role. You are a 45-year-old woman with
        no previous convictions. You have lived in this country for a  long
        time and you have children both here and in Jamaica. I have come to
        the conclusion that whilst many of the factors listed in the lesser
        role definition of the guidelines apply to you or may apply to you,
        I also conclude that you were, to some extent at  least,  motivated
        by financial gain in this offence. I can see no other reason why it
        occurred. That said, I conclude that the correct approach is to fix
        a  starting  point  in  this  case  that  falls  between  the   two
        categories, that is to say at the lowest end  of  significant  role
        and just below the higher  end  of  lesser  role.  That  means  the
        starting point that I consider appropriate in this case is  one  of
        six years and six months imprisonment.


        You will, however, receive full credit for your guilty plea  and  I
        therefore  reduce  the  sentence  by  a  third.  Given  the   other
        mitigation advanced on your behalf I am just  persuaded  to  reduce
        that  sentence  slightly  further  and  so  the  sentence  I   pass
        ultimately is one of four years imprisonment. That means  that  you
        will serve half of that sentence in custody after which you will be
        eligible for release on licence. That will not bring  the  sentence
        to an end. If you commit  a  further  offence  during  the  licence
        period or indeed before the  end  of  the  sentence  you  could  be
        recalled to prison to serve out the remainder of  the  sentence  in
        addition to any new penalties you receive.


        There will be a surcharge payable which will be in the sum drawn up
        by the court. This is not a case I  think  where  the  Crown  Court
        Charges applies. I make no order as to costs or Proceeds  of  Crime
        confiscation. The sentence is one of four years imprisonment.


     4. Having considered the documentary and oral evidence the Judge  sets
        out her findings of fact from [68] of the decision under challenge.
     5. The Secretary of State had issued a Section 72  certificate  which,
        if it stood, excluded NMW from making a  claim  under  the  Refugee
        Convention.  The  Judge  found  that  the  presumption   that   NMW
        constituted a danger to the community had been  rebutted.  At  [68]
        the Judge writes "the point was really conceded by  the  respondent
        that there had not been a  sufficient  analysis  of  the  potential
        future risk posed by this appellant". There is no challenge to this
        aspect of the decision.
     6. Between [71 - 78] Judge writes:


        71.  For reasons that I shall express in this document,  this  case
             is essentially about asylum. If the appellant does not succeed
             in relation to asylum,  then  frankly  she  is  not  going  to
             succeed  on  other  bases.  I  have  provided  a  fairly  full
             narrative of what was said to have  taken  place  in  Jamaica.
             What I concentrate upon is the fact that a good deal  of  what
             the appellant has said took place there, including the violent
             act of rape upon  her  and  being  coerced  into  transporting
             something which was patently heavy in a bra that was  provided
             to her by her assailants does chime  entirely  with  what  the
             acknowledged expert comments  is  known  about  criminal  gang
             activity in Jamaica. In short, the description  given  by  the
             appellant is quite consistent then with what  is  known  about
             how sophisticated criminal gangs operate to recruit  mules  to
             transport drugs for them from A to  B.  It  is  that  evidence
             which in my judgement is valuable  and  serves  to  underscore
             what  I  find  to  be  essentially  the  truthfulness  of  the
             appellant's main narrative.


        72.  Pausing there, there are  some  features  to  the  appellant's
             account which have caused me some trouble and disquiet.  I  do
             not consider that  she  is  a  wholly  reliable  and  truthful
             witness but I make the point as  plainly  as  I  can  that  as
             regards the core elements as I  see  them  she  has  basically
             given a true narrative.


        73.  The point which is less than clear  is  really  what  sort  of
             contact there was between this man G and the appellant  before
             she went to Jamaica. If there was telephone contact, and  that
             of course was noted by the sentencing judge  in  the  criminal
             matter, then that would undercut any suggestion this was  some
             sort of chance matter where she  was  picked  out  at  random.
             There appears therefore to have been some element of  planning
             at least from G's point of view.


        74.  One other feature which I do note is that whilst  the  Learned
             Judge thought that financial gain was a likely motive for  the
             appellant and in the ordinary run of events  that  would  seem
             entirely natural, what is strange about this case is of course
             that the appellant was  someone  who  had  just  enjoyed  this
             considerable winning at bingo and so of all times in her  life
             it was probably at the time when she least needed extra money.
             However, people can of course still be tempted by the prospect
             of some easy gain as they see it, but in this particular  case
             I do not categorise the appellant's actions in this way.


        75.  For the reasons I hope will become clear, my own assessment is
             that the appellant had thought, perhaps rather innocently  and
             ingenuously, that this person who has been described as M  was
             showing some  interest  in  her  because  she  had  had  these
             winnings and he wanted her to back some music business that he
             was interested in. It seems that that particular man  was  one
             and the same as G, although I accept  the  appellant  may  not
             have known that earlier on.


        76.  The incident of the appellant being offered this taxi ride  in
             my judgement is a wholly credible one. I accept that she  went
             in this taxi with her daughter and then a diversion took place
             and of course she was then subjected to this violent rape.  It
             was something that has affected her psychologically and I have
             made a clear note of a number of deeply disturbing experiences
             which the  appellant  has  had  in  her  life.  She  has  been
             repeatedly the victim of abuse and violence. I find that  this
             act of rape was one designed to frighten her and to coerce her
             therefore into carrying this unlawful  drug  into  the  United
             Kingdom in the bra  that  was  provided.  Really  she  had  no
             alternative  but  to  comply  knowing  that  those  that   had
             assaulted her and had acted in that violent manner towards her
             knew where she was living and they knew about her family.


        77.  The situation looking ahead then is  that  the  appellant  who
             pleaded guilty would be seen as someone who had informed on Mr
             G,  who  had  escaped  justice  so  far,  although  13   years
             imprisonment  was  imposed  in  his  absence.  I   am   deeply
             concerned,  particularly  given  this  particular  appellant's
             background and the sort of experiences which she  has  had  in
             her life so far, that she will be  extraordinarily  vulnerable
             to attack if she went back to Jamaica.  This  was  no  amateur
             gang involved in this operation. The value of the  drugs  that
             she herself transported was �180,000 and  had  a  considerable
             level of purity. It should not be under estimated at  all  the
             extent to which that criminal gang can go  if  people  do  not
             comply with what the gang wants.


        78.  I consider  that  the  appellant  has  an  entirely  justified
             subjective fear of Mr G and his criminal associates. The  very
             fact that she was subjected to being raped emphasises  in  the
             most appalling way the preparedness of these  people  to  harm
             her. She can rightly feel fearful for her own  safety  in  the
             future. There is no realistic prospect of the Jamaican  police
             authorities coming to her aid at any place in Jamaica.  It  is
             this gang that has I am afraid the power and in  my  judgement
             although the appellant may have thought that she was  involved
             in something rather more innocent at first, she was drawn into
             this criminal  operation,  used  as  a  mule  if  returned  to
             Jamaica. She does make out her case  to  the  lower  standard,
             which  is  that  of  real  risk,   given   her   psychological
             vulnerability and knowing as we do now what  has  happened  to
             her so far. She is going back, if she goes to  Jamaica,  to  a
             place where people who  have  been  close  to  her  have  been
             murdered and of course she herself has been raped.


     7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  two  grounds
        which was granted by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  on  a  renewed
        application, the operative part of the grant being in the following
        terms:


        1. The judge arguably erred by failing to consider whether internal
           relocation would be  safe  and  reasonable  for  the  appellant.
           Arguably, therefore, there is merit  to  the  ground  of  appeal
           submitting that the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  consider  AB
           (Protection - criminal gangs- internal  relocation)  Jamaica  CG
           [2007] UKAIT 00018.
        2. I do not restrict the grounds that can be argued but notes  that
           the NRM decision was before the Tribunal (see  page  73  of  the
           appellant's supplementary bundle).


     8. In relation to the second  ground  referred  to  in  the  grant  of
        permission to appeal, there was in NRM's documents bundle copies of
        two negative decisions of the NRM that  NMW  is  not  a  victim  of
        trafficking.  The  initial  decision  to  this  effect  had  to  be
        reconsidered but the negative decision upheld.
     9. In her skeleton argument for the purposes of these  proceedings  Ms
        Harvey referred to a positive NRM decision  which  post  dated  the
        Judge's decision which had not been seen by either Mrs Aboni or the
        Tribunal. A copy of the letter advising NMW of the outcome  of  the
        further reassessment of the merits of  the  trafficking  claim  was
        therefore provided by Ms Harvey,  the  relevant  section  of  which
        reads:


        "We found the following types of exploitation occurred:


        It is accepted the PV was a victim of modern slavery in Jamaica and
        the United Kingdom  in  between  12/2013  and  21/01/2014  for  the
        specific purposes of forced criminality  and  a  victim  of  modern
        slavery in Jamaica between 1975 and 1983 (from when the PV was aged
        8-9  until  15-  16)  for   the   specific   purposes   of   sexual
        exploitation."


    10. Mrs Aboni accepted that in light of this document the second ground
        of challenge to the Judge's decision fell away,  based  as  it  was
        upon the assertion that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
        negative conclusions of the Competent Authority when  finding  that
        NMW's claim as to events in Jamaica was credible.



Error of law


    11. The one remaining issue is that relating to the alleged failure  of
        the Judge to consider the country guidance case of AB.
    12. It is not disputed that reference was made  to  that  case  in  the
        skeleton argument of Ms  Harvey  that  was  before  the  Judge.  In
        relation to the case, it is written:


        57.  The Home Office report cites at  2.5.2  the  country  guidance
             case of  AB  (protection-criminal  gangs-internal  relocation)
             Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 00018, which, while old has  not  been
             superseded. It holds:


             If a person is of interest or vulnerable to an OCG  [organised
             criminal gang]  because  of  their  particular  circumstances,
             decision-makers must establish that  an  OCG's  behaviour  and
             capabilities pose a real and  serious  threat  to  the  person
             which amounts to serious harm.


    13. In the section of the skeleton argument headed  'State  Protection'
        it is written between [60 - 65]:


        60.  In AB (Jamaica) the tribunal held:


             5.   The immigration judge went on to find that the  appellant
                  had been persecuted for a Convention reason, "namely women
                  who are perceived as informers and who are unprotected  by
                  the state." There is, she  stated,  "an  insufficiency  of
                  protection in Jamaica for such a social group".


             ...


             Protection against a criminal gang violence


             151. We  turn  to  consider  whether,  even  though  generally
                  willing and able to protect its  citizenry,  the  Jamaican
                  authorities can protect persons who face a  real  risk  of
                  persecution or  serious  harm  or  treatment  contrary  to
                  Article 3 in the form of targeting by criminal  gangs.  Mr
                  Sobers' reports say they cannot.


             152. So far as persons facing such targeting who  live  within
                  the garrison communities to be found in the KMA, we  think
                  the evidence Mr Sobers presents, and that contained in the
                  background  materials,  is  strong.  The  resources   that
                  criminal gangs can draw on in order to carry out  violence
                  on their own turf or in other gang  -controlled  areas  is
                  well illustrated in the 2005 US  State  Department  Report
                  which referred to the "well armed  gangs"  trafficking  in
                  narcotics  and  guns  "control[in]  many   in   the   city
                  communities". Such gangs are said to be "often... equipped
                  better than the  police  force  and  [to  have]  conducted
                  coordinated   ambushes   of   joint   security    patrols"
                  (COI.8.08). Within the garrison communities  gang  leaders
                  (sometimes in alliance with local party leaders) can often
                  act with impunity, although they have  to  vie  for  power
                  with other "dons" or gang leaders. Whilst the  authorities
                  through Operation Kingfish and other initiatives appear to
                  be able to disrupt these gangs, the evidence does not show
                  that they have dismantled them:  within  these  areas  the
                  gangs appear to be still largely in control.
             153. As far as the ability of these gangs to  operate  outside
                  the KMA is concerned, however, the evidence  is  far  from
                  being one way. [...]
             154  (in our view this evidence also cast  considerable  doubt
                  on whether informers as a class can be seen as  unable  to
                  receive  effective  protection.  If  they  are   able   in
                  significant numbers to enter this programme, then it would
                  appear  in  broad  terms  that  their  protection  can  be
                  secured. However, we lack evidence on this and the precise
                  issue of protection for informers is  not  raised  by  the
                  particular facts of this case.)
             155. Nevertheless, of this programme, there does appear to  be
                  a protection gap. For persons targeted by  gangs  who  are
                  not reasonably likely to be admitted into this  programme,
                  we think the evidence adduced  by  Mr  Sobers  and  others
                  strongly  points  to  them  not  being  able   to   secure
                  protection  through  the  range   of   normal   protective
                  functions carried out by the authorities - unless they can
                  internally relocate without being a real risk of detection
                  by their persecutors.


    14. It is important to read the case of AB as a whole. The above quotes
        contained in Ms Harveys skeleton argument are in the terms made out
        but follow a section of the judgement in which  the  Tribunal  take
        issue with the weight that could be given the evidence of Mr Sobers
        resulting in their finding at [150]:


        150.      In short, the evidence  does  not  bear  out  Mr  Sobers'
             contention that there is Jamaica a  general  insufficiency  of
             state protection. On this matter  we  reconfirm  the  guidance
             given in JS.


    15. The Tribunal in AB also considered the issue of internal relocation
        before concluding:


        Internal relocation


         157. The language of Mr Sobers' reports does not appear  to  wholly
         rule out that internal relocation may be an  available  option  for
         some individuals (e.g. those with wealth, see e.g. paragraph 134 of
         his March 2006 Report). However for the most part he  dismisses  it
         in view of the following: the fact that  Jamaica  is  a  relatively
         small island; that there is a reasonably well developed network  of
         roads and telecommunications; that persons relocating will be  seen
         as stranger who stand out; and that there is a  lack  of  a  social
         welfare safety net. Some of  these  factors  go  to  the  issue  of
         continuing  risk   of   persecution,   some   to   the   issue   of
         reasonableness.


         158. As regards the former, Mr  Sobers  considers  that  the  first
         three factors mean that it  would  be  extremely  difficult  for  a
         person who is targeted by a gang or a "persistent abuser" to remain
         undetected. We do not consider that this view is borne out  by  the
         evidence. Whilst that evidence does  bear  out  that  the  criminal
         gangs, at least  the  major  ones,  are  well  organised  and  have
         considerable resources as well as networks, these appear to be very
         largely concentrated within their own areas or  "turfs".  There  is
         nothing at all to suggest that they keep records or have any system
         of  information-storing  or  information-sharing  beyond   ad   hoc
         discussions. It is important also to bear  in  mind  that  criminal
         gangs cannot be considered as some  kind  of  collective  monolith,
         because we are told that much of their time is spent fighting  each
         other for control of the markets in drugs, guns  and  prostitution.
         Even assuming that in every part of Jamaica there are  persons  who
         have connections with or work for  organised  gangs,  the  evidence
         does not show that such persons are generally familiar with or know
         who the sought enemies of these gangs are. In our view  it  is  not
         reasonably likely they would be  told  to  look  out  for  specific
         individuals except in high profile cases. Further it  is  clear  in
         our view that the day-to-day world of criminal gangs is  constantly
         changing with those involved in gangs reacting to opportunities and
         events taking place around them.


         159. We do not consider that the  evidence  even  establishes  that
         where criminal gangs have particular enemies whom they mark out for
         reprisal, they are generally able to track them down and carry  out
         their revenge. We revert here to the  facts  and  figures  we  have
         about the Witness Protection programme. On Mr Sobers' own  figures,
         some 1,000 people have been assisted by this programme  since  1995
         and he does not dispute the government's claim that no one has been
         "lost" to the programme. It is noted that sometimes  those  who  go
         into the programme are placed abroad, but this is not described  as
         the norm. Not only are these facts indicative that witnesses can be
         protected, but it  also  suggests  that  a  significant  number  of
         persons at risk of reprisals have  been  able  to  relocate  within
         Jamaica, without being detected or at least subject to reprisal.


         160.  Mr  Sobers  places  emphasis  upon  persons  who  move   into
         communities for the first time being seen as strangers and standing
         out. The Amnesty International reports  have  emphasised  that  the
         range of factors of relevance would be  whether  persons  would  be
         identified as JLP or PNP by reference to their home area.  However,
         even if these observations are correct, we do not  find  that  such
         visibility is reasonably likely to result  in  their  identity  and
         whereabouts being relayed back to criminal gangs in  any  organised
         way. There is simply  no  evidence  to  suggest  the  existence  of
         infrastructures of this type.


         161. We accept Mr Sobers' evidence about Jamaica's developed system
         of transport networks and  telecommunications  and  the  fact  that
         Jamaica is a relatively small country. At the same time,  its  size
         is not significantly different from a  number  of  countries  where
         UNHCR and national courts and Tribunals have accepted that internal
         relocation may in at least a range of cases be viable (e.g. Kosovo,
         which has an area of 5,000  square  miles).  Significant  parts  of
         Jamaica are known as "the country" and are markedly rural.


         162. We accept that the considerations which Mr  Sobers  highlights
         are very relevant factors when examining the viability of  internal
         relocation in any particular case, but so too, in our view, must be
         the question of the accessibility to any particular  individual  of
         the Witness Protection programme. It seems to us that  it  will  be
         very important in Jamaican cases concerned with protection  against
         a real risk of serious harm from criminal gangs, to  first  of  all
         analyse whether the individual concerned will be  able  to  receive
         assistance from this programme. Assuming it is decided a person  on
         return will be admitted into this Programme, then we consider  that
         the evidence overwhelmingly indicates that  they  will  thereby  be
         able to avoid any real risk of detection: we remind ourselves  that
         no one has been "lost" to the programme  so  far.  So  far  as  the
         likely economic and social conditions faced  by  those  within  the
         Programme, whilst we  do  not  rule  out  that  unusual  individual
         circumstances may make it unreasonable for them to be admitted into
         the  programme,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest   that   programme
         participants are generally exposed to destitution or  unduly  harsh
         living conditions.


         163. When we refer to persons being "admitted" into the  programme,
         we do not believe that  the  test  can  be  what  the  individual's
         preferences are  or  whether  there  are  hardships  that  will  be
         involved (e.g. having to live for at least some period of  time  in
         difficult circumstances). The  test  is  simply  whether,  if  they
         sought access to it, they would be admitted to it.


         164. What, however, would be the position of a person who would not
         be admitted to the Witness Protection  programme?  Here  the  first
         question to be asked is whether it is reasonably likely  they  will
         be traced and targeted in their new place of residence. As  already
         indicated, we do not consider that, except in high  profile  cases,
         such persons would face a real risk of being detected  by  criminal
         gangs based within the KMA or other  inner-city  urban  areas.  But
         each case will turn on its own facts.


         165. Even if it is decided there is no real risk of such detection,
         a person may still  face  a  real  risk,  by  virtue  of  it  being
         unreasonable or unduly harsh for him  to  relocate:  see  paragraph
         339O of HC395 as amended. Here, however, it must be borne  in  mind
         that the criteria identified by the House of Lords  in  Januzi  are
         stringent. It will not suffice that there may be a lack  of  social
         welfare support combined with other difficulties: what  matters  is
         whether such a move will result for the individual in  question  in
         destitution or other forms of violation  of  a  nonderogable  human
         right..


         166. We would re-emphasise at this point that  what  we  have  just
         delineated about insufficiency of protection for those unlikely  to
         be accepted into the Witness  Protection  Programme,  only  becomes
         germane in a case where  it  has  first  been  established  that  a
         criminal gang's behaviour poses a real and  serious  threat  to  an
         individual. In order to show that such a threat exists, it will not
         suffice to show that a criminal gang dislikes an individual or even
         that it has made threats of violence: it has to be shown  that  the
         gang has a real intent to inflict the threatened serious  harm  and
         to carry out its threats. We shall  return  to  the  importance  of
         these considerations  when  we  turn  to  examine  the  appellant's
         particular circumstances.


    16. I find Ms Harvey's submission that NMW will not be admitted to  the
        Jamaican witness protection programme, as she is not a  witness  to
        any crime in Jamaica, not  made  out.  NMW  is  a  witness  to  the
        attempted importation of drugs to the UK by G, to being  trafficked
        by a gang for such purposes by the use of violence, and of being  a
        victim of rape,  all  of  which  contravene  the  criminal  law  of
        Jamaica. There is no evidence of an  approach  being  made  to  the
        authorities in Jamaica or of their refusing to  admit  NMW  to  the
        programme.
    17. In relation to the Witness Protection programme per se; whenever  a
        person says that he or she has witnessed a crime and volunteers  to
        give that kind of evidence, the Police who  come  in  contact  with
        that witness first introduce the witness protection  programme.  As
        part of the process the police undertake a risk  assessment  as  to
        the dangers the witness may face, which will include  consideration
        of who those a witness fears, where they are, and how they operate,
        to enable recommendations to be made to ensure the witness  remains
        safe.
    18. The success of the programme is evidenced by the information
        provided by the Jamaican authorities which show that the programme
        has been running for  over 10 years and that they have not had a
        witness who is on the programme and who remains on the programme,
        injured, killed, or hurt in any way.
    19. The programme began officially in 1995 and is now administered by
        the Ministry of National Security. Social workers from the Ministry
        work with those in the programme.
    20. In its current form, having identified witnesses and made
        recommendations to the Ministry, the Police then divests all
        contact with those individuals to the Ministry.
    21. The Justice Protection Act to provide a legal framework for the
        Witness Protection Programme making the State responsible for
        granting protection.
    22. I find the Judge has erred  in  law  in  failing  to  consider  the
        availability of the witness protection programme  and  the  country
        guidance case of AB in the absence of  providing  adequate  reasons
        for not having done so.
    23. The issue in this case is whether any such error is material for as
        recognised in AB


        165. Even if it is decided there is no real risk of such detection,
        a person may still face a real risk, by virtue of it being
        unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to relocate: see paragraph
        339O of HC395 as amended. Here, however, it must be borne in mind
        that the criteria identified by the House of Lords in Januzi are
        stringent. It will not suffice that there may be a lack of social
        welfare support combined with other difficulties: what matters is
        whether such a move will result for the individual in question in
        destitution or other forms of violation of a nonderogable human
        right.


    24.  Whilst  the  submission  made  by  Ms  Harvey  relating   to   the
        undesirability of NMW having to go through  a  further  hearing  is
        noted, the difficulty that arises is the failure of  the  Judge  to
        consider  the  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation  which  was
        rejected  out  of  hand  without  considering  AB,  and   lack   of
        consideration and findings concerning any prospective violation  of
        a non derogable human right.
    25. It may be that a proper examination of the evidence may  result  in
        the appeal being allowed but it cannot be established at this  time
        that the outcome will be the same. I therefore find the  identified
        error to be material. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall
        be set aside.
    26. The following directions shall apply to the  future  management  of
        this appeal:


            i. List for a remote Resumed hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge
               Hanson on the first available date after 12 March  2021  time
               estimate 3 hours.
           ii. The findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  relating  to  NMW's
               experiences  in  Jamaica,  her  immigration  history,  family
               composition, criminality, positive finding of the more recent
               letter from the NRM, shall be preserved findings.
          iii. NMW shall no later than 5 March  2021  file  with  the  Upper
               Tribunal and send to the Secretary of  States  representative
               an  updated  consolidated,  indexed,  and  paginated   bundle
               containing all the evidence she seeks to rely  upon.  Witness
               statements in the bundle must be  signed,  dated,  contain  a
               declaration of truth, and shall  stand  as  the  evidence  in
               chief of the maker who  shall  attend  the  hearing  for  the
               purposes of cross-examination  and  re-examination  (if  any)
               only, unless the Secretary of States representative  confirms
               the case can procced  by  way  of  submissions  only  and  is
               content for NMW to be  excused  from  attending  the  resumed
               hearing.
           iv. No interpreter being required; none shall be provided by  the
               Upper Tribunal.


Decision

    27. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I  set  that
        decision aside. This appeal shall be  case  managed  in  accordance
        with the directions set out above.



   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated  10 February 2021







