
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04052/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st August 2018                           |On 26th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    H H H
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shergill,  promulgated  on  11th  May  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 25th April 2018.  In the decision,  the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant,  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born  on  1st  July
    1975.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  9th
    March 2018,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection contrary to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a Kurd, working  for
    the Peshmerga, with the  specific  duty  of  guarding  the  President's
    Palace in Baghdad.  He claims  to  have  arrived  in  the  UK  on  11th
    September 2017 and claimed asylum on account that he was at  risk  from
    Daesh, because he reported a member of a sleeper cell.  The person  was
    a local mullah, in the hometown where  the  Appellant  lived  part-time
    (during his leave) with his family.  He now fears reprisals.   He  fled
    for Turkey with his wife and children, whose whereabouts are unknown in
    Turkey.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not find it plausible that the Appellant, who claimed  to
    have served at the President's Palace, would not be  protected  by  the
    Peshmerga.  He did not accept that the Appellant was at risk.  He  took
    into account the fact that there was  a  letter  from  Colonel  Shafigh
    which stated that the Appellant was no longer working in  the  military
    service for the Peshmerga but was not persuaded by  this  letter.   The
    judge, more importantly, came to the conclusion  that,  "The  objective
    evidence does not support  specific  danger  in  the  IKR  from  Daesh"
    (paragraph 19).  The judge concluded that the Appellant managed to live
    peaceably in his home area as a Peshmerga throughout the height of  the
    troubles.  He observed the Kurds are weary  of  infiltration  by  Daesh
    sympathisers entering and operating in the IKR.  However, the  IKR  was
    generally safe (paragraph 19).  By the Appellant's own admission  there
    was no specific  threat  to  him  until  he  had  long  fled  his  post
    (paragraph 20).  Finally, as far as return to Iraq  was  concerned  the
    Appellant had a copy of the of the CSID and there was no reason why  he
    could not approach the United Kingdom based Iraqi or IKR authorities to
    obtain a replacement enabling him to return back to Iraq (see paragraph
    24).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the  judge  had  failed  to  have
    proper  regard  to    the  material  evidence.   He  had  also  wrongly
    approached the issue of "plausibility" and used this as  a  basis  upon
    which to make findings against the Appellant.  Finally, the  judge  had
    departed from the country guidance cases  in  a  manner  that  was  not
    permissible.

 7. On 7th June 2018 permission to appeal was granted.  Notably this was on
    two distinct bases.  First, there was a document  from  the  Chwarqurma
    Security Office, dated 29th February 2018, and was in the small  bundle
    of documents submitted on 24th April 2018.  The judge made no reference
    to this document from the Iraqi Security Services.  It was relevant  to
    the assessment of the credibility of the  Appellant's  claim.   Second,
    the judge made references to the plausibility of the account given. The
    assessment was dependent in part, on the reliability  of  the  Security
    Services' document, upon which no finding was made.   Consequently,  if
    the Appellant were to succeed on the basis of the  failure  to  make  a
    reference to a document from the Iraqi Security Services, namely,  from
    the Chwarqurma Security Office, which was  dated  29th  February  2018,
    then it would follow  that  the  findings  made  with  respect  to  the
    plausibility of the Appellant's account, would also become material.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 21st August 2018, Mr  Greer,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant,  submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  a  high
    ranking Peshmerga official.  He  not  only  fought  for  Peshmerga,  he
    guarded the Presidential Palace.  The core of  this  appeal  was  based
    upon a supplementary bundle, to which the judge had referred, but where
    he had neglected to draw attention to page 2, which was a key document,
    because it was issued from a reliable source  (and  officer),  who  had
    made it quite clear that the Appellant's  complaint  about  not  having
    protection for his  family,  had  been  raised.   The  judge  makes  no
    reference to this.  The essence of the Appellant's claim  was  that  he
    had sought an assurance that, as a high ranking member of the Peshmerga
    protecting the Presidential Palace, and  having  now  exposed  a  local
    mullah as a member of  the  Daesh,  that  not  only  would  he  not  be
    protected from the risk of being targeted, but also  his  family  would
    not be protected.  He had been  told  that  the  family  would  not  be
    protected.  It was this concern, and borne  out  by  written  evidence,
    that had led him to make his claim.

 9. Second, the judge had proceeded to draw attention  to  the  Appellant's
    account on the basis  that  it  was  not  "plausible".  I  accept  that
    "plausibility" is not the same as "credibility" which is the basis upon
    which protection claims are to be determined.  Nevertheless, the  claim
    still had to be made good, as the grant of permission made  clear.   Mr
    Greer drew attention to three examples.  First, the Appellant had given
    an account of how he left his army service because they could not offer
    him appropriate protection for his family.  He had  said  that  he  had
    received a threat by social media from Daesh.  The judge, in  the  face
    of this account, had stated, "I found  the  circumstances  of  how  the
    Appellant fled after many years of  service  in  the  Peshmerga  to  be
    rather odd" (paragraph 13).  Mr  Greer  submitted  that  there  was  no
    explanation as to why this account would be considered  to  be  "rather
    odd".  It was the account given by the Appellant.  It was important not
    to judge it from the vantage point of a decision making  authority  far
    removed from the place of activity in the United Kingdom.   In  itself,
    it was difficult to see why this was not "plausible".

10. Second, there were the letters recently supplied from Colonel  Shafigh,
    and the judge had said that  these  letters  had  a  "curious  turn  of
    phrase", when there was a reference to "at the present time he  is  not
    in military service".  Judge Shergill had said that  if  the  Appellant
    had left in the way that  he  claimed  to  have  done,  he  would  have
    expected the letter to have said "he is no longer in  service"  or  "he
    left his service".  However, the manner of English language used was  a
    matter which had its own peculiarities and  idiosyncrasies  in  various
    parts of the world, and although this was a translation from the Arabic
    into the English, the literal translation of it did  not  suggest  that
    the Appellant had not left his service in the manner that he claimed to
    have left it.

11. Third, and no less importantly, the Appellant had left  Iraq  and  then
    gone to Turkey, a safe place, but where he had received a  threat  from
    Daesh to his family, and he had left Turkey to come to the UK to  claim
    asylum.  The judge had said of this that:-

         "The situation was not plausible and  in  particular,  the  claimed
         threat whilst he was in Turkey did not have the ring  of  truth  to
         it.  He has abandoned his  family  in  Turkey  despite  a  specific
         threat being made to find him  there,  and  that  was  inconsistent
         behaviour given that he took them there for safety ..."  (paragraph
         16).

12. Mr Greer submitted that the fact was that the Appellant's  family  were
    at a safe place, as  far  as  Turkey  was  concerned,  especially  when
    compared to in relation to Iraq, from where they had fled, out of  fear
    of Daesh.  It was not clear why it was implausible a scenario  and  why
    it had no ring of truth to it.

13. Finally, Mr Greer submitted that the country  guidance  suggested  that
    the Appellant could not be returned.  He would have to go  to  Baghdad.
    From Baghdad he would then go to the IKR.   However,  even  the  latest
    country guidance case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  (CG)
    [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) which was handed down on 26th June 2018, makes it
    quite  clear  that  relocation  to  Kabul  is  not  an  option  because
    thereafter a relocation to the IKR is not a reasonable possibility  for
    someone such as the Appellant.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that notwithstanding Mr  Greer's  valid  and  determined
    efforts to persuade me otherwise, that the decision of  Judge  Shergill
    did not fall into a material error of law (see section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that it falls to be set  aside.   The  reason  for  this  is
    notwithstanding the fact that there was a  supplementary  bundle  which
    contained a  document  from  Chwarqurma  Security  Office,  dated  29th
    February 2018, to which the judge did not have regard, which it is said
    created the possibility that the Appellant and his family would  be  at
    risk from Daesh, in the way that they  could  not  be  protected  as  a
    family unit.  The reason for my coming to this conclusion is  that  the
    objective evidence does not support, as Judge Shergill made clear,  the
    idea that there is a specific  danger  in  the  IKR  from  Daesh.   The
    Appellant had, after all,  lived  peaceably  in  his  home  area  as  a
    Peshmerga  throughout  the  height  of  the  troubles.   The  Appellant
    admitted that there was no specific threat "until he had long fled  his
    post" (paragraph 20).

15. The judge accepted that the Appellant had informed on the local  mullah
    and:-

         "that may well be a cause for concern in the home area, but only in
         the immediate home area where people who would know him  personally
         and what went on.  He is not going to be at risk passing through en
         route to some  other  place.   Outside  of  his  home  area  it  is
         implausible that he will be identifiable and I do not accept he has
         an objectively justifiable fear throughout IKR" (paragraph 20).

16. As far as the country guidance cases are concerned,  the  case  of  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) (CG) [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) does not
    suggest that the Appellant, upon return to Baghdad, could not then make
    his way to the IKR.  He has a CSID.  This is not usually the case  with
    many people who flee from Iraq.  He can, as Judge Shergill noted obtain
    a replacement and pre-clear his entry to the IKR (see paragraph 24).

17. There has been a delay in sending out this Determination to the parties
    concerned, because although it was dictated on the day of the Hearing,
    and typed up shortly thereafter, it appears to have been held up in the
    system, before promulgation.

Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The decision shall stand.

19. An anonymity direction is made.

20. This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019





