
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/04694/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                           | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2018                         | On 14 February 2018           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     BDG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Billie, A. Billie Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lebasci, promulgated on  14  July  2017,  in  which  she
    refused the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal, I have made an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds do not seek to challenge the findings made on  the  asylum
    claim however they do challenge the  A8  findings  in  particular  with
    reference to extensive background material about drought and starvation
    in Zimbabwe.  The FtTJ has not properly considered  whether  there  are
    significant obstacles to the appellant's return to  Zimbabwe  and  this
    impacts on the balancing exercise on proportionality.


    I have read the Record of Proceedings and checked the bundle  filed  by
    the appellant.  Pages 80-87 of the Appellant's bundle contains  a  news
    report from the  Guardian  dated  February  2016  about  the  state  of
    disaster due to the drought in  Zimbabwe.   Another  report  refers  to
    unemployment levels of 90%  and  a  hardships  demo.   This  report  is
    undated.  Reference to this material is in the  skeleton  argument  and
    the appellant's witness statement but no findings are made thereon."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


 5. Although the Rule 24 report acknowledges that  the  grounds  of  appeal
    appear to challenge the asylum decision, contrary to the  statement  in
    the grant of permission, at the hearing before  me  Mr.  Billie  stated
    that he was not relying on the ground of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
    decision on asylum grounds.  His challenge to the decision was only  in
    relation to Article 8.


Submissions


 6. Mr. Billie submitted that an assessment under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    must involve the  personal  circumstances  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    conditions in the country of return.  He submitted that paragraph  [33]
    of the decision disclosed an error  of  law,  as  the  Judge  had  made
    findings which were uninformed by the  evidence  provided.   There  was
    evidence that there were no employment prospects in Zimbabwe  and  that
    unemployment was running at 90% (page 86).  There was evidence of acute
    shortages (page 83).  He submitted  that  the  balancing  exercise  was
    flawed  as  the  Judge  did  not  take  into  account   very   relevant
    information.


  7. In response Mr. Richards submitted that the thrust of  the  Appellant's
     appeal was his protection claim and the Judge had dealt adequately with
     that.  The Judge had dealt with  the  Article  8  claim  at  [33].   He
     accepted that there was  not  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  objective
     material  submitted,  but  the  Judge  had  taken  into   account   the
     Respondent's and Appellant's bundles as stated at [11].  The Judge came
     to the conclusion that, given that the Appellant had lived in  Zimbabwe
     and been educated to university level, he had the skills to  find  work
     on return.   The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  there  were  no
     significant  obstacles.   Although  the  objective  evidence  set   out
     difficulties in respect of life in Zimbabwe, the Judge was entitled  to
     come to a conclusion that the Appellant was well  placed  to  establish
     himself in the community in Zimbabwe.  Even if the Judge had  erred  in
     failing to refer to the specific items of  evidence,  this  was  not  a
     material error given her findings in [33].  The findings were  open  to
     the Judge.


  8. Mr. Billie submitted that the error in [33] was more  than  not  making
     specific reference to the evidence, but that the Judge was  unaware  of
     and had overlooked the evidence.  The Judge had come to her conclusions
     regarding the Appellant's prospects of finding employment based on  the
     Appellant's level of education and skills.  The background  information
     indicated that this did not place him  in  any  better  situation  than
     others because of the circumstances in Zimbabwe.  The Judge  would  not
     have reached the same conclusion had she noted the evidence.

Error of law


  9. I have carefully considered the decision.  Mr. Billie  did  not  pursue
     the ground in relation to the asylum claim, and I therefore  find  that
     there is no challenge to the Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal  on
     asylum grounds.


 10. In relation to Article 8, the Judge  deals  with  this  at  [33].   She
     states:


     "I have considered whether the Appellant should succeed  under  Article
     8.  The Appellant relies on Article 8  but  has  provided  very  little
     evidence in relation to this aspect of his  claim.   He  has  lived  in
     Zimbabwe for most of his life, he speaks the language and  is  educated
     to University level.  I find he has the skills that would enable him to
     find work and integrate into the community upon his return.  There  are
     no significant obstacles to the Appellant's return to Zimbabwe.   Given
     the evidence the Appellant has provided in relation to his  family  and
     private life for the purposes of this appeal, I  find  the  Appellant's
     return to Zimbabwe would not result in consequences of such gravity  as
     to engage the  operation  of  Article  8  ECHR.   I  am  satisfied  the
     Respondent's decision in relation to Article 8 is proportionate to  the
     legitimate aim of the Immigration Rules , and there are no grounds  for
     the Appellant to be granted leave to remain outside of them."


 11. The Judge has not referred to the evidence provided by the Appellant in
     this paragraph although I find that she has referred to it  earlier  in
     the decision where she states that she has taken it into account  [11].
     She states that very little evidence had been provided in  relation  to
     this aspect of the Appellant's claim.  Her finding that he has lived in
     Zimbabwe for most of his life, speaks the language and is  educated  to
     university level has not been challenged.  What is challenged  is  that
     this would not place him in a better position to find work.


 12. I have considered the Appellant's witness statement.  At [53]  to  [59]
     he addresses the reasons for refusal letter where that dealt  with  the
     issue  of  whether  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
     reintegration.  He refers to hardships protests  and  the  difficulties
     which ordinary Zimbabweans are experiencing.  He refers to the  economy
     slipping into recession following the 2013 elections.  He  states  that
     he will be unemployed if he returns as it would not be possible for him
     to secure employment, when millions of Zimbabweans are unemployed.   He
     states that he does not have any special skills.


 13. He then refers at [60] to [63] to the  "unprecedented  and  devastating
     drought".  He states that he will be stranded for food if he returns.


 14. I have considered the  evidence  provided  at  pages  80  to  87.   The
     decision of the First-tier Tribunal was promulgated on  14  July  2017.
     The article from the Guardian is dated 5 February 2016, some 17  months
     prior to the decision (pages 80 to 82).  The article at pages 83 to  85
     was published on 6 July 2016,  a  year  prior  to  the  decision.   The
     article at pages 86 to 87 is dated 10 August 2016, 11 months  prior  to
     the decision.


 15. I find that, even had the Judge set out this evidence in greater detail
     at [33], it would not have made a material difference  given  that  the
     evidence is dated between 11 and  17  months  prior  to  the  decision.
     There was no up-to-date evidence before  the  Judge.   In  his  witness
     statement the Appellant  has  referred  to  the  drought,  but  without
     reference to any dates, and the evidence provided in  relation  to  the
     drought is dated February 2016.  The Appellant  also  referred  to  the
     hardship protests, but the background  evidence  that  he  provided  in
     relation to  these  is  dated  a  year  prior  to  the  decision.   The
     statements  made  in  the  Appellant's  witness   statement   are   not
     corroborated by the background evidence which he has provided.


 16. I find that there is no material error in the Judge's consideration  of
     Article 8.  She found that the Appellant had spent most of his life  in
     Zimbabwe, he spoke the language, and that he was educated to university
     level.  There is no error in her consequent  finding  that  his  skills
     would enable him to find work and integrate into the community  on  his
     return.  The evidence  in  the  bundle  pre-dated  her  decision  by  a
     significant period of time, and the evidence in the Appellant's witness
     statement was therefore not corroborated  by  any  objective  evidence.
     She was entitled to find that there were no  significant  obstacles  to
     his return to Zimbabwe.  While it might have been better had the  Judge
     referred to the evidence at [33], there is no material error of law  in
     her failure to do so.



Decision


 17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
     a material error of law and I do not set the decision aside.


 18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 9 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

