
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04567/2018
                                                PA/04578/2018, PA/04581/2018
                                                             & PA/04584/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28th March 2019                 |On 08th April 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between
                                     MT
                                     NM
                                      A
                                     NT
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Templeton, Quinn, Martin & Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. These appeals are brought against a decision by Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal David Clapham dismissing appeals on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellants are nationals of Indonesia.  The first appellant is the
      father of the second and third appellants.  The fourth appellant is
      related to the first appellant by marriage.  Her sister's husband is
      the first appellant's brother.  According to the appellants, the first
      appellant borrowed money for his business and was unable to repay it.
      The appellants fear violence at the hands of these creditors.  The
      appellants also fear persecution on the grounds of religion, having
      abandoned their Muslim faith and become atheists.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made adverse credibility
      findings.  The judge did not accept that the appellants are atheists.
      The judge did not accept their evidence of having been threatened and
      assaulted by creditors.

   4. In summary the grounds of the application for permission to appeal
      contend that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not give
      adequate reasons for the negative credibility findings and disregarded
      material evidence set out in the appellants' witness statements. It is
      also contended that the judge disregarded documentary evidence,
      including a police report and medical evidence.  Permission to appeal
      was given on the basis that the judge had arguably erred by
      overlooking documentary evidence, particularly the police report and
      medical evidence.

   5. At the hearing before me Mr Govan did not seek to defend the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.  He pointed out that
      although the judge said it was speculative to assume that attacks on
      the appellants were instigated by the creditors, the judge disregarded
      the evidence of the appellants that the attackers said they had been
      sent by the creditors.  There was in addition a lack of consideration
      of the documentary evidence.  In relation to the appellants' alleged
      atheism, the judge based his negative finding on the appellants having
      each given their religion at their screening interviews as Islam
      without engaging fully with their evidence.  Finally, the judge
      neglected to address an Article 8 claim advanced specifically for the
      third appellant.

   6. Mr Templeton had nothing to add on the appellants' behalf.

   7. Having considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and related
      documents, I am satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      erred in law in the manner described in the grant of permission to
      appeal and as outlined in Mr Govan's submission.  The decision is set
      aside.

   8. In view of the extent of fact finding required the appeal should be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with paragraph
      7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.  The appeals will therefore be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard before a differently
      constituted tribunal with no findings preserved,

Conclusions

   9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  10. The decision is set aside.

  11. The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard
      before a differently constituted tribunal with no findings preserved.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  In order
to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is finally
decided I make such a direction in the following terms.  Unless or until a
court or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellants or any members of their
family.  This direction applies to the appellants and the respondent.
Failure to comply with this direction may give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.




M E Deans
                           dated 4th April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


