
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04243/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2019                    |On 25 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Mr a. R.
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Walker, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision posted on 12 February 2019 Judge Welsh of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Iran, against the decision made by the respondent  on  14  March  2018,
    refusing his protection claim.  The principal basis of the  appellant's
    asylum claim was that he had been targeted by the  Iranian  authorities
    because of his father's activities on behalf of the Labour Party, which
    had led to his imprisonment.  The appellant's home had been the subject
    of numerous raids by the Iranian authorities.

2.   The judge did not find the appellant's account credible.

3.   The appellant's principal grounds are twofold.

4.   It is first advanced that the judge had made  a  material  misdirection
    of fact giving  rise  to  unfairness  relating  to  the  raids  by  the
    authorities on the appellant's house.  Two  particular  criticisms  are
    made: that the judge was wrong to count against the appellant that none
    of the objective evidence presented made mention of the  father's  name
    "particularly given the  very  lengthy  prison  sentence  he  is  still
    serving"; and  that  there  was  no  rational  basis  for  the  judge's
    assumption that  the  father  had  been  charged,  convicted  and  then
    sentenced to a prison sentence.

5.   I received clear and succinct submissions  from  both  representatives,
    Mr Kotas highlighting that the grounds did not take issue with  several
    of the judge's reasons for rejecting credibility.

6.   Dealing with the second criticism first, I am  not  persuaded  that  it
    identifies a  material  error  of  law.   Plainly  on  the  appellant's
    evidence, the father had been arrested approximately twelve  years  ago
    after he had taken part in a workers' demonstration  at  a  sugar  cane
    factory owned by the government.

7.   It is true that the background evidence, in  particular  the  CIPIN  of
    March 2016 on Iran: Human Rights Defenders, does not specify  that  all
    those arrested and detained  by  the  authorities  for  anti-government
    activities are subject to persecution and trial  and  conviction.   For
    example at 6.3.2 of the CIPIN quotes from the Freedom House, Freedom in
    the World report for 2016 stating that:

         "6.3.2   Activists are routinely arrested  without  warrants,  held
                indefinitely without formal charges, and  denied  access  to
                legal counsel or any contact with the outside  world.   Many
                are later convicted on vague security charges in trials that
                sometimes last only a few minutes.  Activists say they  have
                been  beaten  during  interrogation,   forced   into   false
                confessions,  and  subjected  to   psychological   pressure,
                including threats that their relatives will be arrested.  In
                the past two years, the IRGC's intelligence unit appears  to
                have increased its involvement in political repression.  The
                unit reportedly controls a section of Tehran's Evin  prison.



         Security forces  are  seldom  held  responsible  for  human  rights
                violations.'"

8.   At the same time, this  same  report  describes  "judicial  harassment"
    (see e.g. 6.3.5) as one of the most common tactics used by the  Iranian
    authorities for dealing with  activists  with  fabricated  charges  and
    unfair trials (see e.g. 6.1.5) being endemic.  There was also  specific
    mention in the CIPIN of an OCHR  report  of  2009  about  human  rights
    activists being  arrested  and  convicted:  the  judge  noted  this  at
    paragraph 31(4).  Accordingly it was reasonable of the judge  to  infer
    from the appellant's account that the father's imprisonment for such  a
    lengthy period was not an example of indefinite detention  without  any
    legal process.  In any event, what for  the  judge  was  the  principal
    concern was the failure of the appellant to substantiate his claim that
    his father had been imprisoned for a very lengthy  period.   Ms  Walker
    takes particular issue with paragraph 45:

         "45. The account I have from the Appellant and his witnesses is the
             skeleton of a story.  There is very little  information  about
             the Appellant's father.   For  example,  I  do  not  know  his
             history of political  or  union  activity;  his  role  in  the
             demonstrations that led to his  arrest  and  lengthy  term  of
             imprisonment; whether any of his associates suffered a similar
             fate; the charges and the trial; whether he  was  permitted  a
             lawyer; in which prison he is being held; whether  the  family
             were permitted to visit him or correspond  with  him.   In  my
             view, if the Appellant's  account  were  true,  this  sort  of
             detail  could  and  would  be  provided  and  I   reject   the
             explanations put forward for its absence."

9.   But the main point relied on by the judge was lack of  information  and
    the judge's reference to the lack  of  information  about  charges  and
    trial were  prefaced  by  the  words  "[f]or  example".   Further,  the
    examples given went much wider than information about charge and  trial
    and included "his history of political or union activity", "his role in
    the demonstrations", and "whether his family were  permitted  to  visit
    him or correspond with him".  The judge took fully  into  account  that
    the appellant was 6 years old when he claimed his father was  arrested,
    but properly observed that there had been  extensive  opportunities  to
    obtain such information via his mother and other family.

10.  Turning to the first point of criticism, it focuses on paragraph 44:

          "44.    Given the extent of the  objective  evidence  about  human
             rights defenders, including  trade  unionists  who  have  been
             imprisoned, it is surprising that there is no mention  of  the
             Appellant's father, particularly given the very lengthy prison
             sentence he is still serving."

    I would accept that the background information before the judge did not
    bear out that the Iranian authorities would publicly identify all those
    it detained, even anti-government activists  or  trade  unionists,  but
    this paragraph does not confine  its  scope  to  the  Iranian  regime's
    information/"official sources" about human  rights  defenders.   It  is
    concerned with information from all sources and it is  clear  from  the
    CIPIN report that human rights reports monitoring Iran commonly mention
    detained activists (see e.g. 5.1.4 on a jailed trade  unionist  serving
    an eleven-year sentence).  This lack of any mention of  the  father  in
    the background evidence was one other aspect of the judge's assessment,
    alongside the failure of the appellant to provide specific  information
    that would or should have  been  available  to  the  family  about  the
    father's whereabouts or their inability to establish them.

11.  The grounds also complain that in  finding  that  there  was  not  "any
    logical reason" that the appellant would be of adverse interest to  the
    authorities, the judge flew in the  face  of  the  background  evidence
    stating that family members of activists  are  harassed  and  arrested.
    This contention targets paragraph 51:

         "51. The fact of the evidence upon which the conviction is said  to
             have been based is at odds with the Appellant's account.   His
             case is that neither he, his brother, nor his mother ever been
             involved in any sort of anti-government activity.  He did  not
             provide a reason  why,  therefore,  people  involved  in  such
             political activity would have named him as  a  co-conspirator.
             Nor is there any logical reason why this would  be  the  case.
             Even if  his  father  had  been  involved,  he  was  convicted
             approximately  12  years   before   these   proceedings   were
             initiated.  Given this length of  time,  it  is  difficult  to
             comprehend why anyone involved would  even  be  aware  of  the
             Appellant's name."

12.  I fail to see that in  this  paragraph  or  any  other  the  judge  was
    overlooking the background evidence that  the  authorities  target  not
    just anti-government activists but their families.  Indeed at paragraph
    34 the judge cites a USSD annual report for June 2015 referring to  the
    harassment and arrests of family members of human rights activists.  On
    the judge's findings, the appellant had failed to show that his  father
    had been  a  trade  unionist  arrested  and  detained  by  the  Iranian
    authorities.  Hence the background evidence regarding family members of
    persons who were human rights activists was not  pertinent,  except  as
    background to the claim.

13.  I should record that I have had regard to other points  raised  in  the
    grounds not advanced by Ms Walker before me, including  the  contention
    that the judge had not dealt fairly  or  accurately  with  the  witness
    evidence, had erred in assessing the plausibility  of  the  appellant's
    account of the delay in the Iranian  authorities  instituting  criminal
    proceedings against him and their not charging his mother.  In my  view
    she was  right  not  to  pursue  these  as  they  fell  well  short  of
    identifying any legal error.  I should also add, as regards Article  8,
    that the judge's assessment that the appellant would  not  be  at  real
    risk of suicide was entirely within the range of  reasonable  responses
    and the judge's analysis of the medical report was sound.

14.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law.  Accordingly  the  decision  of  Judge  Welsh  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal must stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 23 September 2019
       [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
