
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04519/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2018                           |On 4 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 HUSAIN [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Stefan Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cary ("Judge Cary" or "the Immigration  Judge")  to
    dismiss his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant's asylum claim on the 26 April 2017. The First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) decided to reject his account of having been  involved  with  the
    Bangladesh National Party.  On 10 October 2018  the  Immigration  Judge
    decided that the appellant had not established he had been  persecuted.
    The decision was promulgated on 22 October 2018. The Immigration  Judge
    dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds and  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The  claim  to  humanitarian  protection  was  also
    rejected.  Permission to bring the present  appeal  was  given  by  FTT
    Judge Boyes who thought it arguable that Judge Cary had erred in taking
    into account Judge Bartlett's earlier decision and gave  permission  on
    the other grounds "so as not to bind the UT".

Background

2.   The appellant first came from Bangladesh to the UK in 2010 as a Tier  4
    Student Migrant.  He applied for further leave to remain  in  May  2010
    but  the  application  was  refused  and  he  appealed  that   refusal.
    Eventually he was granted further leave to remain as a Tier  4  Student
    on 18 January 2011 which expired on 29 December 2013.   His  leave  was
    subsequently renewed until January 2015.  There then seems to have been
    a problem with the appellant's studies and the  respondent  decided  to
    consider curtailing his leave and his leave was curtailed in 2014.   He
    then made an application for leave to remain on 6 February  2015  which
    again he appealed but again those appeals were dismissed.

3.   He was detained and under immigration control in 2016.  He  was  served
    with the papers requiring his removal from the UK but when  interviewed
    he then raised the matter of asylum and on 31 October 2016  he  finally
    advanced that  asylum  claim.  He  claimed  that  he  was  attacked  by
    supporters of the Awami League in Bangladesh  in  April  2009  and  had
    therefore decided to flee to the United Kingdom.  He claimed that since
    arriving in the UK he had continued to support the BNP and he said that
    he was concerned he would be killed by the police  or  members  of  the
    Awami League in Bangladesh.

4.   Judge Cary was the second judge who has had  to  consider  his  appeal,
    the first being Judge Bartlett who in a hearing on 1 August 2017  heard
    extensive  evidence  about  the  appellant's  background  but,  in  his
    decision promulgated on 17 August 2017, decided that  he  would  reject
    the appellant's account as having been incredible. He therefore decided
    to dismiss the appeal  on  asylum  and  other  grounds.   However,  the
    appellant appealed that adverse decision to the Upper Tribunal  and  on
    12 February 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill set aside  Judge  Bartlett's
    decision and directed a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.
    That appeal subsequently came before Judge Cary.

The Upper Tribunal hearing

5.    At  the  hearing  submissions  were  made  by  both   representatives.
    Essentially, Mr Karim,  who  represented  the  appellant,  reduced  the
    grounds of appeal to the key ones as follows:  ground 1 was that  Judge
    Bartlett's decision should not have been referred to  in  Judge  Cary's
    decision. The references to Judge Bartlett's decision at various points
    showed he said that Judge  Bartlett's  adverse  findings  had  infected
    Judge Cary 's findings which made them unreliable.

6.   Mr Karim then referred me to two cases, the case of KJ [2009] EWCA  Civ
    292 in which, he said, the Court of Appeal had indicated  that  it  was
    not appropriate to refer to a decision of an earlier Tribunal which was
    tainted in any way.  He also referred me to the case of EN [2005] UKAIT
    00146 at paragraph 40(e) where Judge Gleeson explained that it would be
    wrong in law for the later judge to  decide  an  important  credibility
    issue, before the Tribunal in that case as having been settled  by  the
    first   Immigration  Judge  by  the  second  Immigration  Judge,  whose
    determination was on appeal in that case (the issue  being  whether  or
    not an appellant had  been  subject  to  FGM).  The  first  Immigration
    Judge's decision no longer existed, and it would be wrong  in  law  for
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, having found an error  of  law  in
    that decision, to refer to the earlier adverse credibility findings  by
    the first Immigration Judge and give them any weight.

7.   Secondly, Mr  Karim  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  his
    involvement with activities for the BNP.

8.   Thirdly, Mr Karim referred to paragraph 54  of  Judge  Cary's  decision
    where he had referred to making  an  "overall  assessment"  as  to  the
    appellant's credibility. Mr Karim pointed out that what the Immigration
    Judge appeared to say was  that  because  he  had  reached  an  adverse
    finding as to credibility but that he then he was able to discount  and
    place no reliance upon certain documents  which  he  had  to  consider.
    Because he had reached an adverse credibility finding generally did not
    mean he was able to discount the documents as being of no weight or any
    significance.   Mr  Karim  submitted  Judge  Cary  had  been  wrong  in
    principle to take that approach.  The Immigration Judge had to  take  a
    view "in the round" and this involved looking at all the evidence, then
    weighing up that  evidence  and  reaching  clear  conclusions  on  that
    evidence.

9.   Mr Karim then referred  to  "lawyer  to  lawyer  communications"  (i.e.
    between lawyers in Bangladesh)  which  appeared  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant was a subject of interest to the authorities there.  This, Mr
    Karim said,  clearly  corroborated  the  appellant's  account  but  the
    Immigration Judge simply failed to make any  findings  in  relation  to
    this evidence.  This was central to his case, he said.  The Immigration
    Judge had simply dismissed these documents without giving any  reasons.
    That was wrong in principle, he said.

10.  The fourth ground of appeal was that Mr Karim was that the  Immigration
    Judge had been wrong to suggest that there was  no  obligation  on  the
    respondent to verify the documents.  He said there were no  exceptional
    reasons why it  was  unnecessary  for  the  respondent  to  verify  the
    documents. They had failed to identify what sort of exceptional reasons
    there were for verification not to take place.  The appellant submitted
    that this is contrary to MA (Bangladesh) in which the Court  of  Appeal
    said that the correct approach in determining whether the circumstances
    of a particular case may necessitate in an  investigation  by  national
    authorities was first to consider whether a disputed document is at the
    centre of the case.  Mr Karim submitted that these  documents  were  at
    the centre of the  case  and,  therefore,  they  would  require  proper
    document verification before they could be rejected.

11.  His fifth ground was that there were specific items  of  evidence  that
    the judge had not referred to which he listed in ground 5 (i) to (v).

12.  Ground 6 was technically relied on but not argued orally before me.

13.  Ground 7 related to a failure on the part of the Immigration  Judge  to
    take account of the oral evidence of Sheikh Liton, whose  evidence,  Mr
    Karim said, corroborated the appellant's role as an activist  with  the
    BNP.  The appellant relied on photographs showing him present with  the
    UK BNP president. Mr Karim argued that It was wrong for the Immigration
    Judge  to  characterise  the  appellant's  role  with  BNP   as   being
    unimportant or minor.   He  was  in  fact  a  "major  player"  in  that
    organisation.  He had  carried  out  sur  place  activities  and  these
    clearly suggested showed that he would be at risk  on  return.   I  was
    referred to the Country of Origin Information Report at paragraph 1.1.1
    and at paragraph 12 which tended to suggest that the risk existed.

14.  In reply the respondent said that the attack on  the  judge's  decision
    was misconceived.  He criticised Judge Cary on many grounds, but  those
    criticisms were not justified by a fair reading of the  whole  decision
    which he described as "thorough and full". He accepted that the use  of
    earlier decisions which have been set aside  needed  to  be  approached
    with some caution, but the case of EN had been misquoted in  the  sense
    that there were further material parts  to  that  decision  which  also
    needed to be considered.  It was pointed out that paragraph 43 of  that
    decision stated that the second Immigration  Judge  had  not  erred  in
    taking account of earlier evidence in circumstances  where  there  were
    clear differences and those differences were material to  the  evidence
    given in the later hearing.  They may form a significant  part  of  the
    core account and therefore may affect credibility findings in the later
    case if there were earlier inconsistent or differing statements.

15.  I was then referred to paragraph 51  of  the  decision  in  this  case,
    where the Immigration Judge did not accept that the appellant had  been
    attacked as claimed in April 2009. Mr Kotas pointed out that there were
    a number of adverse credibility findings throughout the case, not least
    of which engaged Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of
    Claimants etc.) Act 2004.  Mr Kotas pointed out  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had found (at paragraph 51 of his decision)  that  the  appellant
    had not been "seriously involved" with BNP  activities  in  Bangladesh,
    nor did his activities in the UK materially raise  his  profile.  These
    were conclusions that the Immigration Judge was entitled to come to, Mr
    Kotas said.

16.  The Immigration Judge  gave  sound  reasons  given  for  rejecting  the
    evidence from "the lawyers" at paragraph 52 of his decision,  Mr  Kotas
    said. He pointed out that no mention of regular ongoing visits  by  the
    police had  been  made.  Nor  was  there  anything  produced  from  the
    appellant's mother or brother to confirm his account.  The findings  of
    fact were sound, and I was invited to leave the decision  in  place  to
    say that.

17.  The appellant briefly responded he found it very difficult to say  what
    aspects of the decision could be allowed to stand given the "infection"
    of Mr Bartlett's earlier  decision  into  the  decision  under  appeal.
    Bangladesh was in a dangerous situation and the appellant had  produced
    documentary evidence to support  his  claim.   Overall  his  claim  was
    consistent and reliable, and  it  should  have  been  accepted  by  the
    Tribunal below.  Numerous activities for the BNP had been  referred  to
    in the appellant's evidence.  He was a  very  active  "leader"  of  the
    organisation.  The "lawyer's letter" confirmed this.  I  was  therefore
    invited to allow the appeal.

Conclusions

18.  I have carefully considered the  submissions  by  both  representatives
    and I have also re-read the  decision  of  Judge  Cary.   As  Mr  Kotas
    pointed out, this  was  a  lengthy,  thorough  and  detailed  decision.
    Sometimes the length of the paragraphs  can  lead  to  parts  of  those
    paragraphs being taken out of context and that appears to have  led  to
    some of the submissions made in the current appeal.

19.  The appellant had not raised any asylum claim until  many  years  after
    the events are said to have occurred and long after he arrived into the
    UK. The background to his claim is of numerous unsuccessful immigration
    appeals.  The Immigration Judge  had  in  mind  all  the  documentation
    before him, although he did not necessarily deal with this in the order
    that he should have done.

20.  I am satisfied that the Immigration Judge's decision was  not  infected
    by the decision of Judge Bartlett, which had indeed been set aside. Any
    references to Judge Bartlett's decision were by way of background  only
    and I am satisfied the Immigration Judge  did  not  regard  himself  as
    being bound by that decision.

21.  There were a number of gaps in the appellant's  account  which  he  was
    unable to explain and there was no plausible evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claim to being a high ranking official in  the  BNP  Party.
    Mr Liton's evidence was referred to at paragraph  57.  The  Immigration
    Judge was entitled to conclude that evidence did not  add  anything  to
    the overall picture. I do  not  consider  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    adopted an over narrow view  of  credibility  by  regarding  themselves
    bound by his overall adverse assessment thereof when viewing individual
    documents. I accept that the Immigration  Judge  could  have  expressed
    himself better in the final sentence of paragraph 54 of  his  decision,
    however.

22.  I have concluded the  Immigration  Judge  reached  a  decision  he  was
    entitled to reach on the evidence before him and there is  no  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  dismissed.
Accordingly, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  the  Refugee
convention  and  under  the  ECHR  stand.   The   claim   to   international
humanitarian was also rightly dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  make  no
anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date 17th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 17th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

