
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04353/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2016                          |On 4 May 2017                 |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TGA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Loughridge promulgated on 21st October 2016.  The appellant  before  me
    is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and the respondent to
    this appeal, is TGA.  However, for ease of reference, in the course  of
    this determination I shall adopt the parties' status as it  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I shall in this decision, refer to TGA as the
    appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


   2. An anonymity direction was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is
      continued by me.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
      otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member of
      her family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and  to  the
      respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
      contempt of court proceedings.


 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. She first entered the UK as  a
    student on 31st July 2013 with leave to enter  until  5th  April  2015.
    She was granted further leave to remain until  30th  March  2016.   The
    appellant returned to Pakistan between 12th March and 7th  April  2015.
    Almost six months  after  returning  to  the  UK  in  April  2015,  the
    appellant claimed asylum.   The appellant's husband and daughter  (both
    of whom are Pakistani nationals) are dependants of the  appellant.  The
    asylum claim was refused by the respondent on 14th April 2016,  and  it
    was that decision that was the subject of the appeal before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")


 4. The decision of the FtT Judge, is lengthy and spans some 117 paragraphs
    over 21 pages.  The background to the appeal is set out  at  paragraphs
    [1] and [2] of the decision of  the  FtT.   The  appellant's  claim  is
    summarised by the Judge at paragraphs [8] and [9] of his decision,  and
    at paragraphs [10] to [45], the Judge sets out  the  evidence  that  he
    received from the appellant and her husband.   At  paragraphs  [46]  to
    [53] of the decision, the Judge refers to the other evidence set out in
    the appellant's bundle.   The  parties'  submissions  are  recorded  at
    paragraphs [63] to [70] of the decision.


 5. The Judge rejected, at  [73],  the  respondent's  submission  that  the
    appellant's account of events is inherently implausible.  At  paragraph
    [76] of his decision, the Judge states:


         "It is undoubtedly true that there are  numerous  discrepancies  in
         the evidence. The Appellant herself has said  different  things  at
         different times about some of the  key  issues;  and  she  has,  on
         numerous occasions in  my  view,  fundamentally  failed  to  answer
         questions accurately and  with  the  degree  of  thought  and  care
         required. ABA has contradicted her, and was unable to  answer  many
         of the questions put to him in cross-examination. Furthermore,  the
         affidavit  evidence  obtained  in  Pakistan  is,   in   significant
         respects, fundamentally different from the  account  given  by  the
         Appellant. It seems to me that the Appellant  has  embellished  her
         claim which, whilst perhaps understandable if her circumstances are
         indeed as she says, is  ultimately  unhelpful  to  the  process  of
         determining her appeal. It leaves the Tribunal  in  the  unenviable
         position of sifting through the mass of evidence to decide what is,
         and what isn't, accurate..."


 6. The Judge was satisfied, at [82], that the appellant  and  her  husband
    did indeed undergo a forced marriage in December 2012 in consequence of
    a feud between the two families and as part of the solution imposed  on
    the families by the local Jirga. The Judge also  found  that  a  second
    marriage; between the appellant's brother and her husband's sister, was
    also part of the solution, albeit that  marriage  had  to  be  deferred
    because of the age of ABA's sister.   The  Judge  states  at  paragraph
    [85]:


         "However, in respect  of  the  Appellant's  visit  to  Pakistan  in
         March/April 2015  the  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies  in  the
         evidence are far more notable,  and  potentially  damaging  to  the
         credibility of her account."


 7. The Judge accepted that when the appellant left the  UK  to  travel  to
    Pakistan, neither she nor her husband knew  about  her  father-in-law's
    decision not to go through with the second marriage that  was  to  have
    taken place between ABA's  sister  and  the  appellant's  brother.   At
    paragraphs [87] to [96] of his decision, the Judge identifies a  number
    of concerns that he has about the appellant's account of events and  at
    paragraph [97] he states:


         "Overall, therefore, I conclude that there are many aspects of  the
         Appellant's version of events relating to her visit to Pakistan  in
         March/April  2015  which  do  not  make  logical  sense,   or   are
         inaccurate, and indeed are misleading."


 8. The Judge then considers, at [98] to  [102],  the  inconsistencies  and
    discrepancies in the evidence surrounding the  text  messages  and  the
    video said to have been received from the appellant's brother after the
    appellant returned to the UK.  At paragraph [103], the Judge states:


         "So, what factual findings can I sensibly make in relation  to  the
         events of March/ April 2015, and thereafter?  It  is  not  easy  to
         know, and I must say that the discrepancies in  the  evidence  push
         the Appellant's account close to the limit of credibility."


 9. At paragraph [104] of  his  decision  the  Judge  states  that  he  has
    considered various possibilities.  He states:


         "One scenario is that in  March  2015  the  Appellant  returned  to
         Pakistan to visit ABA's family, and her own family, and  the  visit
         went according to plan; that she returned to the UK in April  2015;
         and that by October 2015, she had less than six months left on  her
         student visa, she had stopped studying  because  of  her  difficult
         third pregnancy, and there was no obvious route by  which  she  and
         ABA would be able to remain in the UK; and that, accordingly,  they
         decided to make an asylum  claim  against  the  background  of  her
         difficulties in Pakistan prior to leaving in July 2013, embellished
         by her account of ABA's father withdrawing from the proposed second
         marriage between  her  brother  and  ABA's  sister,  and  the  feud
         beginning again as a consequence. This scenario is consistent  with
         the absence of corroborating evidence (other than by ABA) regarding
         the text messages and the video. It is also consistent with what  I
         have been told about everyone having to abide by the decision of  a
         Jirga, meaning that it would be rather odd for ABA's father  simply
         to be able to decide to withdraw from the second marriage.  As  for
         the video footage on the Appellant's phone at the asylum interview,
         footage of decapitations is widely available on the internet and it
         would be relatively easy to download a short clip."


10. At paragraph [105] of his decision, the Judge states that on the  lower
    standard of proof, he is unable to persuade himself with  a  sufficient
    degree of certainty that this scenario is accurate.   The  Judge  finds
    that the core facts are as set out at paragraphs [106] to [109] of  his
    decision.  I do  not  repeat  those  findings  in  this  decision.   At
    paragraph [110] of his decision, the Judge concluded that on the  basis
    of his factual findings, the appellant has  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving a well-founded fear of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason.
    The Judge then considered whether there is a part of Pakistan where the
    appellant's life would not be under threat.


11. The Judge found at paragraph [112] of his decision, that the  appellant
    genuinely has the paternal relatives described in paragraphs  29-35  of
    her witness statement. He also accepted that  it  would  be  relatively
    straightforward for the appellant's father and brother to  ask  any  of
    these relatives to check official records to see whether the  appellant
    is in Pakistan and, if so, her  address.  At  paragraph  [114]  of  his
    decision, the Judge considered the risk posed by the appellant's father
    and brother.  He states:


         ".... I do have some doubt as to whether they would  be  likely  to
         harm the Appellant particularly if she were to relocate to  a  city
         such as Karachi in southern Pakistan, many hundreds  of  kilometres
         from Peshawar. However, I do not feel  that  I  can  rule  out  the
         possibility with a sufficient degree of confidence to  be  able  to
         say that her life would not be under threat..."


12. The Judge concluded at paragraph [115] of his decision that he was  not
    satisfied that there is any part of Pakistan  to  which  the  appellant
    could safely relocate, in the sense of her life not being under threat.
     The appeal was allowed.


The appeal before me


13. The respondent notes that the Judge has made extensive findings on  the
    evidence but submits that the Judge erred in his approach  when  making
    the findings as to the core of the appellant's  account  at  paragraphs
    [106] to [109] of  his  decision.   The  respondent  submits  that  the
    findings are based upon speculation rather than the evidence  that  was
    before him.


14. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  FtT  Judge  Woodcraft  on  14th
    November 2016.  The matter comes before  me  to  consider  whether  the
    decision of the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and
    if so, to remake the decision.


15. Before me, Ms Isherwood relies upon the grounds of appeal  and  submits
    that although the decision of the FtT  Judge  is  detailed,  the  Judge
    erred in his approach when reaching his findings.  The Judge repeatedly
    refers to the gaps and inconsistencies in the evidence relied  upon  by
    the appellant, and failed to make findings upon the  account  given  by
    the appellant.  She submits that the Judge failed  to  say  whether  he
    accepts or rejects the  account  of  the  appellant,  but  instead,  at
    paragraphs [106] to [109] of his decision, found that  the  core  facts
    were as set out by him. She submits that the core facts as found by the
    Judge were not  an  account  advanced  by  the  appellant,  but  was  a
    speculative account reached by the Judge that had no proper  evidential
    foundation.  She submits that it was entirely irrational  and  perverse
    of the Judge to reach an account of events that was  not  in  fact,  in
    some material respects, an account relied upon by the appellant.


16. In reply, Ms Jones submits that the decision of the FtT  Judge  is  one
    that is very thorough and carefully considered.  She submits  that  the
    respondent seeks to criticise  the  Judge  for  making  clear  findings
    having, as he states at [76], considered and gone through the  evidence
    carefully.  She submits  that  at  paragraphs  [85]  to  [114]  of  his
    decision, the Judge has carried out a careful analysis of the evidence,
    giving it anxious scrutiny and reaching findings that were open to him.
     The Judge has borne in mind throughout that there  were  discrepancies
    and gaps in the evidence, but the findings made at paragraphs [106]  to
    [109] cannot be viewed in isolation.  She submits that it was  open  to
    the Judge, on the evidence, to conclude that  was  what  had  occurred,
    even though that was not necessarily the account being advanced by  the
    appellant in some respects.


  17. The issue for me to decide is whether or not the Judge  was  entitled,
      on the evidence, to make the core findings of fact that are set out at
      paragraphs [106] to [109] of the decision.  In that respect, I  follow
      the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran)  v  SSHD  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal drew together the  threads  of  the
      approach to be adopted in cases where it is claimed that there  is  an
      error of law in the Tribunal's approach to the evidence. The Court  of
      Appeal held that a finding might only be set aside for error of law on
      the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable in  the
      Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the  evidence.
      A finding that is "perverse" embraces findings that are irrational  or
      unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and findings of  fact  that  are
      wholly unsupported by the evidence.   I  apply  that  guidance  to  my
      consideration of the decision in this appeal.


  18. In reaching  his  decision  the  Judge  was  required  to  assess  the
      credibility of claimed facts about past and present events, that go to
      the core of the claim. To do so, the  Judge  was  required  to  assess
      whether the appellant's material factual claim is internally  coherent
      and consistent with past written and verbal statements, and consistent
      with  claims  made  by  dependants  and/or  witnesses  and  with   any
      documentary evidence submitted in support of the claim. It was for the
      Judge to assess how well the evidence  submitted  fits  together,  and
      whether it contradicts itself.


  19. In assessing the evidence a great many cases provide guidance  on  how
      the risk is to be assessed.  In Karanakaran [2000] Imm AR 271,  Brooke
      LJ, noted that a decision-maker in an asylum claim will be faced  with
      four kinds of  evidence:  First,  evidence  whose  validity  they  are
      certain about; Second, evidence they think is  probably  true;  Third,
      evidence to which they are willing to attach some credence, but  would
      not go so far as to say that it is probably true; and fourth, evidence
      to which they are not willing to attach any credence at all.


  20. I recognise that the assessment of an asylum claim  is  not  simply  a
      matter of fact finding, but crucially, an evaluation of the  need  for
      international  protection.   However,  the  evaluation  involves   the
      application of a single test.  That is whether,  on  the  evidence,  a
      fear of persecution or ill-treatment is well founded.  The  evaluation
      must in my judgement  begin  with  an  assessment  of  the  subjective
      account of events advanced by the appellant.  A  Judge  must  seek  to
      establish the past and present facts of  a  claim,  by  assessing  the
      internal and external  credibility  of  each  material  claimed  fact,
      applying the principle of the benefit of the doubt where appropriate.


  21. It is right to say that the decision of the FtT is detailed.  However,
      the task of the Judge was, as the Judge  himself  notes  at  paragraph
      [76] of the decision, made all the more difficult because he was  left
      in the unenviable position of sifting through the mass of evidence  to
      decide what is, and what isn't, accurate.


  22. In my judgement, at paragraphs [106] to [109] of his decision,  rather
      than focus upon the evidence  before  him  and  determine  whether  he
      accepts or rejects the core of  the  appellant's  account,  the  Judge
      sought to construct his own theory of  how  events  had  unfolded,  in
      part, on a basis not advanced by the appellant, her husband or in  the
      witness evidence.  He fell into error in doing  so.   In  constructing
      his account of events the Judge also fails to address how that account
      sits with the account given by the appellant, her husband, and set out
      in the other evidence relied upon by the appellant, all  of  which  it
      seems, the Judge accepted to be internally inconsistent  and  littered
      with gaps.


  23.  The error infects not only the Judge's conclusion as to  whether  the
      appellant has established a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason, but also his assessment as to internal  relocation.




  24. The decision needs to be re-made and both parties  submitted  that  if
      the decision of the FtT is set aside, the most appropriate disposal of
      this appeal is for the matter to be  remitted  back  to  the  FtT  for
      hearing afresh. I have decided that it is appropriate  to  remit  this
      appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal,  having  considered  paragraph
      7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement  of  25th  September
      2012. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(b) apply,  in  that
      the nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary, make  it
      appropriate to remit the matter. The parties will be  advised  of  the
      date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


  25. For the avoidance of doubt, none of the findings of the FtT Judge  are
      preserved.   The re-hearing of appeal before the FtT shall, if listing
      permits, be heard at Newport, but I do not direct that the appeal must
      be heard at Newport.


Notice of Decision


26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


27. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date          21st April 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I set aside the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have  remitted
the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.  No fee award  is  made  by  the
Upper Tribunal.  This is to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

