
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04873/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                               |On 28 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     SW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Profumo, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who was born on [ ]  1988.   She
    came to the United Kingdom on 7 December 2015.  On  24  December  2015,
    she claimed asylum.  The basis of her claim was that  she  had  been  a
    supporter of the opposition group in Ethiopia known as "Ginbot 7".  She
    claimed that her sister, brother  and  father  had  been  arrested  and
    detained by the Ethiopian authorities and that she was  wanted  because
    of her involvement with Ginbot 7 which included  distributing  leaflets
    since 2013.

 3. On 28 April 2016, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge Brewer  found
    the appellant not to be credible and rejected  her  account  and  found
    that she would not be at risk on return to Ethiopia.   The  judge  also
    rejected the appellant's claim under Art 3 and Art 8, relying  in  part
    upon her mental health problems.  The judge dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    essentially two grounds.  First, the judge erred in law by  failing  to
    treat the appellant as a "vulnerable witness" and in  failing  to  take
    into account her mental health problems in assessing the credibility of
    her evidence.  Secondly, in  rejecting  the  appellant's  account,  the
    judge had given illogical and inadequate reasons.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 6 September 2017 the Upper Tribunal  (DUTJ  Hutchinson)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

 7. On 3 October 2017, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Submissions

 8. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Profumo relied upon the two grounds  set
    out in the "grounds of renewal" upon which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.

 9. As regards Ground 1, she submitted that the judge had failed  to  treat
    the appellant as a vulnerable witness  in  accordance  with  the  joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 issued by the (then)  President
    of UTIAC and the acting President of FtTIAC.

10. Ms Profumo submitted  that  the  evidence  showed  that  the  appellant
    suffered from "manic psychotic episodes" which had  led  to  her  being
    'sectioned' five days after the asylum interview on 25 April  2016  and
    also in February 2017 prior to the hearing.  The judge  had  not  taken
    into account the impact which the appellant's mental health might  have
    had upon her  evidence  when  assessing  her  credibility.  Ms  Profumo
    submitted that the judge had only taken into account  the  evidence  of
    the appellant's mental health after he had already  reached  a  finding
    (in para 66) that the appellant's account was not credible.

11. Ms Profumo also raised the issue that the judge had failed to treat the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness at the hearing.   She  accepted  that
    the appellant's (then) Counsel and legal representatives had not raised
    these matters before the judge but, she  submitted,  it  was  incumbent
    upon the judge to consider the issue of the  appellant's  vulnerability
    even if it were not raised by the appellant's representatives.

12. Ms Profumo relied upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  JL
    (Medical reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) as to the
    importance of taking into  account  an  individual's  "vulnerabilities"
    when assessing their  evidence.   In  addition,  she  relied  upon  the
    important decision of the Court of Appeal in AM  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
    [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123  on  the  importance  of  dealing  fairly  with
    vulnerable witnesses and appellants at a hearing and in assessing their
    evidence in accordance with the joint Presidential Guidance Note.

13. In relation to ground 2, Ms Profumo submitted that the judge's  reasons
    in para 66 were deficient.  She submitted that it  was  wrong  for  the
    judge to doubt the veracity of the appellant's evidence  on  the  basis
    that the Ethiopian authorities could have arrested the appellant before
    she left Ethiopia on 7 December 2015.  Ms Profumo  submitted  that  the
    appellant's case was that the authorities  only  became  aware  of  her
    involvement with Ginbot 7 when her family (in  particular  her  brother
    who was a member of Ginbot 7)  was  arrested  and  detained  after  the
    appellant came to the UK and she was told about  their  arrest  by  her
    sister after her sister was released.

14. Further, Ms Profumo submitted that the judge  had  failed  properly  to
    reason that it was implausible that the authorities would  not  "simply
    await her return and arrest her as she stepped off the plane";  in  the
    absence of any evidence that the authorities knew  where  she  was  and
    that she would come back to Ethiopia.  There was, Ms Profumo submitted,
    no background evidence  to  support  the  judge's  inference  that  the
    authorities had the "wherewithal" to discover her whereabouts and  when
    she would return.

15. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Hibbs submitted in relation  to
    ground 1 that the medical evidence did not provide any basis upon which
    the judge could have found  that  the  appellant's  evidence  would  be
    affected by her mental health problems.  There was no evidence that she
    was suffering from any mental  health  problems  at  the  time  of  the
    interview even though she was sectioned only five  days  later.   There
    was nothing in the medical evidence, Mr Hibbs submitted, upon which the
    judge could have found that her evidence was  affected  by  her  mental
    health.  He pointed out that there had been a pre-hearing review  on  7
    September 2016 and the appeal, initially listed on 21  September  2016,
    had been adjourned in order that the respondent could consider  whether
    to re-interview the appellant.   In  the  result,  the  respondent  had
    chosen not to do so but, as was clear from paras 8 and 9 of the judge's
    determination, both representatives at the hearing before Judge  Brewer
    agreed that the appeal should proceed and not be adjourned in order  to
    obtain further medical evidence and a firm diagnosis of the appellant's
    mental health.

16. As regards ground 2, Mr Hibbs submitted that the judge's reasoning  was
    sustainable.  He relied upon the appellant's evidence, set out at  para
    65 of the judge's determination, that her family were arrested  because
    the family "cannot bring me back to the authority" and "they asked them
    to bring me back".  He submitted that, therefore, it was clear that the
    appellant was wanted prior to her family's arrest.

17. Mr Hibbs invited me to uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

18. The judge's findings are at paras 54-66 of his determination.  As  will
    become clear, he accepted some  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account,
    including her detention in 2010 but not that it was for  any  political
    reasons as she had not become politically active until 2013.   However,
    he found her to lack credibility as regards  the  core  of  her  claim,
    namely that she had been involved with Ginbot 7 since 2013 and that her
    family had been arrested and detained and that she was  wanted  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities.  The judge's reasons were as follows:

         "54. I make the following findings of fact:

         55.  The Appellant is an Ethiopian, she was  born  on  16  December
             1988.

         56.  She was imprisoned for 10 days in Ethiopia in  2010  and  then
             released.

         57.  She had no further difficulties with the authorities.

         58.  She travelled to the UK to attend a conference as part of  her
             job, on 7 December 2015.

         59.  She applied for asylum on 24 December 2014.

         60.  I consider that the Appellant's account  as  set  out  in  her
             asylum interview and at the hearing lacked credibility for the
             following reasons.

         61.  The imprisonment in 2010 was not related to political activity
             as on the Appellant's own evidence  she  was  not  politically
             active until 2013, when she  started  leafleting  for  Ginbot.
             Thus, this is immaterial to her application.  I pause to  note
             that at the hearing the Appellant did  say  that  during  this
             period of imprisonment she was  slapped,  but  in  her  Asylum
             Interview she stated that she had not been 'mistreated' whilst
             in prison.  I consider her statement about  being  slapped  an
             embellishment to bolster her claim.

         62.  On her own evidence the Appellant was politically active  from
             2013 until she left Ethiopia in December 2015, a period  of  2
             years during which she encountered no  difficulties  with  the
             authorities in Ethiopia.

         63.  The evidence in the form of  flight  details  shows  that  the
             Appellant was due to travel back to Ethiopia  on  13  December
             having arrived on 7 December, attended the conference  over  9
             and 10 December and then taken a couple of days' holiday.  The
             telephone call with her sister apparently  took  place  on  22
             December.  The reason the Appellant was still  in  the  UK  at
             that time was, she said, because she had asked her employer if
             she could extend her  stay.   She  said  that  she  could  not
             remember exactly when she asked this, but it  was  agreed  and
             indeed there are details in the Appellant's bundle  of  a  new
             return flight on 24 December 2015.

         64.  Her account of her telephone call with her sister  was  rather
             vague and confused.  She said that her sister  had  been  held
             for 3 days after having been arrested at the same time as  her
             brother  and  father.    After   release,   her   sister   was
             hospitalised  for  a  period  and  on  release,   called   the
             Appellant.

         65.  The Appellant confirmed that her  sister  was  not  held  with
             either her brother or her father.  Ashe  also  confirmed  that
             her sister had not spoken to either her brother or her  father
             when she called the Appellant on 22 December.  This  begs  the
             question how could the Appellant's sister know what  was  said
             either to the brother or father?  At the Asylum interview  the
             Appellant's evidence was that the arrests  were  made  because
             the family 'cannot bring me back to the authority'.  She said,
             'they asked them to bring me back...' (my emphasis).   At  the
             hearing, she added that  the  authorities  had  come  with  an
             arrest warrant for her.

         66.   But  there  is  some  difficulty  with  this  evidence.   The
             authorities, had they wished to arrest  the  Appellant,  could
             have done so before 7 December 2015.  Further,  if  they  were
             looking  for  her  they  would  presumably  have  had   little
             difficulty discovering her flight  details.   Why  not  simply
             await her return and arrest her as she stepped off the  plane?
             It was not suggested that her  family  were  hiding  her,  the
             authorities had an  arrest  warrant,  so  why  was  there  any
             mention of the family not being able to produce her  to  them?
             The account is simply not credible."

19. It is plain from these paragraphs that the  judge  did  not  take  into
    account whether the appellant was a vulnerable person and  the  impact,
    if any, upon her evidence of her mental health issues.  He  dealt  with
    the latter under  the  heading  "medical  issues"  at  paras  67-73  as
    follows:

         "67. The Appellant's medical evidence is credible.

         68.  I have seen 3 letters all  detailing  an  apparently  serious,
             albeit not fully diagnosed, mental impairment.

         69.  On 25 April 2016, the Appellant  suffered  a  manic  psychotic
             episode and was sectioned under the Mental Health Act.  She is
             reported to have exhibited 'bizarre disinhibited behaviour the
             details of which I do not need to repeat here but they are set
             out in detail in the  letter  of  8  September  2016  from  Dr
             Yerassimou,  Consultant   Psychiatrist,   Cardiff   and   Vale
             University Health Board.

         70.  On 2 June 2016, the Appellant was discharged from hospital and
             prescribed anti-psychotic medication.  She is under  the  care
             of the Cardiff  and  Vale  University  Health  Board's  Crisis
             Resolution and Home Treatment Team which is an alternative  to
             in-patient care, the implication being that without  this  the
             Appellant would be an in-patient.  In mid-2012  the  Appellant
             was receiving daily home visits.

         71.  Dr Yerassimou's diagnosis was that  the  Appellant's  symptoms
             come and go, so for example by late 2016 she was  felt  to  be
             becoming psychotic again,  experiencing  visual  and  auditory
             hallucinations.   It  is  possible  that  the   Appellant   is
             suffering from Bi-polar disorder, but  this  is  difficult  to
             diagnose definitively.

         72.  The Appellant relapsed in February 2017 and  was  admitted  to
             the John Radcliffe hospital in Oxford again under section.

         73.  Dr Yerassimou's opinion, which I unreservedly accept, is  that
             The  Appellant  is  extremely  unwell,   she   needs   ongoing
             psychiatric  input,  she  has  had  2  significant   psychotic
             episodes in less than 12 months and she is at risk should  she
             become ill again.  Dr Yerassimou describes  the  Appellant  as
             having severe and significant health needs."

20. As will be plain, the judge accepted the medical evidence, such that it
    was, set out in three letters:  one  from  Kathryn  Blow,  a  Community
    Mental Health Nurse at the Cardiff and  Vale  University  Health  Board
    dated 12 June 2016 (at page 23 of the  appellant's  bundle),  a  letter
    from Dr Yerassimou, a Consultant Psychiatrist with the Cardiff and Vale
    University Health Board dated 8 September 2016 (at pages 24 and  25  of
    the appellant's bundle) and a further letter from Dr  Yerassimou  dated
    24 May 2017 (contained within the  appeal  file).   Those  letters,  in
    particular the latter two, are accurately summarised by  the  judge  at
    paras 69-73.  As the judge points out, the appellant  has  "severe  and
    significant health needs" which led to her being  sectioned  under  the
    mental health legislation in April 2016 (five  days  after  the  asylum
    interview) and again in February 2017.  She suffers from "manic psychic
    episodes" exhibiting, at the relevant times,  "bizarre"  behaviour  and
    experiencing "visual and auditory  hallucinations".   The  most  recent
    letter states that she is currently prescribed anti-psychotic and anti-
    depressant  medication.   That  letter  also  points  out  that  having
    suffered "two significant psychotic episodes in the space of less  than
    twelve months" that  "stressful  situations  are  one  of  her  relapse
    indicators".

21. There is little doubt that the appellant is, for the  purposes  of  the
    relevant guidance, a "vulnerable" person.  In principle, therefore, the
    guidance  applied.   It  matters  not  that  the   appellant's   (then)
    representatives did not invite the judge to treat the  appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness, it was clearly incumbent upon the judge, given  the
    evidence before him, to consider that issue and had he done so he would
    no doubt have reached the same conclusion as I have that the  appellant
    is indeed a "vulnerable" witness.  It is wholly unclear to me why  this
    issue was not raised before the judge; it plainly should have been.

22. The importance of applying the guidance  in  an  appropriate  case  was
    emphasised by the Court of Appeal in  AM  (Afghanistan).   Indeed,  the
    Senior President of Tribunals, Sir Ernest Ryder (with  whom  Gross  and
    Underhill LJJ agreed) said at [30] that a  "[f]ailure  to  follow  [the
    guidance] will most likely be a material error of law".

23. At  para  [31],  the  Senior  President  set  out,  in  agreement  with
    submissions made on behalf of the Lord Chancellor in  that  case,  five
    key features of the joint Presidential Guidance Note and  the  Practice
    Direction of the Senior  President,  "First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal:
    Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Witnesses (30  October  2008)  as
    follows:

         "31. The PD and  the  Guidance  Note  [Guidance]  provide  detailed
             guidance on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal  to  an
             incapacitated or vulnerable person.  I  agree  with  the  Lord
             Chancellor's submission that there are five key features:

             a.   the early identification of issues  of  vulnerability  is
                  encouraged, if at all  possible,  before  any  substantive
                  hearing through the use of a CMRH  or  pre-hearing  review
                  (Guidance [4] and [5]);

             b.   a person who is incapacitated  or  vulnerable  will  only
                  need to attend as a witness to give  oral  evidence  where
                  the tribunal determines that 'the evidence is necessary to
                  enable the fair hearing of  the  case  and  their  welfare
                  would not be prejudiced by doing so' (PD [2] and  Guidance
                  [8] and [9]);

             c.   where an incapacitated or  vulnerable  person  does  give
                  oral evidence, detailed provision is to be made to  ensure
                  their welfare is protected before and during  the  hearing
                  (PD [6] and [7] and Guidance [10]);

             d.   it is necessary to give special consideration to  all  of
                  the  personal  circumstances  of   an   incapacitated   or
                  vulnerable person in assessing  their  evidence  (Guidance
                  [10.2] to [15]); and

             e.   relevant additional sources of guidance are identified in
                  the Guidance including from international bodies (Guidance
                  Annex A [22] to [27])."

24. Further, at para [21] (agreeing with the submissions made on behalf  of
    the appellant in that  case),  the  Senior  President  dealt  with  the
    importance of considering the circumstances of a  child  or  vulnerable
    witness when assessing their evidence in an asylum claim as follows:

         "21. It is submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  agreed
             basis for allowing the appeal  on  the  merits  reflects  core
             principles of asylum law and practice  which  have  particular
             importance  in  claims  from  children  and  other  vulnerable
             persons namely:

             a.   given the gravity of the consequences of  a  decision  on
                  asylum  and  the   accepted   inherent   difficulties   in
                  establishing the facts of the  claim  as  well  as  future
                  risks, there is a lower standard of proof, expressed as 'a
                  reasonable chance', 'substantial grounds for thinking'  or
                  'a serious possibility';

             b.   while an assessment of  personal  credibility  may  be  a
                  critical  aspect  of  some  claims,  particularly  in  the
                  absence of independent supporting evidence, it is  not  an
                  end in itself or a substitute for the application  of  the
                  criteria for refugee status  which  must  be  holistically
                  assessed;

             c.   the findings of medical experts must be treated  as  part
                  of the holistic assessment: they are not to be treated  as
                  an 'add-on'  and  rejected  as  a  result  of  an  adverse
                  credibility  assessment  or  finding  made  prior  to  and
                  without regard to the medical evidence;

             d.   expert medical evidence  can  be  critical  in  providing
                  explanation for difficulties  in  giving  a  coherent  and
                  consistent account of past events and for identifying  any
                  relevant safeguards required to meet vulnerabilities  that
                  can lead to disadvantage in the determination process, for
                  example, in the ability to give oral testimony  and  under
                  what conditions  (see  the  Guidance  Note  below  and  JL
                  (medical reports - credibility) (China) [2013] UKUT  00145
                  (IAC), at [26] to [27]);

             e.   an appellant's account  of  his  or  her  fears  and  the
                  assessment of an  appellant's  credibility  must  also  be
                  judged in the context of the known objective circumstances
                  and practices of the state in question and a failure to do
                  so can constitute an error of law; and

             f.   in making asylum  decisions,  the  highest  standards  of
                  procedural fairness are required."

25. There was, of course, no assessment  by  the  judge  in  this  case  of
    whether the appellant was a vulnerable witness  and  therefore  whether
    there was any need for procedural safeguards at the hearing,  including
    (as the court in AM (Afghanistan) makes clear) whether it was necessary
    for the appellant to give evidence at all.

26. Further, the judge did not have any regard to  the  appellant's  mental
    health  issues  in  assessing  her  credibility.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant's (then) representative did not, as Ms Profumo  acknowledged,
    make any submissions in that regard, it was, in  my  judgment,  if  the
    guidance  and  approach  emphasised  in  AM  (Afghanistan)  was  to  be
    followed, incumbent upon the judge to take it into  account.   Although
    the evidence before the judge was not in the form of an  expert  report
    specifically addressing the impact upon the appellant's evidence of her
    mental health issues, it did  raise  clear  warning  'flags'  that  her
    evidence should be treated with some caution when it  related  to  what
    she said five days before her condition was  so  severe  that  she  was
    sectioned under the relevant mental health legislation suffering from a
    "manic psychotic episode" when she was  described  as  being  "floridly
    psychotic" such that she became: "fixated on a broom handle  which  she
    believed was holy, she was banging and shouting on the table,  agitated
    and pacing and had multiple grandiose beliefs".

27. In addition, she was experiencing visual and  auditory  hallucinations.
    As the letter of 24 May 2017 from Dr Yerassimou points out,  "stressful
    situations are one of her relapse  indicators".   An  asylum  interview
    would, no doubt, potentially fall within that rubric.

28. I accept that the evidence was not as clearly indicative of a potential
    impact upon the appellant's evidence as is sometimes the case  when  an
    expert's report is produced with that particular  issue  in  mind  (for
    example in AM (Afghanistan) itself  in  relation  to  that  appellant's
    'learning difficulties').  Nevertheless, I am mindful  of  the  central
    importance placed by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AM  (Afghanistan)  of
    dutifully following and applying the relevant guidance in  relation  to
    "vulnerable" witnesses, such as the appellant.  The judge,  of  course,
    did not have the benefit of AM (Afghanistan) the judgment in which  was
    not handed down until a  month  after  the  judge's  determination  was
    promulgated.  Nevertheless, the principles  it  recognises  pre-existed
    the case, derived, as they are, from guidance including  the  important
    joint Presidential Guidance Note.   The  judge  failed  to  apply  that
    guidance and, again mindful of what the Senior President said  at  [30]
    in AM (Afghanistan), I am not persuaded that  his  failure  to  do  so,
    which was a clear error of law, was not material.

29. For these reasons, I accept, on the basis of ground 1, that  the  judge
    materially erred in law.

30. However, in addition I also  accept  the  essence  of  ground  2.   The
    judge's reasoning (at paras 61-66) is relatively brief.  In para 66, he
    clearly doubts the plausibility of the appellant's account  because  he
    could see no reason why, if she were wanted by  the  authorities,  they
    would not have arrested her before she left Ethiopia on 7 December 2015
    or, alternatively, why they did not wait for  her  return  rather  than
    arrest her family.

31. As regards the first point, I  accept  Ms  Profumo's  submission.   The
    appellant's case was that  she  only  came  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities as a result of her family's arrest  and  that  her  brother
    (who was a member of Ginbot 7) told  them  about  her.   That  was,  of
    course, after she left Ethiopia and so there could be  no  question  of
    them arresting her earlier when they were unaware  of  her  involvement
    with Ginbot 7.  There was, as Mr Hibbs pointed out, some evidence  from
    the appellant (set out at para 65) in her interview  which  might  have
    suggested that the authorities  already  knew  about  her  involvement.
    There was, therefore, potentially at least, conflicting  evidence  from
    the appellant.  The judge's brief reasoning in paras 65 and 66 does not
    seek to grapple with that inconsistency and  provide  reasons  why  the
    judge accepted that the authorities knew about her  involvement  before
    she left Ethiopia.

32.  In  addition,  the   judge's   rhetorical   questions,   founding   an
    implausibility conclusion that the authorities could  have  waited  for
    her to return from the UK to arrest her and that there was,  therefore,
    no need to arrest  her  family,  are  speculative  in  the  absence  of
    background or other evidence that the Ethiopian authorities were likely
    to await her return (assuming they would be able to know when she  were
    to return) and that they would not pre-emptively arrest her  family  to
    discover her whereabouts or to further their interest in the appellant.
     In  the  absence  of  supporting  background  evidence,  I  accept  Ms
    Profumo's submission that the rhetorical question posed  by  the  judge
    could equally  lead  to  a  plausible  answer  that  would  favour  the
    appellant.

33. For these reasons, I am also satisfied that ground 2 is established.

Decision

34. Consequently, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's decision to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material  error
    of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

35. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required,  the  appropriate
    disposal of the appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    hearing de novo before a judge other than Judge Brewer.

36. In the light of the "vulnerability" issues raised  in  respect  of  the
    appellant, although it is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal, it  may
    well  be  appropriate,  as  the  Senior  President   suggests   in   AM
    (Afghanistan), that a Case Management Review hearing to consider  what,
    if any, evidence concerning the appellant's  mental  health  is  to  be
    adduced and, if appropriate, to agree any ground rules for the  conduct
    of the hearing.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              26, March 2018
