
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/04691/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th October 2018                     |On 7th November 2018               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                          Mr broosk burhan ramadhan
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Gardner
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 28th April  1994  is  a  citizen  of  Iraq.   The
    Appellant who  was  present  was  represented  by  Miss  Gardner.   The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Howells a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum and that application  had
    been refused by the Respondent on 27th March 2018.  The  Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Page sitting at Newport on 15th May 2018.  The judge  had
    refused  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.   Application  for
    permission to appeal had been made  and  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  had
    granted permission on 4th July 2018.   It  was  said  that  it  was  an
    arguable error for the judge not to have  dealt  with  the  Appellant's
    humanitarian protection claim under  the  Qualification  Directive  and
    failing to consider the Appellant's position  on  return  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker and failing to refer to the country guidance case  extant
    at that time.  Directions were issued and the matter comes before me in
    accordance with those directions firstly to decide whether an error  of
    law had been made by the First-tier Tribunal.

The Proceedings

 3. Mr Howells conceded that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had  not
    considered Article 15(c) in respect of any matter  of  the  Appellant's
    return to his  home  area  of  Kirkuk  nor  thereafter  had  looked  if
    necessary at the issue of internal  relocation  within  Iraq.   It  was
    conceded that a material error of law had been made and it  was  agreed
    by both representatives that the matter needed to be  returned  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Decision

 4. In accordance with the concession made above I  find  that  a  material
    error of law was made by the judge in  this  case  and  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Anonymity not retained.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

