
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04631/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2018                            |On 7 February 2018            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                  sipho [n]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muzenda, Longfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on [ ] 1989 who appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 28
    April 2017 to refuse  him  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection.   The
    appellant arrived in the UK on a Tier 4 student visa  on  13  September
    2015 valid until 17 November 2016.  The appellant claimed asylum  on  7
    November 2016.  In a  decision  dated  26  April  2017  the  respondent
    refused the appellant's claim.  In a decision and  reasons  promulgated
    on 7 July 2017, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Onoufriou  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.


Grounds of Appeal


 2. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal  with  permission  on  the
    grounds that:


    (i)  The judge erred in failing to correctly apply the case law  in  HS
         (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00094  with
         respect to risk assessment at the Harare Airport.


    (ii) The appellant argued that  the  judge  misunderstood  the  country
         guidance  and  in  particular  [34]  CM   (EM   country   guidance;
         disclosure) Zimbabwe [2013] UKUT 59 in relying in particular on the
         headnote item (6) which says that a returnee to Bulawayo  will  not
         be at risk even if he has a significant MDC profile.


    (iii)     It was submitted that the judge erred in appearing  to  limit
         the risk to only MDC activists with a significant profile which was
         contrary to the additional risk category identified in HS of  those
         seen to be active in association with human rights or civil society
         organisations.  It was submitted that  the  two  organisations  the
         appellant is active in, ROHR and Zimbabwe Vigil, were civil society
         organisations and the judge accepted the evidence of the  witnesses
         to that effect.


 3. Although it was also argued that the judge may well have failed to have
    regard to the background information in  relation  to  the  significant
    increase in levels of violence, relying instead on evidence in 2013, Mr
    Muzenda made no further submissions in this regard and in my view  such
    a ground was not properly arguable.  The judge relied on the up to date
    information and evidence before him as well  as  the  country  guidance
    cases and the judge set  out  the  information  including  the  Country
    Policy and Information Note Zimbabwe dated January 2017.


 4. Mr Muzenda initially attempted to expand the grounds of  appeal  before
    me, arguing that the judge failed to make adequate findings in relation
    to internal relocation.  However he accepted that  those  grounds  were
    not before the Tribunal and not Robinson obvious  and  did  not  pursue
    this further, confirming before me that the only ground pursued was  in
    relation to the appellant's treatment at the airport.


Error of Law Discussion


 5. For the reasons set out below I do not find that any error of  law  has
    been made out.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a careful and well-reasoned
    decision, found that the appellant's claimed fear  of  persecution  did
    not arise until, at the earliest October 2016, in  the  United  Kingdom
    and that the appellant had made it clear that his fear  of  persecution
    was not based on his previous activities in Zimbabwe.  The  judge  went
    on to accept,  at  [32]  that  the  appellant  was  a  member  of  ROHR
    ("Restoration of Human Rights") and that he was a  member  of  Zimbabwe
    Vigil and that the appellant is a  publicity  officer  for  ROHR.   The
    judge also accepted that the appellant had taken part  in  a  sponsored
    bike ride to raise funds for human rights activities  in  Zimbabwe  and
    accepted the evidence of additional witnesses, Mr Tapa and  Ms  Benton,
    regarding the activities of ROHR and Zimbabwe Vigil.  However the judge
    identified that the key issue was whether:


         "... the appellant's activities on  behalf  of  both  organisations
         have brought  him  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  Zimbabwean
         authorities and whether  it  will  result  in  his  persecution  if
         returned to Zimbabwe."


 6. The judge went on to find that it was explained  by  Mr  Tapa  and  the
    appellant that ROHR is a non-political human  rights  organisation  and
    that the appellant accepted that he had not been an MDC activist in the
    UK and that he was not even a member but only a supporter  of  the  MDC
    whilst he was in Zimbabwe.  The judge found that there was no  evidence
    of any persecution by the Zimbabwean authorities of any members of ROHR
    on return to Zimbabwe.


 7. Although Mr Muzenda relied on the appellant's bundle before the  First-
    tier Tribunal including a letter from Zimbabwe Vigil on 22  April  2017
    which contained extracts from  the  internet  in  relation  to  claimed
    difficulties experienced by Zimbabwe Vigil returnees and a letter  from
    Mr Tapa in relation to the claimed  difficulties  experienced  by  ROHR
    after visiting Zimbabwe I am not satisfied that that demonstrates  that
    the judge made any material error in finding that there was no evidence
    of persecution of such activists.


 8. The judge also based those findings  in  the  context  of  the  country
    guidance of CM that it is primarily MDC and political opponents of ZANU-
    PF and Mugabe that may be in some circumstances be at risk if  returned
    to  Zimbabwe.   The  judge  had  also  taken  into  consideration   the
    background evidence provided by the appellant including that  political
    violence increased dramatically in 2016 and the judge reminded  himself
    that it was in that background that he had to  assess  the  appellant's
    case.


 9. The Tribunal went on to find that, in line with CM, which  adopted  the
    findings in EM and Others (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011]  UKUT  98  (as
    amended), a returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF including the  security  forces  even  if  he  has
    significant  MDC  profile  and  that  those  persons  without   ZANU-PF
    connections  returning  from  the  UK  are  highly  unlikely  to   face
    significant difficulty from ZANU-PF even  if  an  MDC  supporter.   The
    Tribunal also took into consideration that Bulawayo is  in  Matabeland.
    The appellant speaks  Ndebele  as  well  as  Shona  and  would  not  be
    discriminated again.  The Tribunal took  into  consideration  that  the
    economy of Zimbabwe had improved markedly and therefore the appellant's
    return would be less problematic especially as a  young,  fit,  healthy
    and well-educated male.  The Tribunal  also  took  into  consideration,
    relying on paragraph 4(d) of the headnote of CM,  that  such  a  person
    would not be at an increased risk.


10. Paragraph 4(d) of the headnote in CM provides as follows:


         "The fresh evidence regarding the position at the point  of  return
         does not indicate any increase in risk since the  country  guidance
         was given in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT
         00094.   On  the  contrary  the  available  evidence  such  as  the
         treatment of those who have been returned to Harare  Airport  since
         2007 and the absence of any reliable evidence of risk  there  means
         that there is no justification for extending the scope of who might
         be regarded by the CIO as an MDC activist."


11. It is misconceived to assert that the judge did not properly apply  the
    country guidance (including HS (returning asylum seekers) as relied  on
    in CM) or assess the appellant's evidence in light  of  that  guidance,
    when it is evident from the judge's findings  at  [33],  that  that  is
    precisely what he did.


12. The headnote of HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007]  UKAIT
    00094 provides as follows:


         "2.  The findings in respect of risk categories in  SM  and  Others
             (MDC - Internal flight - risk categories) Zimbabwe  CG  [2005]
             UKIAT 00100, as adopted, affirmed and supplemented in AA (Risk
             for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061  are
             adopted and reaffirmed. The Tribunal  identifies  one  further
             risk category, being those seen to be  active  in  association
             with  human  rights  or  civil  society  organisations   where
             evidence suggests that the particular  organisation  has  been
             identified by the authorities as a critic or opponent  of  the
             Zimbabwean regime.


         3.    The  process  of  screening  returning   passengers   is   an
             intelligence led process  and  the  CIO  will  generally  have
             identified from the passenger manifest in advance, based  upon
             such intelligence, those  passengers  in  whom  there  is  any
             possible interest.  The fact of having made  an  asylum  claim
             abroad is not something that  in  itself  will  give  rise  to
             adverse interest on return.


         4.   The Tribunal adopts  and  reaffirms  the  findings  in  AA  in
             respect of the general absence of real  risk  associated  with
             any monitoring of returnees that might take place  after  such
             persons have passed through the airport and returned to  their
             home area or re-established themselves in a new area."


13. It was not disputed by Mr Avery that if the appellant  were  identified
    at the airport and subject to the second stage interrogation at  Harare
    then he would be at risk of persecution.  Although CM confirmed that HS
    still applied, this has to be read in light of CM which identified that
    generally a returnee even if an MDC member or  supporter  returning  to
    Matabeleland would not generally be at risk.  It is important  to  note
    that the process is intelligence led.  As already identified the  judge
    was not satisfied that the appellant was a member of MDC or that  there
    were any MDC related activities.   The  judge  found  that  whilst  the
    appellant had a position of publicity officer for ROHR:


         "His activities do not appear to be to such an  extent  that  would
         have concerned the Zimbabwean authorities and he appears  to  be  a
         low profile activist.  As indicated above, even MDC activists of no
         significant profile would  not  face  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF ...".


14. The judge further noted that there were significantly less  politically
    motivated violence in Zimbabwe than previously, as  identified  by  CM.
    Although, as  already  identified,  Mr  Muzenda  pointed  to  the  oral
    evidence, and the evidence of the appellant's activities in the UK  and
    the letters from Zimbabwe Vigil ROHR Zimbabwe  which  pointed  to  some
    claimed difficulties in Zimbabwe, there was no error in the  Tribunal's
    findings, on the basis of all the evidence  before  it;  there  was  no
    error in the ultimate conclusion that the appellant was no more than  a
    low level activist and not at risk.   The  appellant's  claim  was  not
    based on any activities in Zimbabwe.  There was  no  adequate  evidence
    before the First Tribunal to suggest that the organisations with  which
    the appellant is associated with in the UK "have been identified by the
    authorities as critical opponents of the Zimbabwean regime".


15. The Tribunal made adequate and sustainable findings as to the low level
    of the appellant's  activities  in  the  UK.   The  Tribunal  did  'not
    consider that those activities are at such a level as would attract the
    attending of the Zimbabwean  authorities.'   Given  those  findings  it
    cannot be said that there was any adequate evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to suggest  that  those  activities  would  come  to  the
    attention of the Zimbabwean authorities or that the appellant would  be
    identified at the airport (or elsewhere) as someone of concern and that
    he would therefore be at an increased risk.  The appellant's grounds of
    appeal are not made out.


Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.


No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date: 2 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

