

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/04299/2017

                                                PA/04145/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 11 October  2017                   |          On 13 October 2017         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                                   GK & EB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Paxton of counsel, instructed by Virgo
                    Consultancy Services
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellants, who  are  nationals  of  Georgia,  have  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Povey who, by a determination promulgated on 21 June  2017,  dismissed
      their appeal against refusal of their asylum and human right claim.


   2. The judge recorded  the  immigration  history  of  the  appellants  as
      follows. The first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 and
      was admitted as a visitor for six months. He overstayed that leave and
      has remained unlawfully ever since. The second appellant:
           "... by her own admission, submitted false information to secure
           her visa to enter the UK in  2006.  She  was  not,  as  claimed,
           married and the information relating to her claimed husband  was
           all false. As such, when she entered the UK in 2007,  her  entry
           was unlawful and she has remained in the UK without  immigration
           status ever since"
      The parties are, of course, aware of the detail of the  case  advanced
      in support of the appellants' claim and,  for  present  purposes,  the
      following summary provided by the judge will suffice:
           "The first appellant  is  Ossetian  and  was  threatened  whilst
           living in Georgia in 1993. He believes he would be  at  risk  on
           return to Georgia by reason of his ethnicity"
      Pausing there, the judge rejected that claim and  as  Mr  Paxon  makes
      clear that he does not pursue that aspect  of  the  first  appellant's
      claim, I need say no more about it. The  claim  that  is  pursued  was
      summarised thus:
           "The appellants are first cousins and in a relationship akin  to
           marriage. That relationship is against Georgian law and has  led
           to death threats  from  the  second  appellant's  family.  Those
           threats would be carried out if they returned to Georgia and the
           state would not protect them.
           The appellants have established family and private lives in  the
           UK and the respondent's decisions unlawfully interfere with  the
           same, contrary to article 8 of the ECHR."


   3. The respondent refused the claim because she did not accept  that  the
      appellants were in a relationship together as they claimed to  be  and
      did not accept they  had  been  threatened  by  their  families  as  a
      consequence. The claim on the basis or rights protected by  article  8
      ECHR was refused because the appellants did not meet the  requirements
      of the rules  and  the  respondent  saw  nothing  disclosed  by  their
      application that called for a grant of  leave  outside  the  rules  to
      secure an outcome compatible with article 8.


   4. Although the judge accepted that the appellant were, as  they  claimed
      to be, in a relationship together, he dismissed the appeal  on  asylum
      grounds  because,  for  the  detailed   reasons   set   out   in   his
      determination, he did not accept to be true any part of their  account
      of being at risk on return from their respective families or from  the
      consequences of societal disapproval of such  a  relationship  between
      first cousins. He reached that conclusion because, as he explained  in
      some detail at paragraph 40 of his determination, the  appellants  had
      given a significantly contradictory and inconsistent  account  of  the
      threats that were claimed to have been made by family members whereas,
      if those threats had been made, it would be  reasonable  to  expect  a
      consistent account to have been given. He drew together his conclusion
      on the protection claim at paragraph 52, saying this:


           "The appellants are not at risk on return to Georgia  by  reason
           of their relationship. There was insufficient evidence of either
           legal or societal  opposition  to  relationships  between  first
           cousins. As found,  any  threats  from  the  second  appellant's
           family were speculative and, in any event, there was evidence of
           sufficiency  of   protection   available   from   the   Georgian
           authorities. I was not satisfied to the required  standard  that
           the second appellant's brother had  any  influence  over  anyone
           else in Georgia or had any influence in  any  area  of  Georgia.
           There is no reason advanced (other than  the  brother's  claimed
           influence) as to why the appellants could not live in a part  of
           Georgia away from their families, if they so wished."


   5. As for the article 8 claim, the judge  said  that  as  the  appellants
      would return to Georgia together, there would be no interference  with
      their enjoyment of the family life he accepted existed  between  them.
      The judge made a specific finding of  fact  that  they  would  not  be
      "prohibited from continuing their relationship in Georgia  ...  either
      by the state or the community...".


   6. The first  appellant's  article  8  claim  was  cast  wider  than  the
      relationship with the second appellant:


           "The first appellant has two children. One lives in Georgia, the
           other in  Birmingham  with  her  mother  and  step-father.  Both
           children are Georgian nationals. The first appellant has contact
           with both children  (albeit  remotely  regarding  his  child  in
           Georgia). He claimed to try to see his daughter in the  UK  most
           weekends, which was confirmed by the second appellant.  However,
           there was little detailed  information  about  his  relationship
           with his daughter and there was no evidence  from  his  daughter
           (who is 14 years old) or her mother. .... No reasons were  given
           that would prevent his daughter travelling  to  Georgia  without
           restriction (whether to visit or settle).
           ...
           I was also  provided  with  little  detail  of  the  appellants'
           claimed private lives in  the  UK,  save  that  they  have  some
           friends in the UK and have attended social gatherings of  fellow
           Georgians."

   7. Having assembled all the relevant information and evidence relied upon
      by the appellants in respect of  their  article  8  claim,  the  judge
      concluded that there would be no impermissible infringement of article
      8 if the appellants were required to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      nature of the contact between the first  appellant  and  his  daughter
      would have to change but, as the judge pointed out:


           "The first appellant has been able to  maintain  a  relationship
           with his other child, despite being in a different country  from
           her for 15 years."
      The second appellant's nephew came to the United Kingdom in  2016  and
      has been living with the appellants but that was  not  a  relationship
      amounting to family life and any interference would be  proportionate.
      There was scant information concerning the  appellants'  private  life
      and, given that any private life  that  exists  has  been  established
      whilst they were unlawfully present, little weight could be  given  to
      it.
   8. The grounds for seeking permission to appeal, drafted by Mr Paxton who
      appeared  also  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   are   commendably
      succinct. There are two grounds. The first  ground  is  that  although
      attention was drawn to the prohibition on marriage between cousins  in
      Georgia, the judge makes no reference to that. Instead, he finds  that
      there is no  evidence  of  widespread  societal  disapproval  of  such
      relationships. Mr Paxton's submission is that if the judge  had  taken
      account of the fact that such marriages were not permitted in Georgia,
      that would have fed into the judge's assessment of whether  there  was
      societal disapproval and he may have concluded that such relationships
      were considered "taboo". The second  ground  is  that  the  judge  had
      insufficient regard to the first appellant's length  of  residence  in
      the United Kingdom and the "impact upon the emotional wellbeing of his
      daughter, with whom he is in regular face to face contact.


   9. Permission was granted to argue both of those grounds.


  10. At paragraph 36 of his determination the judge said:


           "I am not satisfied that the appellants' relationship  would  be
           in breach of Georgian law."
      In the refusal letter, the respondent said:
           "... it  is  accepted  that  marriage  between  two  cousins  is
           prohibited in Georgia..."
      Those statements assert different things and the latter statement does
      not establish that the first statement  by  the  judge  was  factually
      incorrect. It is one  thing  to  prohibit  marriage  between  cousins,
      which, literally, means no more than that persons so  related  face  a
      prohibition against marriage so that they cannot become man and  wife.
      It may be significant, in that regard that it has not  been  suggested
      that the appellants have sought to be married in the  United  Kingdom,
      where there is no such  prohibition  against  marriage  between  first
      cousins. It is another thing altogether to say Georgian law makes such
      a relationship unlawful or  seeks  to  criminalise  it  or  to  impose
      penalties upon those who  engage  in  such  relationships.  Mr  Paxton
      developed this ground in oral submissions by suggesting that the  fact
      that the law prohibited such marriages may well mean that  this  would
      impact upon the level of societal disapproval so that the  judge  left
      out of account a material consideration and so fell into legal  error.
      The difficulty with that submission is that Mr  Paxton  accepted  that
      there was no evidence  before  the  judge  as  to  how  such  societal
      disapproval  has  or  might  manifest  itself  nor  that  any  adverse
      consequences  had  been  visited  upon  persons  conducting   such   a
      relationship in Georgia.
  11. When pressed to identify any evidence of societal disapproval that was
      before the judge, Mr Paxton pointed to the witness  statement  of  the
      second appellant in which she said that she had brought shame upon her
      family. This, plainly, is not cogent evidence of societal  disapproval
      such as to render irrational the rejection by the judge  of  any  such
      risk. Mr Paxton argued that the main focus of the  claim  was  on  the
      risk from family members in Georgia but, on the findings made  by  the
      judge, that was not a real risk faced by the appellants and  if  there
      be any difficulty, the availability of  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      from the authorities and the ability to relocate  elsewhere  that  the
      area in which family members live were a complete answer in themselves
      to the claim.


  12. For these reasons, I am entirely satisfied that the  first  ground  is
      not made out.


  13.  The  second  ground  concerns  the  article   8   claim   and   that,
      understandably, is focussed on the  first  appellant,  as  the  second
      appellant's claim was, by any view, a weak one that  had  no  prospect
      whatever of succeeding, for  the  reasons  given  by  the  judge.  Two
      complaints are made in respect of the approach taken by the  judge  to
      the article 8  claim  of  the  first  appellant.  The  first  is  that
      insufficient regard was had by the judge to his length  of  residence.
      That is not arguable because it is plain that the judge  had  that  in
      mind because at paragraph 53.2, where he  considers  this,  he  refers
      specifically to the fact that the first appellant has spent  15  years
      in the United Kingdom. The second complaint, that the  judge  has  not
      had sufficient  regard  to  the  impact  upon  the  first  appellant's
      daughter in the United Kingdom is also not  made  out.  As  the  judge
      observed, the appellant had been able to maintain a relationship  with
      his daughter in Georgia despite being absent 15 years and there is  no
      reason at all to suppose that he  cannot  similarly  maintain  contact
      with his daughter in the United Kingdom, even if that  will  be  of  a
      different nature. The judge noted the absence  of  any  evidence  from
      that child or her  mother  about  the  current  arrangements  and  his
      conclusions were plainly open to him on  the  evidence  the  appellant
      chose to put before him.


  14. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge made no error of law,
      material or otherwise.
   Summary of decision:
  15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey made no material error of law and  his
      decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.


  16. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 12 October 2017


