
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04364/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 April 2019                       |On 13 May 2019                        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                   m a k c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss F Shaw of Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal M A Khan who in a  decision  promulgated  on  5
    February 2019 dismissed her appeal against a decision of the  Secretary
    of State, to refuse to grant asylum, made on 15 September 2017.

2.   The appellant entered Britain on 14 September 2017 and claimed  asylum.
     Her application was refused.  Her claim was that she was a  Sikh  from
    Afghanistan and  that  the  family  had  been  harassed  there  and  in
    particular by a Muslim man named BS who had threatened her  father  and
    demanded money from him.  They had beaten up the appellant's father and
    had killed her mother and the local Gurdawara had made arrangements for
    the appellant, her father and brother to go to India.  They had entered
    India in 2014.  While in India the appellant's father  had  arranged  a
    marriage for her with another Afghani Sikh (SC) who  had  discretionary
    leave to remain in Britain.

3.   The appellant claimed that she, with the help of an agent, had  entered
    Britain but that her father and her brother had to stay behind  on  the
    route when they were separated as the agent could not take them all  at
    the same time.  The appellant had travelled with her young daughter who
    had been born on 29 March 2017 and therefore was  under  6  months  old
    when she arrived.

4.   The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant  was  a  Sikh,
    and furthermore did not accept that the appellant's  relationship  with
    her husband was genuine and subsisting, and furthermore concluded  that
    she would not face persecution if returned to  Afghanistan  as  it  was
    pointed out that the threats that had been made had been  made  to  her
    father and not to her.  Indeed, the Secretary of State did  not  accept
    that the appellant would be returning to Afghanistan as a  lone  female
    with a dependent child as it was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    brother and father had fled Afghanistan, nor was it accepted  that  the
    appellant's mother had been killed as a result of the threats that  she
    and her family had experienced.  It was stated it was  considered  that
    she could return to her family in Kabul and that they would be able  to
    provide her with male protection and financial support.

5.   Prior to the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal directions  were  given
    by Judge Seelhoff to ascertain the status of the  appellant's  husband.
    He directed that there be evidence  regarding  the  rationale  for  the
    grant of leave to the appellant's husband and an indication of  whether
    it was accepted there were significant obstacles to his integration  on
    return and an indication of whether the  appellant's  husband  and  his
    brother, with whom he had travelled to Britain, were accepted as  Sikhs
    from Afghanistan.

6.   The respondent wrote  to  the  Tribunal  on  28  December  2018  giving
    details of the immigration history of HL the brother of the appellant's
    husband, on whom the appellant's husband was dependent.  It was  stated
    that they had both been granted discretionary leave as part of a review
    completed by the Older Live Cases Unit (OCLU) which was  a  unit  which
    sought to review cases under exceptional circumstances when  an  asylum
    or human  rights  claim  has  been  refused,  appeal  rights  had  been
    exhausted  and  no  further  submission  existed.   In  granting   such
    discretionary leave it was stated that the terms of paragraph 353B  had
    been taken into consideration and therefore the Secretary of State  had
    taken into account the character, conduct and  associations,  including
    any  criminal  records  relating  to  the  appellant's   husband,   and
    compliance with other grants of leave as well as the length of time  in
    Britain accrued for reasons beyond the migrant's  control  after  their
    human rights or asylum claim had been submitted or refused.  The letter
    however did state:-

     "It has not at any time been  accepted  by  the  SSHD  that  there  are
         significant obstacles for Mr. HLC  or  for  Mr.  SC  to  return  to
         Afghanistan.

     It was accepted that Mr. HLC was an Afghan national and a Sikh".

The Hearing of the Appeal

7.   Judge Khan found that the appellant was a Sikh and by implication  that
    her marriage was genuine  and  subsisting.  He  noted  the  appellant's
    evidence that her husband had set up a business  in  Britain  and  that
    they did not have any relatives left in Afghanistan, there  was  no-one
    there to return to, and moreover that her husband could not  set  up  a
    business in Afghanistan because they were  at  risk  there  because  of
    their religion.  She had stated that there was nothing she could do  as
    she had young children and would be a lone woman  in  Afghanistan  (the
    appellant had a second child born on 2 May 2018  by  the  date  of  the
    hearing).  The judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  husband  had  been
    granted discretionary leave in 2015 to 2016 and 2016 to 2017  and  that
    his current leave would expire in November  2019.   He  noted  evidence
    that they had married in a Gurdawara in  India  while  the  appellant's
    husband had been on a visit there.

8.   The judge did not find that the appellant's fears of BS  were  credible
    and did not accept that her mother had been killed.  He considered that
    she had made up  the  evidence  regarding  the  death  of  her  mother,
    reaching that conclusion having referred to the fact that the appellant
    had said that she was aged 17 when she had left Afghanistan which would
    mean that she had left in 2012 but had then stated that they  had  left
    Afghanistan in 2014.  The judge stated that had her mother been  killed
    the appellant would have been aware of her age when that had  happened.
    Moreover, the judge did not  accept  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
    Indian authorities had told her, her father and her brother  that  they
    would have to leave India.  He did not accept the appellant's  evidence
    that her husband had gone to India and had met her by chance  and  that
    it was not until after he had returned to Britain that the  family  had
    been told to go back to Afghanistan by the Indian authorities  and  her
    father had arranged for them to travel 6,000 miles to  Britain  without
    her husband knowing about her travels.  He stated  that  he  found  the
    appellant's story utterly incredible.  He stated  he  did  not  believe
    anything the appellant had to  say  about  a  threat  to  her  life  in
    Afghanistan or that she was told to return to Afghanistan by the Indian
    authorities.   He  placed  weight  on  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  He placed  weight
    on the fact that the appellant had not provided evidence to  show  what
    her husband's immigration status was.

9.   In paragraph 53 the judge  briefly  mentioned  two  expert  reports  by
    Professor Magnus Marsden and Dr Jasit Singh  which  he  stated  were  a
    general nature of the situation in Afghanistan not specifically related
    to the appellant's claim.  Professor Marsden had stated that there  are
    about 150 Hindu and Sikh families in Kabul.  He  stated  that  she  had
    failed to establish she would be  persecuted  in  Afghanistan  or  that
    there was a real risk of persecution on return to the country of origin
    and therefore the Secretary of State would not  be  in  breach  of  the
    Refugee Convention if the appellant were returned to  Afghanistan.   He
    found, in effect, that she was of no interest to anyone there.

10.  In considering the issue of the appellant's rights under the  ECHR  the
    judge referred to Section 117B and appeared to dismiss her  application
    merely by considering the factors set out therein.

11.  The grounds of appeal on which Miss Shaw relied argued that  the  judge
    had made various errors of fact which included the assertion  that  the
    appellant's husband had been aware that she would come to Britain,  but
    more importantly, that the judge had not applied the  country  guidance
    case of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan  CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00595 (IAC) and had failed  to  take  into  account  the  material
    evidence and to properly consider "the issue of the appellant's  wife's
    ability  to  practise  her  religion  freely  in  Afghanistan"   (sic).
    Moreover, it was argued that he had failed  to  properly  consider  the
    background material before him.

12.   Having  referred  to  the  findings  in  relation  to  Sikh  women  in
    Afghanistan the grounds went on to refer to considerable evidence  from
    UNHCR regarding to the circumstances in Kabul  for  civilians  and  the
    UNHCR guidelines for assessing the international  protection  needs  of
    asylum seekers from Afghanistan.  It was also asserted that  the  judge
    could, in any event, depart from existing country guidance if there was
    credible fresh evidence, and in that regard referred  to  the  evidence
    from UNHCR in the bundle.  The grounds also refer to the deprivation of
    education or employment and say that  the  judge  should  not  properly
    consider the issues of Article 8 of the ECHR.

13.  At the hearing of the appeal  before  me  Miss  Shaw  referred  to  the
    grounds of appeal stating that the judge had based his  conclusions  on
    the assumption that the appellant's husband would return to Kabul  when
    in fact it was unlikely that he would leave as he was  on  a  route  to
    settlement.  That, she stated, had not been considered by the judge  in
    the First-tier.  Moreover, she argued that the judge had been wrong  to
    find  that  the  appellant  would  be  of  no  interest  to  anyone  in
    Afghanistan, pointing out that she would be  a  lone  woman  travelling
    with two very young children aged 2 and just under 1 year and that this
    was something which would mean that it would be difficult  for  her  to
    reintegrate  into  Afghanistan.   He  had  erred,  moreover,   by   not
    considering the background evidence.

14.   In  reply,  Miss  Kenny  stated  that  the   judge's   findings   were
    sufficiently reasoned.  With  regard  to  the  fact  that  he  had  not
    considered the terms of the judgment in TG, that was not material.   TG
    had emphasised that each case was  fact-sensitive  and  the  judge  had
    properly considered that the appellant would not be at risk on  return.
    In any event, she stated that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  could
    return to Afghanistan as  a  family  unit,  obtain  accommodation,  and
    indeed the appellant's brother-in-law had had a business there and  her
    husband would be able to access employment.  She accepted there were no
    specific findings regarding the appellant's father but stated  that  it
    was clear that the appellant could not meet the threshold  for  showing
    that she would face persecution on return.  The children were young and
    therefore no Section 55 issues would arise.  It was likely, she argued,
    that the family had had a business in Afghanistan previously.

15.  She pointed to the fact that that letter of refusal  had  not  accepted
    that the appellant's father had left Afghanistan.

Discussion

16.  I consider there were material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the
    Judge.  I note that he made no clear finding regarding the  appellant's
    father, but the Secretary  of  State  appeared  to  consider  that  the
    appellant's father would be in Afghanistan.  That,  however,  does  not
    sit easily with the belief  that  the  appellant's  marriage  had  been
    arranged by her father and her uncle in India which  would  imply  that
    her father was in India then.  Moreover, I consider it an error of  law
    for the judge not to have  engaged  with,  or  appeared  to  apply  the
    provisions of the relevant country guidance case  to  this  appellant's
    circumstances.  As Miss Kenny argued, every case is case sensitive  and
    I consider that clear and reasoned findings as to  what  the  appellant
    would return to in Afghanistan are required, and indeed for that it was
    necessary for the judge to have  engaged  with  the  very  considerable
    background evidence before him, and indeed the expert reports to  which
    he makes too brief reference.  I further consider that the judge  erred
    in making the bold assertion that the appellant would be  returning  to
    Afghanistan with her husband and children.  The  reality  is  that  her
    husband does have leave to remain  and  may  well  be  on  a  route  to
    indefinite leave.  If that is  the  case  the  judge  is  in  error  to
    consider that the appellant would be returning to Afghanistan with  her
    husband.  There appears to be nothing before him to indicate that,  and
    indeed the appellant's husband was not asked why he could not return to
    Afghanistan, but in any event, findings need to be made as  to  whether
    or not the appellant's husband could return to Afghanistan with her and
    what would be available for the family there.

17.   I consider that these are material errors of law in  the  decision  of
    the Immigration Judge and  in  these  circumstances  I  set  aside  his
    decision and direct that the appeal proceed to a further hearing on all
    issues.  I would emphasise that in  particular  there  needs  to  be  a
    detailed assessment of the appellant's rights under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR given that she has two young children.  I do not consider that the
    judge  was  correct  merely  to  confine  his  consideration   of   the
    appellant's rights under  Article  8  to  an  application  for  various
    factors set out in Section 117B.


Notice of Decision

     The decision of the First-tier Judge is set aside.

Directions.

   1. This appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh at Hatton Cross.

   2. A Pushtu interpreter is required.

   3. Time estimate - three hours.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 5 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy






