
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04115/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st September 2018                  |On 25th October 2018                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [A C]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss S Vidyadharan (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie, which was promulgated on 21st June 2018, following a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 1st May  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    appears to have dismissed the appeal on asylum  grounds,  but  to  have
    allowed it on human rights grounds, whereupon the Respondent  Secretary
    of State subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  1st
    January 1991.  The essence of his claim was that he was a member of the
    BNP since 2005 when he was approximately 14 years of age  and  that  he
    had remained a member  until  he  left  Bangladesh  in  2010.   He  had
    submitted,  he  claimed  letters  from  the  BNP  testifying   to   his
    membership, and  several  photographs,  suggesting  that  he  had  been
    involved in demonstrations organised by the  BNP.   He  claims  he  was
    attacked in Bangladesh because he was a member of the BNP and sustained
    stab wounds and injuries.

The Judge's Determination

 3. The judge heard evidence from an official from the BNP in the  UK  who,
    when asked if he knew the name of the Appellant staggeringly  suggested
    that he did not know who the Appellant was.  The  judge  also  observed
    that the Appellant had no photos of his UK activities in the BNP before
    14th August 2017, which was after he had made  his  asylum  claim.   He
    also had not made his asylum claim at the earliest opportunity.

 4. The judge went on to conclude that the Appellant  did  not  manifest  a
    profile of a person who was an active member of the BNP.   He  did  not
    even know what the 18 point programme of the BNP was.  Moreover, it was
    not possible for the BNP to take on a  member  aged  14  on  a  one-off
    payment, as the Appellant claimed.

 5. The judge also stated that:-

         "A  feature  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  in  my   opinion
         significantly undermines the credibility of his claim to have  been
         a BNP member, is that the BNP  official  that  he  called  to  give
         evidence at this hearing was asked by  the  Tribunal  to  give  the
         Appellant's name.  He was given an adequate opportunity  to  gather
         his thoughts on the point but he failed to recall the name  of  the
         Appellant.  In my opinion the only reasonable inference to be drawn
         is that the  evidence  of  this  witness  that  he  has  known  the
         Appellant for a number of years, through his participation  in  BNP
         activities, is fabricated" (paragraph 11(4)).

 6. The judge concluded by the observation that:-

         "I struggled to find the reason why, amongst the  several  thousand
         members the BNP of his age, this Appellant should  be  singled  out
         for persecution to the extent that almost  eight  years  after  his
         departure the Awami league would still seek  to  persecute  him  in
         targeting him individually.  I cannot accept that there is anything
         at all in his past profile, that justifies a level of intensity  of
         interest in him ..." (see paragraph 11(5)).

 7. At the end of the determination the judge said that:-

         "even if one takes the Appellant's case at its highest, he would in
         my opinion fail to establish that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
         expect him to relocate to a place of safety beyond the reach of the
         Awami league and in particular those he claims are still after him"
         (see paragraph 13).

 8. The judge's last paragraph of the determination is that:-

         "I am satisfied on the basis of the findings I have made, that  the
         Awami league and the authorities would  not  manifest  any  adverse
         interest in this Appellant.  He does not have any  profile  of  any
         activities prior to his arrival in the UK ..." (paragraph 14).

 9. Under the heading "Decision", the  judge  then  wrote  "The  appeal  is
    dismissed on asylum grounds".   However,  surprisingly  there  is  then
    another paragraph, which appears in an altogether different font, which
    states "The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".  It  even  goes
    on to make  an  anonymity  direction  in  the  same  font.   Even  more
    surprisingly, after the judge has signed off his name, in the fee award
    section, the judge states "I have dismissed the  appeal  and  therefore
    there can be no fee award".

Grounds of Application

10. In the Grounds of Application, the Respondent states that the  decision
    of the judge was "quite clearly an error as, until the decision,  there
    was absolutely no indication that the  judge  intended  to  reach  this
    conclusion.  There are no findings to support it".  It goes on  to  say
    that since there is no provision in the  Procedure  Rules  to  make  an
    application under the Slip Rule" the only recourse  is  to  appeal  the
    decision.

11. On 25th July 2018 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

12. At the  hearing  before  me  on  21st  September  2018,  there  was  no
    attendance by the Appellant,  and  nor  was  there  any  representative
    available.  I took time to ensure  that  notice  of  hearing  had  been
    served, on the correct address, and in the correct way.

13. I then asked the court usher to take steps to telephone the Appellant's
    representatives to see if an explanation was forthcoming as to why  no-
    one was in attendance.

14. The court usher returned some 30 minutes later with a  fax  dated  20th
    September 2018 which states that "Please note that  the  Appellant  has
    not instructed us to represent him for the hearing scheduled  for  21st
    September 2018.  Nevertheless he would like to rely on the documents he
    has already provided".

15. For  her  part,  Ms  Vidyadharan,  appearing,  as  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, on the Respondent's behalf, submitted that this was
    clearly an error, and the judge had never intended to allow the appeal,
    and the fact that there was a separate paragraph in a  different  font,
    only  served  to  demonstrate  that  something  had  crept   into   the
    determination which was not intended for this particular decision.  She
    asked me to make a finding of  an  error  of  law  and  to  remake  the
    decision.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are those set out in the Grounds of  Application,
    and the grant of application.   It  is  plain  that  there  is  nothing
    whatsoever in the body of the decision that  suggests  that  the  judge
    ever intended to allow this appeal.  Everything suggests the  contrary.



17. The judge consistently makes highly critical findings of  fact  against
    the Appellant, commenting upon the entirely  reprehensible  conduct  on
    the part of the Appellant in adducing a witness, who does not even know
    the Appellant, as a BNP official, which is to say nothing of  the  fact
    that the Appellant himself produced oral evidence that the judge  found
    to have been lacking in all credibility.

18. I find that the decision to allow the appeal "on human rights grounds",
    following as it does, the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  "on  asylum
    grounds", was an error of law, and this is manifested no  less  in  the
    fact that in the fee award the judge makes it quite clear that "I  have
    dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award".

Remaking the Decision

19. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am dismissing the appeal of the  Appellant  for  the  reasons
    that were already set out by the judge in his determination.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it should be set aside.  I set aside the  decision  of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  of
    the Appellant is dismissed.

21. No anonymity direction is made.

22. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th October 2018



