
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04051/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2017                   |On 13 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                 Luul Yeibyo
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Kirk, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Luul Yeibyo, date of  birth  1.1.99,  is  a  citizen  of
    Eritrea.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas promulgated 17.10.16,  dismissing  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds but allowing on humanitarian protection grounds only his appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 7.4.16, to refuse
    his claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 15.9.16.

 4. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    6.12.16.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 13.1.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Lucas should be set aside.

 7. The Secretary of State accepted that  the  appellant  was  an  Eritrean
    national who had left the country illegally  and  in  doing  so  evaded
    national service, which the First-tier Tribunal Judge  acknowledged  at
    [18] and [19] of the decision.

 8. Judge Lucas concluded that the appellant's core account was fabricated,
    unsustainable and implausible, but in the light of the country guidance
    in relation to illegal exit and draft evasion  allowed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

 9. The decision not to allow the appeal on asylum  grounds  was  perverse.
    The country guidance as it stood at the date of hearing of  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal  included  MO  (illegal  exit  -risk  on
    return) Eritrea CG  [2011]  UKUT  190  (IAC),  and  MA  (Draft  evaders
    -illegal  departures-risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2007]  UKAIT   00059,   which
    demonstrated that persons in the appellant's circumstances, having left
    Eritrea illegally in order to evade military service, are likely to  be
    viewed as having engaged in an  act  of  political  opposition  and  on
    return would be persecuted for this reason, so that he is a refugee for
    a reason within the Refugee Convention.

10. Following the  hearing  but  before  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was promulgated the Upper Tribunal confirmed this position  in
    MST and Others (national service - risk categories) Eritrea  CG  [2016]
    UKUT 00443 (IAC).

11. It is clear that having found that the appellant would be  at  risk  on
    return as someone who left illegally and evaded national  service,  the
    appeal should have been allowed on asylum grounds.

12. This is accepted in the Secretary of State's Rule  24  response,  dated
    5.1.17, which states: "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's
    application for permission to appeal and concedes the point  raised  in
    ground 1, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material  error  of
    law in dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds, having found  that  the
    appellant left Eritrea illegally and had evaded national  service.  The
    Country Guidance on this scenario provides  that  the  appellant  falls
    under the provisions of the Refugee Convention and  should  be  granted
    asylum. In the circumstances  that  the  respondent  accepts  that  the
    decision is unsustainable, it  will  be  unnecessary  for  the  hearing
    scheduled for 13 January to proceed."

13. The response of the Secretary of State has not been  considered  before
    today, and the appeal remained listed for hearing.

14. In the circumstances, and for the reasons explained above, it is  clear
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand and should be
    set aside to be remade by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set  aside  the  decision  in  its  entirety  with  no
                    findings of fact preserved.

                    I re-make the decision in the  appeal  by  allowing  the
                    appeal on asylum grounds.

                    In the circumstances, it is not  necessary  to  consider
                    humanitarian protection or human rights grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable in this case and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

