

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04894/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 27 January 2020                           |on 24 February 2020           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Ogunbusola instructed by Winston Rose Solicitors.

For the Respondent: Ms R Bassi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 16 September 2019 the Upper Tribunal found a judge of the First-
        Tier Tribunal had erred in law in a manner material to the decision
        to dismiss the appellant's appeal on protection  and  human  rights
        grounds. The matter comes back before the Upper Tribunal for it  to
        substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  on  the  18  August
        1986 who arrived in the United Kingdom by air on 16 May  2011,  but
        who did not claim asylum until 9 October 2017.
     3. The findings of the First-Tier Tribunal relating to the appellant's
        immigration status and immigration history are preserved  findings,
        as follows:


             17.  The appellant told me that he had entered  the  UK  on  a
                  spouse Visa sponsored by his ex-wife on 16 May 2011.  When
                  he gave evidence, he told me that about 4 months after his
                  arrival his relationship broke down, that  is  to  say  in
                  about September 2011 he was no longer in  a  relationship,
                  although he spouses Visa [sic] until July 2013.


             18.  This witness said that he had no contact with his ex-wife
                  since the breakup. He had been granted a spouse Visa it is
                  worth noting from 19 April 2011 to 19 July 2013.


             19.  The appellant did not claim asylum after the relationship
                  broke down but on 2  May  2013  shortly  before  his  Visa
                  expired on 19 July 2013, he applied for outside the  rules
                  compassionate grounds leave to remain but on 5  July  2013
                  the application was refused with no right of appeal.


             20.  On 7 December 2015 the appellant was served with Red 0001
             as an overstayer.


             21.  Even at this stage the appellant did not claim asylum. On
                  4 January 2016 he applied for family/private life leave to
                  remain on human rights grounds and on 17 March  2016  this
                  application was refused.


             22.  The appellant still did not  to  do  anything  about  his
                  case, knowing that he was here unlawfully, and it was  not
                  until one year and 6 months  after  the  said  refusal  on
                  human rights grounds, that he decided to  make  an  asylum
                  claim.






The appellants claim



     4. The appellant sets out his case in his witness statements. In  that
        dated 17 June 2019, filed for the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, he states be cannot return to Bangladesh as a result of a
        fear will be persecuted by the Awami  League,  the  current  ruling
        party in Bangladesh.
     5. The appellant claims he was beaten up by supporters of  this  group
        who burnt his feet and legs and  who  have  lodged  a  false  claim
        against him. The appellant  states  he  believes  that  it  is  the
        intention  of  this  group  to  kill  him  if  he  is  returned  to
        Bangladesh.
     6. The appellant claims he became the General Secretary of the BNP  on
        15 January 2006 for his area and later the Vice  President  of  his
        area in 2009. His responsibilities were  to  invite  and  encourage
        people to attend meetings. On 25 February 2010, in Bangladesh,  the
        appellant claimed to have come  under  attack  in  an  area  called
        Somuna by Awami League members whilst he  was  making  his  way  to
        Sylhet.  The  appellant  claims  he  was  in  a  car  with  another
        individual when Awami League members approached the  front  of  the
        vehicle and stopped them. When the appellant got  out  of  the  car
        they began to beat the back of his head which caused him to fall to
        the ground. The appellant claims that when he fell  to  the  ground
        they beat him on his knees and stood him up and used  a  hammer  to
        strike his toe with a nail. The appellant claimed his  ankles  were
        also injured which is the reason for his health conditions and  why
        is unable to stand for a long period now. The appellant claims they
        poured petrol on him and burned him with a matchstick  burning  the
        back of his thighs from top to the bottom as well as on his feet.
     7. The appellant claims local people who heard his screams came to the
        scene and used sacks to put the fire out and took him to  a  nearby
        hospital although, a result  of  the  fact  they  had  difficulties
        feeding him, they took him to Sylhet hospital where he was kept for
        approximately one year.
     8. The appellant claims he sent two close friends to file a case about
        the attack on 3 March 2010 as he was too ill to do  so  as  he  had
        been admitted to hospital for the year. The appellant believes  the
        Awami League chose to file a false claim  against  him  because  he
        attempted to file accounts against them to the  police  by  sending
        his friends to the police station.
     9. The appellant claims he learned of the false case when a letter was
        received at his home address in Bangladesh outlining a  warrant  of
        arrest in his name which he claims to have been issued  on  8  June
        2011.
    10. The appellant claimed his role within the BNP is  still  developing
        as he attends meetings and demonstrations the most recent of  which
        was 24 March 2018 at London Bridge and in the  early  hours  of  26
        March 2018. The appellant  claims  he  also  attended  independence
        commemoration events on 26 March 2019 and regularly attends  weekly
        meetings and similar events.
    11. The appellant was supported by a witness, Mr Rahman, who claimed to
        be the International Affairs Secretary of the BNP who confirmed the
        appellant has been politically active in the UK, that he  is  aware
        of the positions held by the appellant in Bangladesh including  the
        titles of General Secretary in 2006 and Vice President in 2009, and
        that in the opinion of the witness if the appellant were to  return
        to Bangladesh to live freely and support the BNP he will face  real
        risk of persecution and that his life will be in danger.



Discussion



    12. The appellant was cross-examined  extensively  by  Miss  Bassi  who
        focused in particular upon the core aspects the appellant's  claim.
        The appellant had maintained the  truth  of  the  evidence  in  his
        statements which stood as his evidence in chief.
    13. The appellant stated he was attacked at 1 PM in reply to a specific
        question. It was pointed out to him  that  was  different  from  an
        earlier statement in which he had claimed the attack occurred at 12
        PM.
    14. The appellant confirmed that after the attack he  was  taken  to  a
        local hospital and then to Sylhet where he remained  for  one  year
        before being discharged on 24  February  2011.  The  appellant  was
        referred at this stage to  an  application  that  he  made  to  the
        British High Commission in Dhaka for a Visa to the United  Kingdom.
        This showed an application dated 10 May 2010, which fell within the
        time the appellant had claimed he had to remain  in  the  hospital,
        which was only 4 � months from the date  he  claimed  he  had  been
        attacked.
    15. The  appellant  was  asked  how  he  was  able  to  make  the  Visa
        application if he was in hospital as he claimed to which he replied
        that his wife had obtained all the documents to make an application
        with the help of a  relative.  When  it  was  pointed  out  to  the
        appellant that it is clearly recorded  that  on  10  May  2010  his
        biometrics had been taken and received in the UK the appellant then
        claimed that he took time out of the hospital to go  and  give  the
        fingerprints and photographs required.
    16. The appellant was asked how long it was before he was able to  walk
        after sustaining burns to his legs which he stated  was  some  8-10
        months.
    17. A further discrepancy was pointed out to the appellant in  that  he
        had claimed in his statement that at the relevant time he worked in
        his father's shop whereas according to  the  Visa  application  the
        appellant had stated he worked in private service. I do not  accept
        the submission made on the appellant's behalf that it was not clear
        what is meant by private service and that this could be the same as
        working in his father's shop. There is a clear discrepancy  between
        these claims.
    18.  A  further  issue  arising  from  the  evidence  is  the  material
        difference between the appellant's claim recorded  in  his  witness
        statement above that he was taken to hospital and the  two  friends
        filed a complaint with the police on his behalf and  his  reply  to
        question 131 and 132 of his asylum interview in which the appellant
        claimed he himself had filed the case with the police.  When  asked
        how he did it he stated he had the medical papers that he  took  to
        file the case and that he had some witnesses and was dependent upon
        those. The appellant was asked at question 134 how, if  he  was  in
        hospital for a year, he was able to  file  a  case  at  the  police
        station a week after the attack, to which he claimed he was ill and
        that there was another person and that he was ill and did not  file
        the case. The contradictory nature of this  was  indicated  to  the
        appellant who then claimed that he was wrong and what he  said  was
        wrong before.
    19. In his oral evidence the appellant was asked by Miss Bassi when  he
        went to the police station which  he  now  claimed  it  was  on  25
        February the day of the attack. When asked whether it was after the
        attack he claimed that that was when  it  happened.   When  it  was
        pointed out his original account was  that  he  was  taken  to  the
        hospital after the attack the  appellant  claims  he  went  to  the
        police station on the way to the hospital. When the  appellant  was
        asked to clarify whether what he was claiming was that he had  been
        attacked and burned after which he went to the police  station  and
        then to the hospital, he stated he came to the police station as it
        was on his way to the hospital, and that it was not a  minute  from
        the main road to the police station. This is a material discrepancy
        in the appellant's evidence regarding an important  aspect  of  the
        case as the appellant claims that it was as a result of his  making
        a complaint that the  Awami  League  that  they  made  a  complaint
        against him.
    20. The appellant claims the police would not accept his claim but also
        that when he was in hospital two  friends  took  documents  to  the
        police for him.
    21. The appellant's evidence was further contradictory when he  claimed
        that he was ill, and he had not filed a  claim  and  asked  whether
        there was any reason he had not mentioned attempts to lodge a  case
        on his way to hospital  in  his  earlier  evidence.  The  appellant
        claimed had not mentioned it as he had no evidence and  that  there
        are other persons who could say he went there.
    22. The appellant claimed charges have been laid against him  and  also
        that he was not sure who attacked him as they wore  masks.  If  the
        appellant has no means of identification of those who attacked  him
        it is unlikely the police would have  been  able  to  take  further
        action; although the appellant also claims  others  living  locally
        were able to say who his attackers were.
    23. The appellant was asked whether he was aware of  the  charges  that
        have been filed against him and what they are to which his  replies
        were vague. The appellant claimed that he knew there was a case but
        that he did not know what it was for and  that  he  had  heard  the
        matter had gone to court.  When  asked  if  he  was  aware  of  the
        punishment  handed  down  he  claimed  he  had  received  14  years
        imprisonment and a fine.
    24. The appellant provided documents in support of the claim which  can
        be found at Annex J of the respondent's  bundle.  This  includes  a
        Charge  Sheet  dated  13  November  2011  Referring  to   a   First
        Information  Report  of  8  June  2011.  The  document  states  the
        plaintiff is the President of the Bangladesh Awami League  for  the
        appellant's local  branch  with  names  and  addresses  of  accused
        including the appellant. It is asserted in the  document  that  the
        accused members of the Awami League ambushed members of  the  Awami
        League using weapons including a firearm. There is also a  document
        from the Honourable Chief  Judicial  Magistrates  Court  in  Sylhet
        purportedly filed by a  person  with  the  name  of  the  applicant
        referring to an incident on 25th February 2010 at 12  PM  in  which
        the  appellant  was  beaten  and  had  his   leg   set   on   fire.
        Notwithstanding the date and time of the incident on the first page
        being 12 PM it also appears the time of 1 PM is given later in  the
        document as well.
    25. There is also a First Information Report referring to an occurrence
        of 8 June 2011 at about 12 PM referring to a similar location  also
        accusing the appellant and those mentioned earlier of  the  use  of
        unlawful weaponry and inflicting injuries and attempted murder. The
        appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  in  May  2011  was  not  in
        Bangladesh in June of that year.
    26. There is a copy of an arrest  warrant  containing  the  appellant's
        name dated 13 November 2011 and a copy of  a  judgement  against  a
        Rubel Ahmed dated 17 July 2017.  The appellant's  name  appears  in
        the document too in which he is described as having absconded  with
        the arrest warrant having been issued and with the trial continuing
        in absence. The documents indicate conviction for breach of section
        19 Arms Act 1878 and sentence of 14 years imprisonment and  a  fine
        of 50,000 Taka.
    27. It is accepted there is within  Bangladesh  a  statutory  provision
        known as The Arms Act 1878 but section 19 of that  Act  deals  with
        penalties. Those penalties are  applicable  if  there  has  been  a
        conviction of the specified offences as follows:


             19. Whoever commits any of the following offences (namely):-

                  (a) manufactures, converts or sells, or keeps,  offers  or
                  exposes for sale, any arms, ammunition or military  stores
                  in contravention of the provisions of section 5;
                  (b) fails to give notice as required by the same section;
                  (c) imports or exports any arms,  ammunition  or  military
                  stores in contravention of the provisions of section 6;
                  (d) transports any arms, ammunition or military stores  in
                  contravention of a regulation or prohibition issued  under
                  section 10;
                  (e) goes armed  in  contravention  of  the  provisions  of
section 13;
                       (f) has in his possession or under  his  control  any
                  arms, ammunition or military stores  in  contravention  of
                  the provisions of section 14 or section 15;
                  (g) intentionally makes any false entry  in  a  record  or
                  account which, by a rule made  under  section  17,  clause
                  (c), he is required to keep;
                  (h) intentionally fails to exhibit anything  which,  by  a
                  rule made under section 17, clause (e), he is required  to
                  exhibit; or
                  (i) fails to deposit arms, ammunition or military  stores,
                  as required by section 14 or section 16;

             shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life  or  any  other
             rigorous imprisonment which  shall  not  be  less  then  seven
             years,].


    28. Section 19 only sets out the  level  of  punishment  that  will  be
        handed down to a person  convicted  of  a  breach  of  a  specified
        section. The documents provided do not  specify  any  such  breach;
        that record being a conviction on the basis of guilt for breach  of
        a sentencing provision. Without more this is arguably irrational.
    29. Similarly the wording in the  document  specifying  the  defendants
        having been able to prove without a doubt the charges against  them
        deserve punishment is also irrational. It is not for the  defendant
        in a criminal justice system such as that in force in Bangladesh to
        prove their guilt.
    30. Section 19 also appears to provide the  punishment  for  conviction
        under  any  of  the  said  sections  is  a  substantial  period  of
        imprisonment yet the appellant claims to have been both  imprisoned
        and fined in this document.
    31. There is a  letter  dated  9  November  2017  purportedly  from  an
        advocate in Bangladesh addressed  'to  whom  it  may  concern'  but
        clearly written  in  the  first  person  as  if  addressed  to  the
        appellant. It is not clear why the letter would be written advising
        the appellant on 9 November 2017 of a conviction dated 17 July 2017
        especially when any right of appeal  against  the  conviction  had,
        purportedly, to have been issued within one month of  the  date  of
        the judgement.
    32. Concern about forged documents emerging from Bangladesh was  raised
        as an issue.  Although the respondent  was  unable  to  verify  the
        documents relied upon by the appellant  does  to  resource  issues,
        this does not mean they have to be accepted at face  value.  It  is
        necessary to consider the documentary evidence in  the  round  with
        all  the  other  material  in  accordance  with  the  Tanvir  Ahmed
        principles.
    33. In this appeal the appellant relies upon a course of  event  which,
        as a result of his political views, led to him being  attacked  and
        sustaining serious injury, reporting the matter to the police as  a
        result of which he was subject to false claims by the Awami  League
        which have led to his conviction and sentence  for  a  considerable
        period of  imprisonment  and  substantial  fine,  the  evidence  in
        support of which has been found to be contradictory and unreliable.
    34. It is not disputed the appellant has evidence of burning his  body.
        It is noted  from  the  copy  medical  records  provided  that  the
        appellant consulted his GP on 14  June  2019  claiming  to  have  a
        painful scar. The GP records the following:


             Problem       painful scar (first)


             History       Alleged assault by another Political group  back
                           in   Bangladesh   25.02.10.   He   said   pouring
                           inflammable liquid & then put fire.
                           He never mentioned before.
                           Now having pruritus related condition around that
                      area


             Examination       Extensive scar in the inner thighs  of  both
                           lower limb consistent with old burn/scald


             Medication    Aqua Max cream when required 500 g


    35. The appellant had claimed he was attacked with a hammer  which  was
        used to strike his toe with a nail, that his ankles  were  injured,
        and that his assailants poured petrol on him and burned him with  a
        matchstick burning the back of his thighs from  top  to  bottom  as
        well as his feet. The GP does not record the presence  of  scarring
        other than the inner thighs of both lower  limbs  which  one  would
        have thought would have been visible  and  reported  upon  had  the
        appellant had petrol poured over his legs and feet and had the same
        set alight in the  regions  he  claims.  I  find  the  presence  of
        scarring relating to burning made out but not the causation of  the
        same.
    36. Having considered the inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence,
        which I find go to the core  of  his  claim,  I  do  not  find  the
        appellant has established even to  the  lower  applicable  standard
        that his claim is credible. I find he is not a credible witness. He
        claims to have been attacked and to have suffered extensive burning
        for which he required hospitalisation for  a  period  of  one  year
        during which he was unable to walk. Despite suffering such injuries
        he claimed in his oral evidence to have reported the assault to the
        police whilst being taken to  hospital.  This  contradicts  earlier
        evidence. The appellant then claims that two  others  reported  the
        matter to the police due to the fact  he  was  incapacitated.  Miss
        Bassi adduced strong evidence in the Visa application form to  show
        this claim is untrue. The appellant  was  required  with  his  Visa
        application to attend in person to provide biometric details  which
        he did. This completely undermines his claim. It is also noted  the
        appellant's occupation and details provided in the Visa application
        contradicts his evidence given elsewhere. Those  claims  must  have
        been verified by the ECO as the spouse visa was issued on which the
        appellant entered the UK.
    37. The court documents are clearly false for the reasons  noted  above
        including the fact they refer to an incident on  a  date  when  the
        appellant was in the United Kingdom. I find they are  not  evidence
        of  genuine  proceedings  being  taken  against  the  appellant  in
        Bangladesh. I do not find the appellant has proved  such  documents
        justify the weight being placed upon  them  the  appellant  asserts
        when applying the Tanvir Ahmed principles.
    38. I do not accept the appellant has  established  any  credible  real
        risk of harm on return to Bangladesh as a result of  activities  in
        that country.
    39. I do not find the appellant has established a credible real risk on
        return as a result of any  activities  he  has  undertaken  in  the
        United Kingdom. His sur place profile does not establish a credible
        real risk when considering the relevant country guidance  case  law
        and country information.
    40. I find this is a  disingenuous  claim  made  by  the  appellant  to
        attempt to secure permission to remain in the United Kingdom.
    41. I do not find the  appellant  has  established  an  entitlement  to
        remain either within or outside the Immigration Rules  or  pursuant
        to ECHR on either protection or human  rights  grounds  or  on  any
        other basis.


Decision

    42. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    43. The anonymity direction made pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 shall continue until  further
        order.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 February 2020












