
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04208/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    [T T]
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mughal, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey.  She  was  born  on  20  February
    1994.

 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  her
    asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds  dated  16
    December 2013.

 3. Judge Obhi (the judge) dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal in a decision promulgated  on  3  September  2018.
    The judge did not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness.   The
    judge found that the appellant would not be at risk on return to Turkey
    and  that  as  regards  Article  8,  the  respondent's   decision   was
    proportionate.

 4. The grounds claim there are

         "...

         (a)  a series of material errors within the  determination  on  the
             basis  of  which,   individually,   the   IJ's   decision   is
             unsustainable and this error was  capable  of  preventing  her
             from reaching an alternative decision.":

         Failing to place weight on the evidence of the appellant's brother.

         Making an adverse finding that the appellant's sisters did not give
         evidence.

         Failing to apply the presidential guide with regard  to  vulnerable
         adults.

         Failure to apply IK (Returnees - Records - IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2004]
         UKIAT 00312.

         No adequate analysis of the IK CG risk factors.

         Failure to consider the current situation in Turkey".

 5. Judge I D Boyes granted permission on 8 October 2018.  The grounds read
    inter alia as follows:

         "2.  The grounds assert that the judge has made a wholesale failure
             to consider any and all risk factors or the familial link.

         3.   It would be wrong to say more,  in  light  of  the  complaints
             about this judgment, other than the grounds do have merit  and
             that they certainly are arguable.  The apparent failure by the
             judge to deal with the list of  risk  factors  in  the  detail
             required is arguably the error".

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Ms Mughal relied upon the grounds, in particular, that  the  judge  had
    placed no weight on the evidence of the  appellant's  brother  who  had
    been recognised by the respondent as a refugee.

 8. Mr Jarvis submitted that there was nothing in  IK  CG  which  suggested
    that the fact that the appellant's brother had  been  identified  as  a
    refugee was determinative of risk.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. The judge made  wholesale  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the
    appellant and it is inevitable that it was against that background that
    the appellant's brother's refugee status must be considered in terms of
    whether the judge materially erred.

10. The appellant had experienced no problems whatsoever.  Her evidence was
    found not to be credible.  See [60].  The grounds fail to establish how
    it is in the particular circumstances of this case that the appellant's
    brother's  case  was  relevant.   As  the  judge  said  at  [40],   the
    appellant's brother had no personal knowledge of the appellant's claim.
    He only heard of her claim  through  third  parties.   The  appellant's
    circumstances can be readily distinguished from those in IK.

11. Ms Mughal did not pursue before me  the  submission  contained  in  the
    grounds that the appellant was a vulnerable adult and  that  the  judge
    failed to treat her as such.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         27 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

