
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04969/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th January 2020                          |On 30th January 2020          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    K P A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Hillis
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd July 2019.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  1st  January  1992.   He
    arrived in the UK clandestinely on 28th October 2018 and claimed asylum
    the following day.

 3. The appellant's case is that in early October 2018 he  and  his  friend
    were taking some goods to Sardasht, delivering pomegranates in a pickup
    truck. They saw two people by the road whom they picked up to give them
    a lift.  When they arrived it was discovered that one of the people had
    placed a gun amongst the fruit and he and his friend  were  accused  of
    working for the KDPI.  The appellant knew that that  would  cause  them
    great difficulty and he decided to leave Iran.

 4. The judge did not believe  the  appellant's  story  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law in assessing the credibility of the appellant's claim.



 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic on 20th November 2019.

Submissions

 7. Ms Patel argued that the judge had erred  in  holding  it  against  the
    appellant that he had not disclosed the extent  of  his  claim  at  the
    first opportunity, namely the screening interview.  The  appellant  was
    informed before that interview that he was only going to be asked for a
    brief outline of why he was claiming  asylum.   He  had  said  in  that
    interview that the basis of his claim was

         "Whilst travelling we assisted some people in getting  to  Sardasht
         who left a handgun inside the baskets of  fruit  we  were  selling.
         Some people had been arrested and if I return I do  not  know  what
         will happen to me."

 8. At paragraph 48 of  the  determination  the  judge  said  that  it  was
    significant that the appellant did not mention anything about the  KDPI
    at that stage.  Ms Patel submitted  that  the  appellant  had  in  fact
    disclosed that aspect of his claim in the statement  which  accompanied
    the questionnaire which was completed shortly afterwards.  It  was  not
    reasonable, given the advice that had been given at the  start  of  the
    screening interview to expect him to give a  full  disclosure  at  that
    stage.

 9. Second, the judge had speculated in not believing  that  the  appellant
    would not have spoken with the two men and was wrong  to  say  that  it
    would have been entirely natural in any culture and in  particular  the
    Kurdish culture for them to chat and exchange names  if  there  was  no
    reason to distrust them.

10. Third, the judge was not entitled to find it not credible that the  men
    the appellant suspected of being connected  to  the  KDPI  would  speak
    Farsi in front of him.  The appellant said that  they  did  so  because
    they did not want him to understand what they were saying and  in  fact
    he could not understand them because although he  had  some  elementary
    education in Farsi and could write the language, his spoken  Farsi  was
    limited.

11. She asked that the decision  be  set  aside  and  reheard  because  the
    Immigration Judge's credibility findings were unsafe.

12. Mr McVeety defended the determination submitting  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to place weight upon the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not
    disclosed any KDPI element in his claim at the screening interview  and
    to disbelieve the appellant's account for the reasons which he gave.

Findings and Conclusions

13. There is no error of law in this determination.

14. First, the whole basis of the appellant's claim is  that  he  feared  a
    return to Iran because he thought that he would be suspected of being a
    KDPI member.  That is a very different claim to the one he put  forward
    at the screening interview which  was  simply  that  he  feared  return
    because a handgun had been left inside the  baskets  of  fruit  he  was
    selling and people had been arrested.  The judge was entitled to  place
    weight upon such a major omission and to  take  that  into  account  in
    conjunction with the other adverse credibility findings which he  made.



15. It was open to the judge to find it implausible that the passengers  in
    the car would assume that speaking the national language of Farsi would
    mean that neither the appellant nor his friend  could  understand  him.
    He was entitled to find it not credible that, given the  appellant  had
    been educated in Farsi and could read it, he would  not  to  have  been
    able to understand any of the conversation which the men in the  pickup
    truck were having.  Moreover, as Mr McVeety pointed out, the truck  was
    travelling in a border area where smuggling was  commonplace.   It  was
    the appellant's case that he had picked up two  random  strangers.   It
    was not logical for there to be no conversation between him and his new
    passengers.

16. So far as the challenge to the judge's conclusions in relation  to  the
    Farsi language is concerned it is without merit.  The point being  made
    by the judge was that the passengers  would  have  no  way  of  knowing
    whether or not the appellant and his friend spoke Farsi.

17. The judge carefully considered all  of  the  evidence  and  came  to  a
    reasonable conclusion based  firmly  on  that  evidence.   The  grounds
    disclose no error of law in that decision.

Decision

18. The original judge did not err  in  law.   His  decision  stands.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed[pic]                             Date 27 January 2020


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


