

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/04806/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st September 2017                   | On 17th October 2017             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                   Mr.S.O.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mrs M.Cleghorn, Counsel.
For the Respondent:      Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a 37-year-old widower who has the care of his seven-
      year-old son. He is Kurdish and has lived all his life in Kirkuk.


   2. He claimed he was at risk on return because he lent his car to someone
      who then filled it with explosives. The car was discovered and the
      appellant says the authorities now suspect his involvement. His claim
      for protection was rejected, with the index event not being believed.

   3. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Maka and was dismissed in a
      decision promulgated on 19 December 2016.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge made a material factual error at paragraph 59 of the decision in
      stating that the appellant had lived all his life in the Independent
      Kurdish Region. The judge also did not apply AA(Article 15 (c) Rv 1)
      Iraq CG[2015]UKUT 544 regarding the appellant being returned to Kirkuk
      or of relocating to Baghdad, particularly, as the sole carer of a
      child.

   5. Mrs M.Cleghorn referred me to the grounds upon which leave was granted
      and Mr Diwnycz to the rule 24 response.

Conclusions

   6. The judge does make some basic factual errors which cannot be
      explained as simple slips. Paragraph 18 correctly records that he is a
      Sunni Muslim from Kirkuk. However, paragraph 59 refers to him
      returning to the IKR and that he has lived there all his life. The
      judge also refers to him as being a `normal Kurdish Muslim 'without
      distinguishing which branch of Islam he follows and the difficulty
      this could cause for him.


   7. The paragraph 61 repeats the factual error that he is from the IKR and
      so can return there without documentation. The judge went on to say
      the appellant was not at risk in his home area, by which impliedly
      they  meant  the IKR.The judge referred to Kirkuk as a place of
      relocation. The judge alludes to recent changes in the country
      situation but does not go into detail. In stating he faces no 15 (c)
      risk in Kirkuk the judge is departing from the country guidance but
      does not explain, beyond commenting that the situation has moved on.

   8. The judge does not give consideration to the viability of the
      appellant living in Baghdad. Consequently, there is no evaluation of
      the matters set out in AA(Article 15 (c) Rv 1) Iraq CG[2015]UKUT 544
      as guidance for consideration of the reasonableness of relocation.

   9. My conclusion from the above is that material errors of law and fact
      have been established. Consequently, the decision cannot stand. The
      parties were in agreement that given the factual matters that would
      have to be determined it was appropriate for the matter to be reheard
      in the First-tier Tribunal.

  10. The account about lending his car was disbelieved. Ms Mrs Cleghorn
      submitted that this finding should not be preserved. My conclusion was
      that in the interests of fairness all matters should remain open for
      the rehearing. Consequently, this finding is not preserved.





   Decision


   The decision of First-tier Judge Maka materially errs in law and cannot
   stand. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing of
   all issues de novo.






   Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Farrelly
    13th October 2017



































