

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/04942/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|On 5 December 2017                    |Promulgated                           |
|                                      |On 7 December 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     R O
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms R Petterson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Ms V Adams, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Anonymity order

I make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall identify, whether directly or indirectly, the appellant  below
(the respondent in this appeal, described in  my  decision  for  clarity  as
'the claimant'). This order applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
   Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  him  international  protection
   under the Refugee Convention or humanitarian protection grounds, or leave
   to remain on human rights grounds.

2. The claimant is a citizen of Iraq and an ethnic Kurd from  Kirkuk,  whose
   appeal was allowed on humanitarian protection grounds pursuant to Article
   15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  2004/83/EC.   The  only  area  of
   internal relocation relied upon by the Secretary of State  was  the  IKR,
   both in the refusal letter and at the hearing.

3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make an  anonymity  order,  but  as
   this is an asylum appeal, it is appropriate to  anonymise  this  decision
   and the Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity order of its own motion.

Background

4. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the claimant  came  from  the  area
   where he said he originated, near  Kirkuk  in  northern  Iraq,  where  he
   worked in agriculture.  The claimant was educated until about 10 years of
   age, speaks some Arabic as well as Kurdish, and  has  previously  held  a
   CSID card, which he no longer has in his possession.  He  has  family  in
   Iraq, but in Kirkuk, not the IKR.   The Judge found as a  fact  that  the
   claimant had no family members or alternative support network within  the
   IKR.

5. Kirkuk is not in the IKR:  the Secretary  of  State  considers  that  the
   claimant has an internal relocation option to the IKR.

First-tier Tribunal decision

6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that the Secretary of State  had
   not shown how the claimant would get to the IKR from Baghdad, if returned
   by that route, that no accommodation was available to him in the IKR, and
   that in the absence of family or a support network  there,  he  would  be
   likely to be an IDP with limited prospects, if any, of employment.

7. At [35] the Judge found that the claimant had no CSID  with  him  in  the
   United Kingdom and that it was 'unlikely  to  be  practical  for  him  to
   obtain a replacement in his home area in Iraq given the current situation
   there'.  He applied AA (Iraq) (in context, AA  (Article  15(c))  (Rev  2)
   [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) as this decision was  promulgated  on  29  November
   2017, not the later revision of that guidance in July 2017 by  the  Court
   of Appeal) and found that return was currently  not  feasible  but  that,
   applying the guidance in AA (Iraq) at [169]-[170] it  remained  necessary
   to consider whether, if returned, the claimant would  be  in  a  position
   which entitled him to international protection in the United Kingdom.

8. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the core asylum claim, but at  [39]  the
   Judge found that the claimant was  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
   'because he cannot return to his home  area  [Kirkuk]  and  it  would  be
   unduly harsh for him to relocate  to  those  areas  relied  upon  by  the
   [Secretary of State]'.

Permission to appeal

9. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal. She  argued  that,
   while some reasons had been given for finding that the claimant could not
   be returned to the IKR, there were no reasons in  the  decision  why  the
   claimant could not return to Erbil, Sulaymaniyah, or Dohuk, and  that  in
   addition, he had an uncle in Iraq who could provide support  for  him  on
   return.

10. At a hearing on 6 April 2017, the Secretary of  State  sought  leave  to
   amend her grounds of appeal and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Holmes  gave
   directions requiring her to make a written application  to  amend,  which
   she did, on 13 April 2017.

11. In  her  amended  grounds,  the  Secretary  of  State  incorporated  the
   original grounds of appeal, but in  addition,  argued  that  her  Country
   Information and Guidance reports of August 2016 concerning  the  security
   situation in the 'contested' areas and in Baghdad,  the  south,  and  the
   Kurdistan region of Iraq, demonstrated  improvements  in  Diyala,  Kirkuk
   (except Hawija and the surrounding areas) and Salah al-Din, all of  which
   were now considered to fall below the Article 15(c) level  of  risk,  and
   that the claimant's appeal should have been dismissed.

12. The Secretary of State accepted that  without  a  CSID,  the  claimant's
   return to Iraq was not feasible at the date of hearing, but  argued  that
   if he could not be returned,  no international protection was needed  and
   that humanitarian protection should not have been granted.  The Secretary
   of State relied on AA (Iraq) at [206]-[207].

Rule 24 Reply/Claimant's Response

13. The claimant responded to the Secretary of State's grounds  and  to  her
   amended grounds, in a combined Response which I treat as a Rule 24 Reply.
    Much of the Response deals with the manner in which the  amendment  came
   about, coupled with observations that Judge Holmes should  not  hear  the
   resumed hearing.  The allegation of bias against Judge Holmes (relying on
   Magill v Porter [2001] UKHL 67 and R on the application of B  v  X  Crown
   Court [2009] EWHC 1149 (Admin)) is not made out.

14. Judge Holmes did not hear the resumed hearing. The question of  bias  by
   him at the directions hearing in April 2017 was not relied  upon  in  the
   Upper Tribunal hearing and I do not consider it necessary  to  spend  any
   further time on that part of the Response.

15. The claimant opposes any order permitting  the  Secretary  of  State  to
   amend her grounds of appeal, arguing that the Secretary  of  State  never
   said at the First-tier Tribunal hearing that Kirkuk had  ceased  to  meet
   the Article 15(c) risk level.

16. In  relation  to  the  tension  between  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
   guidance in 2015 and the later Country Information  and  Guidance  relied
   upon by the Secretary of State, the claimant notes  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's decision is in line with AA (Iraq) [2015].  The  Secretary  of
   State did not provide any reason for departing from that guidance at  the
   First-tier Tribunal hearing and should not be  heard  to  say  that  such
   reasons existed now.

17. The claimant contends that 'bold assertions by the Home Office' are  not
   equivalent to 'credible fresh evidence' as the basis for  divergence,  as
   set out in the UTIAC Chamber Guidance Note 2011 No 20 at [12].  He relies
   on the procedural guidance given in DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure
   from CG) Afghanistan [2013]  UKUT  148  (IAC) at  [20]-[25]  as  to  the
   circumstances  when  it  is  possible  to  depart  from  current  country
   guidance.

18. The claimant  also  disagrees  with  the  assertion  on  behalf  of  the
   Secretary of State that if return is not  feasible,  applying  AA  (Iraq)
   [2015],  the appeal must always be dismissed.

19. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

20. At the Upper Tribunal hearing,  I  considered  whether  I  should  grant
   leave to amend.  I have regard to  the  claimant's  contention  that  the
   Secretary of State's application should not be considered  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal.  However, permission to make an  application  to  amend  having
   been given, I am not persuaded that it would be appropriate to refuse  to
   consider that application.  I consider it  to  be  in  the  interests  of
   justice to allow the amendment and deal with the additional grounds,  and
   the claimant's response thereto.

21. Before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Adams  contended  that  the  Secretary  of
   State's position now was an attempt to withdraw a concession made at  the
   hearing that return could be only to the IKR.  She relied on [30] in  the
   refusal letter and [36] of the First-tier Tribunal decision,  which  made
   it clear that such had been the Secretary of State's position  throughout
   and asked that I uphold the decision.

22. Ms Petterson accepted that the contents of [36]  are  inconsistent  with
   the Secretary of State's case as now advanced:

         "36.  Relocation  to  the  IKR.  It  is  important  to  note   that
         notwithstanding the [Secretary of State's] guidance of August  2016
         entitled 'Country Information and Guidance - Iraq:  return/internal
         relocation' the [Secretary of State] has only relied on the IKR  as
         an area of potential relocation.  This was the case as put  in  the
         refusal letter and  at  the  hearing.   As  that  is  the  way  the
         [Secretary of State] has put her case, and in particular, as it was
         conceded that he could not return to  his  home  area,   I  do  not
         consider it appropriate to seek to revisit the  areas  in  AA  that
         were deemed to be safe for returns."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

   While not withdrawing the Secretary of State's appeal, Ms  Petterson  did
   not press the appeal beyond the grounds.





Discussion

23. I begin with the original grounds of appeal.  There was no need for  the
   First-tier Tribunal to give reasons why the claimant could not return  to
   Erbil, Sulaymaniyah or Dohuk in addition to a finding that he  could  not
   return to the IKR.  All those cities  are  within  the  IKR  and  do  not
   represent additional  possible  areas  for  internal  relocation.    That
   ground has no merit.

24. Turning next to the Secretary of State's reliance  on  her  August  2016
   Country Information and Guidance, it is clear from [36] in the First-tier
   Tribunal's decision  that  the  Judge  did  consider  that  document  but
   discounted it as it had not been relied upon by the Secretary of State in
   her refusal letter or at the First-tier Tribunal hearing to  support  any
   argument that there was another area, outside the IKR, where the claimant
   could reasonably be expected to go.

25. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing,  the  Secretary  of  State  conceded
   that the claimant could not return to his home area (Kirkuk):  it is  not
   open now to her to seek to rely  on  material  in  the  August  2016  CIG
   suggesting that part of Kirkuk, or indeed Diyala or Salah al-Din might be
   suitable as internal relocation sites, as this did not form part of,  nor
   was it relevant, to the Secretary of State's  case  as  advanced  at  the
   hearing, which focused exclusively on return to the IKR.

26. I consider next the argument that where return is not feasible, that  is
   dispositive of the appeal and that it should have been  dismissed.   That
   approach is not supported by the passage relied upon by the Secretary  of
   State in AA (Iraq) [2015] at [205] - [206]. At both [169] and [205] of AA
   (Iraq), the Upper Tribunal makes it clear that lack of  feasibility  does
   not mean necessarily that there is no need make a protection assessment:

         "169.     On  one  reading  of HF  (Iraq) -  particularly  the
         highlighted passage in paragraph 101 - the impossibility of  return
         could be said to make it unnecessary to hypothesise any risk to  an
         appellant in  the  country  of  proposed  return,  whether  or  not
         stemming from a lack of documentation or  similar  problem.  We  do
         not, however, consider that the Court can be taken to have intended
         such a reading. There may be cases where it will  be  evident  that
         the person concerned would  be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
         serious harm irrespective  of  lack  of  documentation.  Were  Nazi
         persecution of the Jews occurring today, it would  clearly  subvert
         the purpose of the Convention to deny refugee status on  the  basis
         that, regardless of what  might  happen  to  appellants  on  return
         because they are  Jewish,  they  cannot  in  practice  be  returned
         (whether because of documentation or mere refusal to admit Jews  to
         Nazi Germany). For this reason, we consider that the judgment in HF
         (Iraq) does not preclude a claim to international protection  from
         succeeding, insofar as the asserted risk of harm  is  not  (or  not
         solely) based on factors  (such  as  lack  of  documentation)  that
         currently render a person's actual return unfeasible. ...

         207.     Given  that  the  appellant's  return  is  not  currently
         feasible it could be said that it is unnecessary to hypothesise any
         risk to him upon his return to Iraq. However,  as  identified  in
         paragraphs 169 and 170 above, there may be cases where it  will  be
         evident that  the  person  concerned  would  be  at  real  risk  of
         persecution  or  serious  harm  irrespective   of   the   lack   of
         documentation and that an applicant should not  be  precluded  from
         pursuing a claim to international protection in circumstances where
         the asserted risk of harm is not (or not solely) based  on  factors
         (such as lack of documentation) that currently  render  a  person's
         actual return unfeasible."

27. In this case, the risk on return to  Kirkuk,  or  to  Baghdad,  both  of
   which were conceded, were not based on unfeasibility but on Article 15(c)
   armed conflict: the question of unfeasibility affected only the  question
   of internal relocation to the IKR.  The Judge therefore did  not  err  in
   fact or in law in seeking to examine the risk on return in those areas or
   in deciding that humanitarian protection was available to the claimant.

28. For all of the above reasons, the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  cannot
   succeed.  I dismiss her appeal and uphold the decision of the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

DECISION

29. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         6 December 2017                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson





