
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04658/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2019                  |On 24 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                    [A D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim (instructed by Murgul law)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the appellant in relation to
    a decision in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Housego, promulgated  on
    16 September 2019, in which he  dismissed  the  appellant's  protection
    appeal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who claimed to be entitled to
    international protection on  account  of  his  being  a  gay  man  from
    Bangladesh.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that the CPIN
    did not suggest, as the judge concluded, that it was only those who are
    activist or otherwise "stood out" as LGBT who would be at risk.  It was
    also arguable that, although the judge found that the  appellant  would
    not be open on return, that conclusion was not fully reasoned  because,
    the judge said that he had felt it unnecessary to decide the point.  It
    is also arguable that he did not give full reasons for  his  conclusion
    as to the fourth part of the HJ (Iran) test.

 4. A brief background to the claim is that the  appellant,  born  in  July
    1990, came to the UK in September 2000 with a multi visit student visa.
    His leave was extended  until  December  2015.  In  December  2016  the
    appellant was served with notification of liability to be detained  and
    later the same  month  claimed  asylum.  That  claim  was  rejected  in
    December 2017 and in February 2018 his appeal was dismissed.

 5. The appellant made a further application for asylum in  September  2018
    which was refused on 12 April 2019. That is the  decision  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. In his first appeal, dismissed in 2018, the First-tier Tribunal did not
    accept the appellant was gay.

 7. Judge Housego however concluded, having  heard  evidence,  particularly
    that the appellant had been residing in a same-sex relationship with  a
    man in Cornwall for a considerable period of time, that  the  appellant
    was indeed gay. By the time of the hearing before  Judge  Housego  that
    relationship had come to an end.

 8. The appellant also claimed to have been in a relationship in Bangladesh
    and when he and his partner were caught, they were beaten. However,  he
    was not attacked following that incident nor was he of any interest  to
    the authorities.

 9. Having accepted his sexuality, Judge Housego went on to  consider  risk
    on return. Judge Housego noted there had been no difficulties following
    his discovery in a same-sex relationship in  Bangladesh  in  the  past,
    although life had been uncomfortable.

10. At paragraph 61  of  the  Decision  and  Reasons  the  judge  correctly
    identified the issue in the case was whether the appellant would choose
    to live as openly gay or discreetly in Bangladesh; whether there was  a
    risk on return from family, state  or  non-state  actors,  and  whether
    there is a sufficiency of protection  or  whether  internal  relocation
    would remove any risk.

11. Judge Housego  considered  the  previous  determination  carefully  and
    concluded, bearing in mind the lower standard of proof applicable, that
    a reappraisal in a holistic way, of  all  of  the  evidence  led  to  a
    different outcome and his finding that the appellant is gay.

12. The judge noted at paragraph 73 that  there  were  no  prosecutions  in
    Bangladesh and so no risk from the State to the appellant.

13. He noted at paragraph 74 that the appellant is not an activist and that
    his profile in the UK is very low-key. He therefore concluded that  the
    appellant would not come to attention in Bangladesh if he returned, any
    more than he had before he left. He had not been persecuted in the year
    before coming to the UK and the judge found no reason why he  would  be
    persecuted on return. He found that attendance at UK Gay Pride  marches
    did not indicate that he would be an activist in  Bangladesh  and  that
    the objective evidence was that  activists  face  persecution  but  not
    ordinary people who are gay.

14. The judge then considered the CPIN, which had been  placed  before  him
    and noted that there were only two short paragraphs about  LGBT  people
    and those referred only to risk for activists.

15. The judge also dealt with the HJ (Iran) questions, setting them out  at
    paragraph 86. Having concluded that the appellant was  gay,  the  judge
    then repeated his finding that, for people such as the  appellant,  who
    was not an activist and who had suffered physical violence  only  once,
    when caught in the act of same-sex activity, but not thereafter  either
    from society or the authorities, there  was  no  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.

16. I was referred to the relevant part of the CPIN report and  agree  with
    the grounds and my colleague in the First-tier  Tribunal,  who  granted
    permission, that the judge has misunderstood the contents of the CPIN.

17. At 2.2.1 of the CPIN it is accepted that  LGBT  persons  in  Bangladesh
    form a particular social  group  within  the  meaning  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.

18. At 2.2.2 it is stated that although LGBT persons in Bangladesh  form  a
    PSG, establishing such membership is not sufficient to be recognised as
    a refugee. The question to  be  addressed  is  whether  the  particular
    person faces a real risk of persecution on account of their  membership
    of such group.

19. At 2.3.17 it is stated that in general an  LGBT  person  who  does  not
    conceal their sexual orientation or gender identity may be at  risk  of
    treatment, which by its nature and repetition amounts to persecution or
    serious harm. LGBT rights activists and bloggers may be at greater risk
    due to their profile. However, each case must be considered on its  own
    facts, with the onus on the person to demonstrate why their  particular
    circumstances would put them at real risk from non-state actors.

20. It is not the case, therefore, that  only  activists  or  bloggers  are
    persons at risk and it was necessary for the judge to go on to consider
    the other aspects of HJ (Iran) and  in  particular  how  the  appellant
    would behave on return and if he would be discreet why  that  would  be
    the case and he did not do so.

21. In failing to do so I find the judge made a material error of law.  The
    Decision and Reasons therefore must be set aside.

22. Given that it is the judge's assessment of the facts on  the  basis  of
    the CPIN that is the error and not his credibility or other findings of
    fact, there is no  reason  why  the  matter  cannot  be  re-decided  on
    submissions.

23. Both representatives agreed and Mr Bramble helpfully indicated that  it
    was accepted that the appellant is a gay man.

24. In his submissions, Mr Bramble accepted that this was an appellant  who
    had been openly gay in the UK, living in a  same-sex  relationship  and
    who had previously been attacked in Bangladesh.

25. He acknowledged that openly gay men in Bangladesh would  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution. In terms of whether this  appellant  would
    be open, the appellant had said that  he  would.  However,  Mr  Bramble
    noted that he had been discreet in the past and his behaviour in the UK
    indicated that he was naturally discreet. He also acknowledged that, if
    I did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  would  behave  discreetly  in
    Bangladesh, or alternatively would  do  so  only  because  of  fear  of
    persecution, then the appellant is entitled to asylum.

26.  I  find  that  the  way  the  appellant  behaved  when  in  Bangladesh
    previously, when he had not had  experience  of  living  in  a  country
    tolerant to  same-sex  relationships,  he  did  behave  in  a  discreet
    fashion. However, he has since had experience of living in the  UK  and
    living openly as a gay man.  Not only did he have  a  relationship  but
    lived with his partner in a same-sex relationship.  I  am  prepared  to
    accept the evidence that he gave that he would wish to live openly as a
    gay man in Bangladesh and the only reason he would not do so  would  be
    fear of persecution. That being the case, it is accepted by Mr  Bramble
    that the appellant is entitled to succeed in his protection  claim  and
    is entitled to asylum as he meets the requirements for  refugee  status
    as set out in the Refugee Convention.

27. For all of the above reasons,  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Decision  and  Reasons  contained  a  material  error  of  law  in  its
    conclusions. Having redecided the matter, I allow the appeal on  asylum
    grounds.

28. Accordingly, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

29. Having allowed  the  appeal,  I  see  no  justification  in  making  an
    anonymity direction and do not do so.

30. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed [pic]                            Date 23 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

