
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04359/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th January 2018                  |On 22nd January 2018                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                          MR PESHRAW HADI MOHAMMAD
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MS E SANDERS (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    MR P NATH (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Housego  (FTT)  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  9th  June   2017
    dismissing his appeal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 21st April 2017 refusing his claim for asylum and  human  rights.
    This is an error of law hearing.

Background
2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity  and  from  the
    district of Makhmur.  He claimed asylum on the grounds that  he  feared
    threats from a tribe/family following  a  land  dispute  with  his  own
    family and as a result of which his brother was killed and  his  family
    threatened. He additionally raised Article 15c.

Grounds of appeal
3.      In lengthy grounds of appeal  the  appellant  argued  that  the  FTT
    erred as follows;
     a) that it failed to apply the correct standard of proof for an  asylum
    appeal,
     b) failed to make proper  findings  of  fact  in  respect  of  material
    matters including the death of the appellant's brother and past  events
    of threats made to the family,
     c) failed to apply the country guidance case of AA[2015] UKUT  544  and
    rather relied on a Home office guidance note  of  policy  and  "current
    affairs reports "indicating that Kirkuk was no  longer  an  area  where
    Article 15c applied [14],
     d) failed to adequately reason  its  decision  on  internal  relocation
    [43] by failing  to  take  into  account  relevant  individual  factors
    including employment, family, ID cards.
     e) failed to consider lack of  ID  documents  in  the  context  of  the
    protection claim.

Permission to appeal
4.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  UTJ
    Kebede on  7.11.2017 who found it arguable that the FTT failed to  make
    clear findings on the evidence and  failed  properly  to  consider  the
    appellant's circumstances in line with AA (Article 15c) (Rev 2)  [2015]
    UKUT 544.

5.    The  respondent's  Rule  24  response  dated  23.11.2017  opposed  the
    application.  The FTT was entitled to depart from the Country  guidance
    case following Upper Tribunal guidance Note 2011 No 2 at paras  11  and
    12.

Error of law hearing
Submisssions
6.     At the hearing  before  me  Ms  Sanders  representing  the  appellant
    adopted the grounds of appeal and argued that the FTT  failed  to  make
    clear findings of  fact  on  relevant  matters  and  that  failure  had
    infected the further consideration of Article 15c.  The FTT  failed  to
    properly justify with reference to background evidence its  reason  for
    not applying AA which was the current country guidance for  Iraq.   The
    FTT simply adopted the respondent's  policy  without  consideration  of
    evidence.  There was no analysis  of any current affairs reports.

7.    The FTT variously referred to  different  standards  in  its  decision
    including "substantial likelihood" [12] which  suggested  that  it  had
    applied a higher standard than the  appropriate  lower  test  of  "real
    risk."

8.   The FTT  mistakenly  located  Kirkuk  in  the  Kurdistan  region  which
    indicated a lack of care  in  its  consideration  of  the  appeal.  The
    Appellant is from Kirkuk which is not in IKK.  The FTT failed to  apply
    AA in terms of relocation without giving reasons,  and  ought  to  have
    engaged in a fact sensitive analysis of relevant factors.


9.    In response Mr Nath for the Respondent relied on the  Rule  24  notice
    and contended that the FTT  decision  was  sustainable.   The  FTT  was
    entitled to follow the respondent's policy as to the improved situation
    in Kirkuk.  It was clear that the FTT had applied a lower  standard  at
    [32-34] and found that the account was not credible [41].  Any error in
    this regard was not material.  It was a question of style as to how the
    FTT had set out facts and reasoning and when looked at as a  whole  the
    decision was adequate.  FTJ Ford was correct in his reasoning given for
    refusal of grant of  permission.   The  appellant  had  not  relied  on
    Article 15c in his initial claim but this had been added by  his  legal
    representatives.

10.    Ms  Sanders  responded  that  the  appellant  was  not  required   to
    specifically plead Article 15c.  The FTT had reached a broad conclusion
    which did not  save  the  inadequate  reasoning  for  its  findings  or
    decision.  It was accepted that the Court of Appeal judgment in AA  was
    post determination of this appeal. The FTT ought to have considered the
    appellant's circumstances in light of the fact that he was not from the
    IKK.

Discussion and conclusion

11.  I have decided that the decision and reasons  contains  errors  in  law
    and that the decision is to  be  set  aside.  The  decision  itself  is
    lengthy amounting  to  21  pages  much  of  which  contained  statutory
    provisions and/or judicial decisions.  The FTT's consideration  of  the
    actual issues under appeal was set  out  in  the  last  3  pages.  When
    considering each individual ground separately I have some  reservations
    as to materiality in terms of the outcome, however when looking at  the
    grounds  as  a  whole,  I  conclude  that  when  taken   together   the
    determination is not  sustainable  as  the  errors  have  infected  and
    impacted on the decision made. The grounds of appeal are made out. I am
    satisfied that the  FTT  failed  to  give  sufficiently  evidenced  and
    justified reasons in support of its decision not to apply  the  country
    guidance case of AA and as such failed  to  comply  with  the  Practice
    direction 12.2-12.4.  I am satisfied that the FTT failed to make  clear
    findings on relevant matters such  as  the  death  of  the  appellant's
    brother. Further the FTT's factual mistake that the appellant came from
    the IKK or that Kirkuk was in the IKK did not inspire  confidence  that
    the FTT had carefully considered the relevant issues or  given  anxious
    scrutiny. The  appellant  was  not  from  Erbil,  the  capital  of  the
    Kurdistan region. The FTT concluded that the  appellant's  account  was
    lacking in credibility but did not specifically or  satisfactorily  set
    out its findings of fact on material matters.  The  decision  does  not
    make it clear what facts were believed, disbelieved or those  it  found
    to be uncertain. The FTT set out speculative conclusions  based  on  if
    the account were true and/or untrue [40] & [43], a flawed approach.

12.  The FTT was bound to consider Article 15c and failed to do so  properly
    as the facts were not clearly established.  The application of  Article
    15C is intended to be fact sensitive and which the FTT  failed  to  do.
    There was some confusion in the decision as to what standard  of  proof
    was applied and whilst accepting  the  FTT  did  set  out  the  correct
    standard at [9] there were also references to a higher standard applied
    at [12] where the phrase "substantial likelihood " is used and  towards
    the end of the decision at [32] where the lower standard  is  described
    as " that it reasonably likely to be true" and  at  [34]  reference  is
    made to the "balance of probabilities".

Decision

13.   There are material errors of law in the decision which  shall  be  set
    aside.  The appeal  is  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (excluding FTJ Housego) for a hearing de novo at Taylor House.



                               Signed                     Date  18.1.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ANONYMITY ORDER
No fee award made




                               Signed                     Date  18.1.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


