
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04165/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 May 2017                       |On 24 May 2017                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     KAA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Woodhouse of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        A.M.S Green ('the Judge') promulgated on 25 October 2016  in  which
        the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and  human
        rights grounds.

Background


     2. The appellant is an Afghan National said to have been  born  on  30
        September 2000. There  is  no  dispute  regarding  the  appellant's
        nationality.

     3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  10  October  2015  and
        claimed asylum on the same day. It  was  known  the  appellant  had
        travelled through several European  countries,  including  Hungary,
        where he has been fingerprinted. The  appellant  has  been  granted
        discretionary leave as an  unaccompanied  minor  which  is  set  to
        expire on 30 March 2018.

     4. The Judge noted the appellant's claim  is  based  upon  an  imputed
        political opinion as his father was in the Afghan national army and
        the Taliban sent three  threatening  letters  to  his  family  home
        requiring his father to leave the army or  face  the  consequences.
        The letters are said to have been sent on the  same  day  and  that
        during that evening the Taliban attacked the appellant's house. The
        appellant  claims  that  he  was  woken  by  gunfire  and  that   a
        Farsi/Uzbek speaker approached him and told him that his  life  was
        in danger. The appellant left with the man, fled the  country,  and
        travelled to the UK.

     5. The Judge noted the reference in the refusal  letter  to  the  fact
        that after leaving Afghanistan the appellant lived  in  Turkey  for
        three years, that when  questioned  about  his  father's  role  and
        duties in the army the appellant gave vague answers,  that  he  was
        unable to say why the Taliban would have sent three letters on  the
        same day and attacked the family home that same evening  which  was
        held to be implausible.  The appellant's belief that  he  would  be
        recruited by the Taliban because his father was  in  the  army  was
        dismissed as speculative as the appellant had  never  claimed  that
        the Taliban had attempted to recruit him even though his father had
        been in the army for many years. It was  also  noted  that  adverse
        credibility finding had been made pursuant  to  section  8  of  the
        Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  on
        basis the appellant had claimed  asylum  in  Hungary  but  had  not
        waited for the outcome of his application. The respondent  did  not
        accept the appellant was entitled to leave on human rights  grounds
        or that he will be of any adverse interest to anybody sufficient to
        give rise to a well-founded fear of persecution or  entitlement  to
        international protection.

     6. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny, including relevant country  information  as  a
        reading of the determination clearly shows. The Judge sets out  his
        findings of fact at [7] to [21].

     7. The Judge considered the section 8  argument  in  [13]  noting  the
        appellant failed to claim asylum in several  safe  third  countries
        including Hungry before coming to the United Kingdom. The appellant
        was fingerprinted in Hungary and lived and  worked  in  Turkey  for
        three years. The appellants claimed to have been  forced  to  leave
        Turkey because he was stabbed but was this  was  not  supported  by
        evidence.

     8. The Judge notes in [14] of the decision:

        "14.  I did not have the benefit of hearing  the  Appellant  giving
             evidence. Had I done so, I would have been able to assess  his
             evidence and how it stood  up  to  cross-examination.  He  was
             present at the hearing and there was no obvious reason why  he
             did not  give  evidence.  There  was  no  suggestion  that  he
             suffered from mental health issues that  would  make  it  very
             difficult to give evidence. There was no  evidence  about  his
             peace of mind being disturbed. He is 16 years  old  and  could
             have testified. Instead, he simply chose to  say  nothing.  He
             did not adopt his witness statement. Under the  circumstances,
             I give his witness statement very little weight.  I  have  not
             even seen copies of the alleged Taliban letters. I  simply  do
             not believe what he is saying about the letters  or  that  his
             father was threatened or that he was even in the army."

     9. The Judge noted the Taliban are recruiting in the appellant's  home
        province and that the appellant may not be able to return to  Logar
        as he would be a man of fighting age. The appellant would, however,
        have the alternative of returning to Kabul [15].

    10. At [16] the Judge accepted the appellant has family in  Afghanistan
        who arranged an agent to bring him to the UK. The appellant's claim
        to have lost contact with his family was not accepted by the  Judge
        in view of  the  adverse  credibility  findings  in  rejecting  the
        appellant's claim that the Taliban had threatened  his  father.  It
        was not accepted  the  appellant  did  not  know  of  his  family's
        whereabouts and the Judge did  not  believe  that  the  appellant's
        family will be unable to meet him and care for him in Kabul on  his
        return, or that he will be forced to live alone if  he  returns  to
        Afghanistan. The appellant is  not  an  orphan  and  would  not  be
        returning as an unaccompanied child. He would  be  returning  as  a
        single able-bodied adult.

    11. The Judge found the appellant had expressed a generalised  fear  of
        the situation on his  return,  maintaining  his  risk  of  forcible
        recruitment by the Taliban and other militant groups  and  that  he
        would  be  vulnerable  given  his  age  and  lack  of  family   and
        clan/tribal support. The Judge  noted  the  appellant  had  adduced
        objective country information to fortify  his  submission  that  it
        would not be safe to return him to Kabul [19]  before  setting  out
        his overall conclusions at [20] and [21] in the following terms:

        "20.      I believe that the Appellant is frightened  of  the  mere
             possibility  of  ill-treatment  or  forcible  recruitment   on
             account of the unsettled situation in his  country.  He  would
             not be of interest to the authorities as a potential insurgent
             or foreigner and he would not be  targeted  and  subjected  to
             inhumane treatment. Although he would be a man of military age
             on his return, I do not accept on the objective evidence  that
             he would be at risk of forcible recruitment either by AGEs  or
             ALP in Kabul. His fear is purely generalised and not  specific
             to him. He would be returning to  Kabul  as  a  single,  able-
             bodied man and may be  able  to  subsist  without  family  and
             community support in Kabul  in  an  area  that  has  necessary
             infrastructure and livelihood opportunities to meet the  basic
             necessities  of  life  and  are  under  effective   government
             control. For the reasons given above I do not, in  any  event,
             believe that he has lost contact with his family and he should
             be able to call upon their support on relocating.

        21.  I am not satisfied that I would be justified in departing from
             the country guidance set out in  AK.  I  appreciate  that  the
             situation in Afghanistan is changing and it may  well  be  the
             case that by the time the Appellant reaches his 18th  birthday
             the circumstances in that country  may  have  deteriorated  to
             warrant further country guidance from the  Upper  Tribunal  or
             departing from the existing country guidance. It may  be  that
             the Appellant's own circumstances may change. In either  case,
             it would be open to the Appellant to  submit  a  fresh  asylum
             claim if appropriate."

Grounds and submissions


    12. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
        which was initially refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
        but, thereafter, renewed to the Upper Tribunal.

    13. The appellant refers to a number of alleged errors in the  decision
        in that:

   a. At [15], [16],  [20]  and  [21]  the  Judge  ignored  the  fundamental
      principle that protection claims are assessed on the facts at the date
      of the hearing and not some future date.

   b. The Judge erroneously assessed the appellant's case on  the  basis  he
      would be returned to Kabul as an adult.

   c. At [13] to the Judge erred in treating the appellant's credibility  as
      damaged for not claiming asylum in Hungary or  Turkey  when  there  is
      evidence of systematic failings  and  deficiencies  in  the  Hungarian
      asylum system and Turkey is not a signatory to the refugee  convention
      and as such it is not a safe  third  country  within  the  meaning  of
      article 27 of Directive 2005/85/EC.

   d. At [14] draws an adverse inference that the appellant was not  telling
      the truth because he did not give oral evidence or tender himself  for
      cross-examination; said  to  raise  an  important  point  of  practice
      especially in relation to a child applicant for asylum.  It is  stated
      the point is material because it is only at [14] that the Judge  gives
      reasons for disbelieving the appellant's account.

   e. It is asserted it was wrong in law for the Judge at [14]  to  draw  an
      adverse  inference  from  the  child  applicant's  failure  to  adduce
      documentary evidence to support his claim from his country of  origin:
      see JK v Sweden, 59166/2012, 23 August 2016, (Grand Chamber)  at  [92]
      holding that a lack of direct evidence cannot be decisive per se of  a
      protection claim.

   f. Notwithstanding [15] the Judge failed to assess the appellant's asylum
      claim on the basis established by UNHCR's country assessment that  the
      appellant is a man or boy of fighting age is a member  of  a  targeted
      group in his home province of Logar.  As  such  the  Judge  failed  to
      direct himself in accordance with the approach of the Grand Chamber in
      JK v Sweden, above at [103].

   g. The failure to Judge to take account of the decision in JK  v  Sweden,
      is material notwithstanding the appellant would be returned  to  Kabul
      as the Judge failed to assess  the  reasonableness  of  relocation  to
      Kabul on a correct basis. The Judge found erroneously that because the
      appellant was not credible for  the  reasons  at  [14]  and  [15]  the
      appellant could expect to be supported by  his  family  on  return  to
      Kabul.

    14. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  on
        21st February 2017 for the reason that "it is arguable  the  First-
        tier Tribunal judge failed to give adequate or any  regard  to  the
        appellant as a child; failed to give  adequate  or  any  regard  to
        Turkey not being a signatory to  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the
        shortcomings of the Hungarian asylum system;  that  he  assess  the
        evidence  on  the  basis  the  appellant  would  be  returning   to
        Afghanistan as a 'man' rather than a minor, failed  to  assess  the
        reasonableness of returning to Kabul.

    15. The appeal is opposed by the Secretary of State  who  asserts  that
        the Judge directed himself appropriately and made adequate findings
        of fact as set out at [16]  and  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
        Taliban had not threatened his father and that he would have family
        to return to in Kabul.

Discussion


    16. On behalf of the Secretary State Mr Bates accepted that  the  Judge
        had erred in assessing the issues before him as  if  the  appellant
        were returning as an adult at some future point in time,  when  the
        Judge was obliged  to  consider  the  matter  in  relation  to  the
        situation appertaining at the date of the hearing. At this point it
        is not disputed that the appellant is a minor.  The  issue  is  the
        materiality of any such error.

    17. In relation to the assertion the Judge erred in holding against the
        appellant that he was not telling the truth because he did not give
        oral evidence or tender himself for cross-examination, this is  not
        an accurate reflection of the Judge's findings made. The finding at
        [14] is set out above. In this the Judge notes the appellant  chose
        not to give evidence but that had he done so the Judge  would  have
        been able to assess the evidence and how  it  stood  up  to  cross-
        examination. The Judge makes  several  observations  regarding  the
        fitness of the appellant to give evidence and his age as a 16-year-
        old who could have testified, but that he chose to say nothing. The
        Judge does not use this  to  find  that  the  appellant  is  not  a
        credible witness or to disbelieve the appellant's  account  but  to
        explain  why,  under  the  circumstances,  the   Judge   gave   the
        appellant's witness statement very little weight.

    18. Whether an individual gives evidence is a matter for them  although
        what weight shall be given to material made available  is  for  the
        Judge, provided it is shown the Judge considered the evidence  with
        the required degree of anxious  scrutiny  and  has  given  adequate
        reasons for findings made, as  the  Judge  arguably  did.   To  the
        extent this is a weight challenge, the appellant has failed to make
        out any arguable legal error in the approach adopted by  the  Judge
        when assessing the weights to be given to the appellant's evidence.
         Similarly, the Judge does  not  seek  corroborative  evidence  but
        observes that he has not seen copies  of  alleged  Taliban  letters
        which is factually correct. In light  of  the  fact  little  weight
        could be given to the evidence which was not  tested  under  cross-
        examination and in the absence of  any  evidence  other  than  that
        referred to by the Judge, the Judge was entitled to  conclude  that
        he did not find the appellant's evidence regarding the  letters  or
        threats, or the appellant's father's activities in the army, to  be
        convincing. It is arguable the Judge was entitled to  apply  little
        weight to the assertion made such as to conclude that  he  did  not
        believe the appellant's account.

    19. If a witness fails to attend the hearing, or attends but elects not
        to give oral evidence, they must accept that  the  Judge  can  only
        arrive at findings based upon the evidence the Judge accepts he  or
        she can attach due weight to.

    20. It is not a case that  the  conclusions  of  the  Judge  relate  to
        matters of which the appellant was not fully aware.  In the Reasons
        for Refusal Letter the decision-maker  noted  in  relation  to  the
        appellant's claim that his  father  was  a  member  of  the  Afghan
        National Army that even though he would have been under the age  of
        13  when  he  lived  in  Afghanistan,  it  would  not   have   been
        unreasonable to expect the appellant to recall some details of  his
        father's role in the army yet he did not. Similarly, in relation to
        the issue of the Taliban  threats  the  Judge  noted  the  lack  of
        credibility in a claim the Taliban would have  sent  three  warning
        letters on the same day and yet attacked the  appellant's  home  on
        the  same  evening  without  giving  the  appellant's  father   the
        opportunity to leave the army, which is the normal way the  Taliban
        appear to expect an individual to react if such warnings are given.
        It was noted in the Refusal Letter  the  appellant  was  unable  to
        provide a reasonable explanation for why  the  Taliban  would  have
        acted in the way in which he alleges.

    21. The appellant and his representatives  were  therefore  aware  that
        issues pointing to the  lack  of  credibility  in  the  appellant's
        account had been raised some time ago by  the  respondent,  in  the
        refusal letter of the  11  April  2016.  The  appellant  had  ample
        opportunity to appear before the Judge to  give  oral  evidence  to
        support his claim and the fact he failed to do so and the resultant
        impact on the assessment of the evidence is a  specific  point  the
        Judge chooses to comment upon. No arguable legal error is made  out
        in relation to this aspect of the decision.

    22. The Judge was fully aware of the appellant's age and  the  need  to
        exercise caution before rejecting as incredible an  account  by  an
        anxious, young and inexperienced asylum seeker, whose  reasons  for
        seeking asylum may well be expected to contain inconsistencies  and
        omissions in the  course  of  its  revelation  to  the  authorities
        investigations on appeal [12]. It is not made out  in  the  grounds
        that the Judge ignored the need to exercise care when assessing the
        evidence upon which appropriate weight could be placed, in arriving
        at the conclusion set out in the decision.

    23. Accordingly, no important point of practice arises in  relation  to
        the assertion regarding whether it  is  fair  to  draw  an  adverse
        inference that an applicant is not telling the truth, as it is  not
        made out this is what the Judge was doing. As stated, the issue  is
        that of weight to be given to the evidence not of credibility.

    24. It is accepted Turkey is not a signatory to the Refugee  Convention
        meaning the appellant is unable to claim asylum  in  that  country,
        but the Judge does not specifically claim that the appellant should
        have claimed asylum there.  There appears to be a contradiction  in
        the Judge noting the respondent's  claim  that  the  appellant  had
        claimed asylum in Hungary when he was encountered on 29 August 2015
        but was unaware of the outcome of the application as  he  left  the
        country to come to the UK, rather  than  availing  himself  of  the
        protection of the authorities in Hungary. The appellant would  have
        been unaware of the decisions of the  High  Court  in  relation  to
        difficulties within the Hungarian asylum system and indeed  appears
        to have engaged with the authorities  by  making  an  asylum  claim
        without evidence of his  experiencing  any  difficulties.  This  is
        therefore not a decision made in relation to a person who  did  not
        make a claim but rather a person who  did  claim  asylum  but  then
        chose to pursue his claim elsewhere, namely in the United  Kingdom.
        The Judge's conclusions in relation to section 8 of  the  2004  Act
        have not been shown to be infected by arguable  material  error  on
        the facts. In any  event,  the  Judge  did  not  make  the  adverse
        credibility findings based upon the Section  8  elements  only  but
        clearly found that the appellant's  behaviour  contributed  to  the
        adverse credibility findings.

    25. In relation to the assertion the Judge failed to assess that  as  a
        man or boy of fighting age the appellant will  be  a  member  of  a
        targeted group in his home province of Logar, the  Judge  finds  at
        [15] the country information suggests the Taliban are recruiting in
        Logar and that the appellant may not be able to return to his  home
        province as he would  be  a  man  of  fighting  age.  Even  if  the
        reference to "man" is arguably incorrect  it  is  clear  the  Judge
        accepted the appellant might face a real risk of recruitment by the
        Taliban if returned to his home  province,  leading  the  Judge  to
        consider the alternative of an internal relocation to Kabul.

    26. The Judge did not find that the  appellant  would  be  returned  to
        Afghanistan as an unaccompanied minor as the Judge found  that  the
        appellant had family in Afghanistan to whom he will be able to turn
        for assistance. It must be accepted  that  somebody  paid  for  the
        appellant to leave Afghanistan. The fact  the  appellant  has  been
        granted discretionary leave by the  Secretary  of  State  does  not
        prevent the Judge undertaking this assessment. The Judge found that
        the appellant is in contact with his family and has failed to  make
        out that his family would not be  able  to  provide  assistance  on
        return. The findings at [15] and [16] are reasonably  open  to  the
        Judge on the evidence including, in the latter  paragraph,  finding
        that family could meet the appellant in  Kabul.  This  is  of  some
        importance in light of the  challenge  as  the  Judge  was  clearly
        considering the decision of the tribunal in AK where  it  was  said
        that where a child has close  relatives  in  Afghanistan  who  have
        assisted him in leaving the  country,  any  assertion  that  family
        members are un-contactable who are unable  to  meet  the  child  in
        Kabul and care for him on return, should be supported  by  credible
        evidence of efforts to  contact  those  family  members  and  their
        inability to meet and care for the child in the event of return.

    27. As stated, the Judge did not accept the appellant has lost  contact
        with his family or does not know their whereabouts, had  no  reason
        to believe the appellant's family will be unable to  meet  him  and
        care for him in Kabul on his return or that he would be  forced  to
        live alone if he returned to Afghanistan.  The  Judge  specifically
        finds the appellant would not be an orphan and not be returning  as
        an unaccompanied child. Although the Judge refers to  return  as  a
        single able-bodied adult which repeats the error in considering the
        merits of the claim at some later date rather at the  date  of  the
        hearing, the Judge clearly finds that even as a child the appellant
        will be returned with family support. It has not  been  shown  this
        decision is not within the range of those the Judge was  reasonably
        entitled to make on the available evidence.

    28. The evidence before the Judge did not support  a  finding  that  it
        would not be reasonable to expect  the  appellant  to  relocate  to
        Kabul.  This was raised in the Reasons for Refusal letter but,  yet
        again, the appellant failed to adduce sufficient evidence,  written
        or oral,  to  show  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  in  all  the
        circumstances to expect him to exercise this alternative.

    29. The material did not show that the appellant would face a real risk
        on return if he relocated to Kabul with the availability of  family
        support. It is possible to infer that such  a  finding  is  equally
        applicable to the appellant as a minor at the date of hearing  too.
        The issue of reasonableness of internal relocation  was  raised  in
        the refusal letter at [44-54] so the appellant was aware this is an
        issue but failed to adduce sufficient  evidence  to  establish  the
        respondent's conclusions  in  relation  to  the  reasonableness  of
        internal relocation were  wrong,  even  though  the  decision-maker
        assessed this issue based upon the appellant's  chronological  age.
        It has not been arguably made out that the Judges  conclusions  are
        irrational or perverse, or that the conclusion this is a reasonable
        option was not available to the Judge on the evidence.

    30. The appellant's reliance upon the decision of the Ground Chamber in
        JK v Sweden is noted. This is a case in which there was an accepted
        account of a direct murder attempt on the husband and the death  by
        shooting of their daughter which established a prima facie case for
        asylum, thus the evidentiary burden fell on the Swedish authorities
        to prove that the applicants would not be subjected  to  Article  3
        ill-treatment  on  return.   The  decision  of  the  Grand  Chamber
        criticised the approach of the Swedish authorities in finding  that
        lack of credibility of the applicants on some issues could  nullify
        the evidentiary value of other facts.

    31. In the case before the Judge there was no acceptance the core claim
        relied upon by the appellant established a  prima  facie  case  for
        asylum meaning that the evidential burden, to  the  lower  standard
        applied by the  Judge,  proving  an  entitlement  to  international
        protection remained upon  the  appellant.  Whether  that  had  been
        discharged was assessed  by  the  Judge  taking  into  account  the
        appellant's age.  The findings by the Judge have not been shown  to
        offend the principles set out by the Grand  Chamber  sufficient  to
        infect the Judges overall conclusions with arguable material  legal
        error, even if the eventual outcome is infected by legal  error  as
        it was assessed as  the  appellant  would  be  as  an  adult.   The
        grounds, however, fail to establish any evidential aspects of  this
        case that would support a claim that such error is material.

    32. The core account was not accepted by the Judge. The Judge noted the
        appellant's age and the  availability  of  family  support.  As  no
        credible real risk of persecution in all of  Afghanistan  had  been
        made out, and any potential real risk in the appellant's home  area
        found to be mitigated by the availability  of  an  internal  flight
        option which the  appellant  had  not  shown  was  unreasonable  or
        unfair, no arguable legal error material to the decision to dismiss
        the appeal has been made out.

Decision

    33. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    34. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  I make
        such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
        Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 22 May 2017

