

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/04423/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 24 April 2018                       |       On 27 April 2018             |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     C B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Bartrum, The Migrant Law Partnership


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





                            DECISION AND REASONS




    Background

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,  I
    refer below to the parties as they  were  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the Appellant in this
    particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Griffith  promulgated  on  2  February  2018  ("the
    Decision") allowing the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 24 April 2017 refusing the Appellant's protection claim.



 2. The Appellant is  a  national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    ("DRC").  He arrived in the UK on 15 October  1995  when  he  was  aged
    three years with his mother, stepfather and a sibling.  He applied  for
    leave to remain as a dependent to his parents' asylum claim.  That  was
    refused but he and his family were granted exceptional leave to  remain
    until 29 July 2004.

 3. The Appellant's mother  applied  for  further  leave  for  him  as  her
    dependent but that was refused on 17 December 2008  when  reasons  were
    given for his  deportation  following  convictions  in  June  2008  for
    possession of cannabis, robbery and actual bodily harm.  A  deportation
    order was signed on 26 July 2010 but  then  revoked  based  on  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights (by reference to the case of Maslov).  The
    Appellant was granted further discretionary leave until 11 March  2015.
    He applied for further leave, which application was outstanding at  the
    date of refusal of the decision here under appeal.

 4. Between 2009 and 2016 the Appellant was convicted of offences including
    offences against the person and dishonesty.  On 18 January 2016, he was
    convicted of possession of Class A and Class B drugs and  sentenced  to
    eighteen months' imprisonment reduced to eight months on appeal.

 5. On 26 February 2016, the  Appellant  made  the  protection  claim,  the
    refusal of which has  led  to  this  appeal.   In  short  summary,  the
    Appellant claims to be at risk from the authorities in DRC as a  member
    and youth leader in the UK of the group APARECO.

 6. The Appellant's appeal was allowed on protection  grounds  (asylum  and
    Article 3 ECHR) because the Judge accepted that  he  is  likely  to  be
    considered by the authorities to be more than simply a  rank  and  file
    member of APARECO and at risk on that account.

 7. The Respondent appeals on the grounds that the  Judge  has  erred  when
    considering the  risk  categories  set  out  in  the  relevant  country
    guidance and, in essence, has made findings not  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.  Specifically, the Respondent notes the limited nature of the
    evidence, that the Appellant said that  he  did  not  have  an  APARECO
    membership card, was  "not  sure"  if  his  activities  appear  on  the
    internet and admitted that he was not a senior member or  official  and
    did not know where APARECO's headquarters are located.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Farrelly
    on 8 March 2018 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-

         "...


         [2]      It is arguable that the First tier Judge materially  erred
         in allowing the appeal on sur place activity given the findings  at
         para 55 of level activity and the risk categories identified in  BM
         and Others (returnees-criminal and non criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT
         00293 (IAC)."


 9. The matter comes before me to decide whether the  Decision  contains  a
    material error of law.  Both parties accepted that, if I found there to
    be an error of law in the Decision, given the basis of  the  challenge,
    the appeal could remain in this Tribunal for re-hearing.

    Decision and Reasons

10. I begin by noting that there  was  very  limited  documentary  evidence
    produced by the Appellant.   That is limited  to  the  Appellant's  own
    statement, transcripts of videos and a photograph.  The Judge also  had
    the record of  the  Appellant's  screening  interview  and  substantive
    asylum interview and she heard oral evidence from the Appellant.

11. In relation to the protection element of  the  appeal,  the  Judge  had
    regard to paragraph 88(iii) of the relevant country guidance case of BM
    and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015]  00293
    (IAC) ("BM") at [54] of the Decision.  That paragraph  is  repeated  at
    [3] of the headnote in BM and is therefore part of the relevant country
    guidance.  The relevant part of that passage is as follows:

         "A national of the DRC who has a significant  and  visible  profile
         within APARECO (UK) is, in the event of returning to his country of
         origin, at real risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  or
         serious harm or treatment  proscribed  by  Article  3  ECHR...Those
         belonging  to  this  category  include  persons  who  are,  or  are
         perceived to be, leaders, office bearers or  spokespersons.   As  a
         general rule, mere rank and  file  members  are  unlikely  to  fall
         within this category.  However, each case will be  fact  sensitive,
         with particular attention directed  to  the  likely  knowledge  and
         perception of DRC state agents."


12. The findings and reasoning which led the Judge to her  conclusion  that
    the Appellant falls within that risk category are as follows:

         "[50]     ...the  appellant  relies  on  his  sur  place  political
         activities and Article 8 to resist  the  respondent's  decision  to
         deport him.  Regarding his connection with APARECO, it  appears  he
         had no interest in the political and internal affairs  of  the  DRC
         until he found himself in prison with other Congolese prisoners and
         discovered the existence  of  the  group.   He  was  introduced  to
         APARECO in the UK by his mother's boyfriend, T, in or  about  2015.
         There is evidence of his membership in the form of a  letter  dated
         29 December 2016 from the president of  that  organisation,  Ernest
         Likiyo.  The letter stated that  the  appellant  is  in  charge  of
         mobilisation and media of APARECO/Youth-London.  The  letter  spoke
         of the risk and threat posed by the Kabila regime to all members of
         APARECO, claiming that photographs of members of APARECO have  been
         published.  The letter claimed that several members  who  had  been
         deported were all tortured and killed.


         [51]     In the  appellant's  bundle  there  were  two  photographs
         featuring the appellant being stills from a video, and  transcripts
         of speeches, including one short  speech  from  the  appellant,  in
         which he identified himself and invited people to attend  an  event
         on 15 December 2017.  There were also translated  transcripts  from
         Lingala or French of two speeches from two named  spokespersons  in
         support of the march  on  15  December  2017.   There  was  also  a
         photograph showing the appellant with others at a gathering said to
         be outside the Congolese Embassy in London - the location cannot be
         verified from the  photograph.   The  appellant  is  shown  with  a
         Congolese flag across his mouth.  In the video promoting the  event
         of 15 December 2017, it is recorded that  the  appellant  made  the
         following speech:


             "My name is [CB].  I am an active youth member of APARECO.   I
             am basically here to invite everybody and I mean everybody and
             I mean from mothers fathers and children you  are  welcome  to
             the event run by APARECO on 15 December from 10am to 5pm.   We
             will  be  marching  and  protesting  about  the  human  rights
             violations back in the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  outside
             the Congolese Embassy in the UK"


         [52]     As to whether that is sufficient to draw the appellant  to
         the adverse attention of the authorities in DRC, I have  considered
         BM and Others....


         [53]     At paragraph  87  of  that  decision,  the  Tribunal  made
         specific findings addressing the risk to  those  considered  to  be
         opponents of the  Kabila  regime  by  reason  of  their  sur  place
         activities.  The findings included that the monitoring  of  APARECO
         (UK) is likely to be undertaken by and on behalf of the DRC embassy
         in London and that it was likely that leaders, office  bearers  and
         spokespersons  are  known  to  the  DRC  UK  embassy  and  the  DRC
         government."


       [The Judge then set out the relevant paragraph of the headnote in BM
       and others to which I refer at  [11]  above,  before  continuing  as
       follows]


         "[55]    In assessing whether the appellant falls within one of the
         risk categories, apart from the recent speech promoting  the  march
         on 15 December 2017, there is little evidence  of  the  appellant's
         activities.  At his interview in December 2016, he  stated  he  had
         attended many rallies and to have watched himself on the APARECO TV
         channel.  He admitted that he was not a senior person  or  official
         but said he spoke for the youth.  The letter  from  APARECO  stated
         that he is "in charge of mobilisation and  media"  of  the  APARECO
         youth.


         [56]     It was found in BM that the APARECO website is  accessible
         in the DRC  (paragraph  99(iv)).   There  is  no  evidence  of  his
         leafleting, but there is evidence that he  has  a  visible  profile
         promoting the activities of APARECO; he has been identified by name
         and has spoken as a member of the youth wing in support.


         [57]     The refusal letter  suggests  that  the  appellant  joined
         APARECO only because his mother's boyfriend, who had  been  in  the
         same situation as himself, won  his  case.   In  other  words,  the
         appellant is not sincere and is  simply  using  a  connection  with
         APARECO to gain asylum.   I  do  not  rule  out  that  possibility.
         Regulation 6(2) of the Qualification Regulations  states,  however,
         that:


             "In deciding whether a person has a well-founded fear of being
             persecuted, it is immaterial whether he actually possesses the
             racial,   religious,    national,    social    or    political
             characteristic which attracts the persecution,  provided  that
             such a characteristic is attributed to him  by  the  actor  of
             persecution."


         Accordingly, whether he is sincere is immaterial; what is  relevant
         is how the authorities in DRC will perceive him."






13. The Judge's conclusion is then set out at [58] as follows:

         "Applying the lower standard of proof, I am  satisfied,  albeit  on
         limited evidence, that the appellant falls into  one  of  the  risk
         categories identified in MM.  This is  because  he  has  identified
         himself (both visually and by name) as a spokesperson for the youth
         wing on a medium that is acknowledged to be accessible in  the  DRC
         and is therefore likely to be viewed as more than a rank  and  file
         member..."


14. Mr Duffy was constrained to accept that the grounds might appear  as  a
    mere disagreement  with  the  Judge's  findings.   Returning  to  those
    grounds, the Judge accepted that there was limited  evidence  from  the
    Appellant  himself  about  his  activities.   She  accepted  that   the
    Appellant was a member whether or not he had a membership card  because
    she accepted that the organisation had vouched  for  him  as  a  member
    ([50]). She accepted based on evidence from that organisation, findings
    in BM and the Appellant's own evidence, that his speech as shown on the
    video would be accessible to the authorities in DRC ([50], [51],  [53],
    [55] and [56]).   The  Judge  took  into  account  that  the  Appellant
    admitted that he was not a senior member or official of APARECO  ([55])
    but noted the Appellant's case based on the letter  from  APARECO  (UK)
    that he is in charge of "mobilisation and media"  of  the  youth  wing.
    The Judge took into account that the Appellant's motives in associating
    himself with APARECO might not be  sincere.   As  she  noted  at  [57],
    however, the question is not whether the Appellant genuinely holds  his
    political opinion but whether that is likely to be imputed  to  him  by
    the DRC authorities.

15. Whilst I do not accept as Mr Bartram at one point  submitted  that  the
    outcome of this appeal was inevitable, particularly given  the  limited
    evidence, nonetheless, I am satisfied that it cannot be argued that the
    Judge's findings, reasoning and conclusion based on that  evidence  are
    perverse or irrational.

16. As Mr Bartram pointed out, based on the Decision, the Respondent  knows
    why she has lost.  There is  no  insufficiency  of  reasoning  for  the
    conclusion.  The grounds merely disagree  with  the  findings,  reasons
    given and the conclusion reached.  The grounds do not disclose an error
    of law.

17. For those reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law in  the
    Decision. I therefore uphold the Decision.




    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith
    promulgated  on  2  February  2018  with  the  consequence   that   the
    Appellant's appeal stands allowed


    Signed
           [pic]
    Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith                                      Dated:
    25 April 2018
