
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/04057/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 8th December 2017                   |          On 4th January 2018        |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                      km
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Russia born  on  15th  March  1978.   The
    Appellant left Russia on 29th September 2016 with  a  passport  in  his
    mother's maiden name.  He  had  a  ticket  to  Brazil  which  transited
    through London.  On 30th September he caught  a  plane  to  London  and
    claimed asylum on arrival.  The  Appellant  claimed  to  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in the Russian Federation on the  basis  of
    his religion and that on return to Russia he feared  that  the  Russian
    Special Forces and Dagestan Special Forces could kidnap  or  kill  him.
    The Appellant's application for asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal
    dated 17th February 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Walker sitting at Hatton Cross on 25th May  2017.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  2nd  June  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.  The   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    made an anonymity direction.  No  application  is  made  to  vary  that
    direction and it remains in force.

 3. On 13th June 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    On  15th  September  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  refused
    permission to appeal finding that the grounds amounted to nothing  more
    than disagreement with findings the judge was entitled to make  on  the
    evidence of a lack of credibility  of  past  problems  and  a  lack  of
    consequent risk on return.

 4. On 29th September 2017 new Grounds of Appeal were lodged to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. On 10th October 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor  granted  permission
    to appeal contending that it was arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred for  all  the  reasons  identified  in  the  grounds  but  in
    particular it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in
    its consideration  of  the  expert  report  both  in  relation  to  the
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility and the risk to the Appellant
    upon return.

 6. On 9th November 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes before
    me to determine whether or not there is a material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed Counsel Miss Brown.  The Secretary of State  appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Duffy.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr  Duffy does no more  than  rely  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   He
    contends that in a detailed determination  Judge  Walker  analysed  the
    evidence  and  made  a  series  of  negative  credibility  findings  at
    paragraph 25 and that those findings were open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence  presented and that it cannot be said that they are irrational
    findings.  He further noted that Judge Walker also had  concerns  about
    Mr Chanciner's report and that at paragraph 13 the judge  had  referred
    to the fact that the expert had not met  the  Appellant  and  that  the
    content of paragraph 1.2 of the report did not mirror  the  Appellant's
    account.  Further he contends  that  at  paragraph  15  the  judge  had
    referred to various assumptions made by Mr Chanciner and that the judge
    after further analysis concluded at  paragraph  19  that  the  expert's
    report depends on the Appellant's account of events being correct.

 8. In response Miss Brown relies on the grounds  as  identified  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor.  She points out that the Appellant  relies  on
    detailed grounds for permission to appeal and that they were fivefold:

      i) A  misdirection  in  law/failure  to  take  into  account  material
         evidence when determining credibility at paragraphs 12 to 15.

     ii) A mistake of fact  or  procedural  unfairness  in  respect  of  the
         questions of passports and the  use  of  the  Appellant's  mother's
         maiden name at paragraph 16 to 18.

    iii) A failure to  take  into  account  country  evidence/an  unreported
         decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  specifically  relied  upon   at
         paragraph 19 to 22.

     iv) The failure of the judge to take into account material  assessments
         within the country  expert  report  and  that  he  made  irrational
         conclusions - at paragraph 23 to 25.

      v) A failure to make findings on material facts at paragraph 26.

    She asked me to find that there are material errors of law and  to  set
    aside the decision and to remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. Miss Brown has taken me to the  submissions  made  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  She asked me to go no further than to consider the grounds and
    not to go outside them and this approach I adopt.  In  essence  all  Mr
    Duffy seeks to do is to rely on the Rule 24 and the submission that the
    judge's findings were open to him and that the Grounds of Appeal amount
    to mere disagreement.

12. I am not persuaded that that is correct.  The starting  point  involves
    the assessment  of  credibility.   A  proper  approach  to  credibility
    requires an assessment of the evidence and of the  general  claim.   In
    asylum claim relevant factors are firstly the internal  consistency  of
    the claim, secondly the inherent plausibility of the claim and  thirdly
    the consistency  of  the  claim  with  external  factors  of  the  sort
    typically found in country guidance.  It is theoretically correct  that
    a Claimant need do no more than state his claim but  that  claim  still
    needs to be examined for consistency  and  inherent  plausibility.   In
    nearly every case external information against which the claim could be
    checked will be available.  In this case  I  acknowledge  that  a  fair
    assessment of credibility could only be  made  once  all  the  material
    evidence had been considered and that this would include Mr Chanciner's
    report.  What the judge has done is to consider Mr  Chanciner's  report
    after making a conclusion that the Appellant's claim was incredible and
    that he was not at risk on return.  That is not  the  correct  approach
    and as such constitutes  a  material  error  of  law.   Thereafter  the
    grounds challenged the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  for
    example as to whether there was any inconsistency  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence, and the  failure  to  rely  on  the  unreported  decision  of
    Absalutdin Bennatov and Naida Daibova v the Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department (AA/09970/2013 and AA/09971/2013).   This  again  takes
    into account whether the Appellant would or would  not  have  benefited
    from reliance upon this.

13. All grounds effectively argue that the judge has failed  to  take  into
    consideration in its entirety Mr Chanciner's evidence  and  bearing  in
    mind the manner  in  which  the  judge  has  materially  erred  in  his
    assessment of the expert's report the correct approach  is  to  make  a
    finding that there is a material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and to set the decision aside  and  to  remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing with  none  of
    the findings of fact to stand.



Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of  three
    hours.

 3) The appeal is to be before any Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  other
    than Immigration Judge Walker.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file/or serve  at  the  Tribunal
    and upon the other party to the appeal such subjective and/or objective
    evidence upon which they seek to rely at least seven days prior to  the
    restored hearing.

 5) That in the  event  of  the  Appellant  requiring  an  interpreter  his
    instructing solicitors do notify the  Tribunal  within  seven  days  of
    receipt of these directions.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 28th December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


