
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04850/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th August 2018                           |On 10th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Abdullah [H]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Foudy made
    following a hearing at Manchester on 10th May 2018.

 2. Mrs Pettersen accepted that the determination contained errors  of  law
    such that it ought to be set aside and remitted back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Foudy.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran whose age is disputed.  He claims to
    have arrived in the UK on 9th December 2015 when he was either 15 or 16
    years of age and said that he would be at risk on return  to  Iran  for
    political reasons.

 4. The judge dismissed his appeal against the refusal of his asylum  claim
    finding him to be a wholly incredible witness.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2  of  2010
    Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance in making  her
    findings, and had failed to bear in mind that,  on  any  view,  he  was
    recounting events which had taken place when he was a child.   Moreover
    the appellant had provided a medical report which shows that he  is  in
    therapy with a counsellor who had identified symptoms of PTSD.

 6. Mrs Pettersen accepted that the judge had erred for the reasons  stated
    in the grounds in that she had failed to adequately assess the  medical
    evidence and had not borne  in  mind  that  the  unrepresented  teenage
    appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness.  Consequently  her  credibility
    findings could not stand.

 7. The decision is set aside.  It will have to be remade by another First-
    tier Judge other than Ms Foudy at Manchester.  Ms Khan asked that it be
    listed in the first instance for a CMR as it was intended that a proper
    Medico-Legal Report be prepared.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed[pic]                             Date  20 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



