
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04076/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2017                        |On 09 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     ZS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero of Counsel, instructed by Migrant Law
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on [ ] 1996.  He appeals  the
    decision of the Secretary of State on 2 April 2016 to refuse his asylum
    application.  Having  unsuccessfully  applied  for  a  visit  visa  the
    appellant arrived in the UK on 2 October 2015 in the back of  a  lorry.
    He applied for asylum on 29 October 2015.  The application was  refused
    on 6 April 2016 and the appellant appealed that decision.   The  appeal
    came before a  First-tier  Judge  on  4  April  2017.   His  claim  was
    summarised by the First-tier Judge in the following  extract  from  her
    determination:

         "2.  The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is contained  in
             his Statement of Evidence Form, asylum interview  and  witness
             statement.  The appellant is a Kurd from Turkey.   He  claimed
             that he was arrested and detained three times by  the  Turkish
             authorities.  On the first occasion he was detained on 8  June
             2014 after he attended a demonstration in support  of  Kurdish
             rights.  He claimed that he shouted some slogans and some  PKK
             supporters blocked the roads.  He was hit with the butt  of  a
             rifle and arrested.  He claimed that he was detained for three
             days, ill-treated and accused of being a PKK  supporter  which
             he denied.  He was released without  charge.   On  the  second
             occasion he was arrested on 20 October 2014 from his home.  He
             and his brother were detained.  The authorities  searched  the
             house and found two invoices for donations which he  had  made
             to the People's Democracy Party (HDP).  The appellant  claimed
             that he was again accused  of  supporting  the  PKK.   He  was
             detained for three days and accused of being  involved  in  an
             arson attack on a school and the AKP Party building.   He  was
             again released without charge.


         3.   The appellant claimed that the last detention took place on 13
             August 2015.  He was one of ten people  who  went  to  an  HDP
             Party building in Varto.  The appellant claimed that there was
             a crowd in front of the building and one person was  giving  a
             speech.  He shouted some  antigovernment  slogans;  the  crowd
             wanted to march but the security forces  threw  teargas.   The
             appellant claimed that he was detained for  three  days,  ill-
             treated in detention and asked the same type of questions that
             he was asked before.  He  was  threatened  that  he  would  be
             killed or put in prison if he did not become an informant  for
             the Turkish  authorities.   The  appellant  claimed  that  the
             following day he agreed to be an informant and was released on
             16 August 2015.  He was given a telephone number and  told  to
             provide information about the PKK and HDP to the  authorities.
             He was also asked to report to the police every  Monday.   The
             appellant claimed that he feared that his life was  in  danger
             and left Varto on 19 August 2015 and  went  to  Istanbul.   He
             stayed in Istanbul for seven to ten days and then left  Turkey
             about one or two weeks later after  the  police  went  to  his
             house looking for him.  The appellant stated in interview that
             he is a supporter of HDP because they support Kurdish people's
             rights."


2.   The Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the  Turkish  authorities
    were interested in the appellant as he had been released from detention
    without charge nor that he had been forced to become an  informer.   If
    the appellant were of high interest to the authorities they would  have
    looked for him sooner.  While the appellant had basic knowledge of  the
    HDP, he could have gleaned this as he was  a  Kurd  from  Turkey.   The
    appellant's claims on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  Article  8
    grounds were rejected.

3.   The First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and  also
    from his cousin ES, who has the same surname as the appellant.  He  had
    been granted asylum in 2013 after an appeal and had been in the  United
    Kingdom since November  2000.   He  had  returned  to  Turkey  on  four
    occasions since 2011 and had  had  no  problems  with  the  authorities
    during his visits as he now held a British passport.  He had been  told
    by members  of  his  family  that  the  appellant  was  wanted  by  the
    authorities in Turkey.   He  said  the  appellant's  brother  had  been
    interviewed by the Home Office in respect of his claim for asylum.

4.   The judge records that the appellant claimed that his father and  older
    brother supported the PKK and that the PKK were active in his area  and
    that  a  number  of  villagers  had  joined  them.   She  refers  to  a
    discrepancy in the record of asylum interview.  The appellant had  said
    that his first detention occurred on 8 June 2014 and had  later  stated
    that the next political event that he had attended  was  on  7  October
    2014.  However, he had subsequently stated in the interview that he had
    attended a protest on 21 August 2014.  The discrepancy in the  view  of
    the  First-tier  Judge  cast  doubt  upon   the   appellant's   overall
    credibility.

5.   Issue is taken in this  case  with  the  judge's  negative  credibility
    assessment and Counsel focused chiefly on what the judge stated in  the
    following paragraph of her determination, paragraph 16, which reads  as
    follows:

         "16. At question 47 of the asylum interview of the appellant stated
             that his second  arrest  occurred  on  20  October  2014.   At
             question 56 he stated that  on  each  detention  he  was  ill-
             treated; he referred to beatings, torture, electric shocks and
             falaka.  However I find that there is no medical  evidence  to
             support the appellant's assertions that he was physically ill-
             treated in detention.  There is no evidence that the appellant
             suffered any injuries.  Yet if he was ill treated in  the  way
             he claims, he would have  suffered  injuries  consistent  with
             that ill treatment.  I find that the appellant never  referred
             to suffering injuries during his detention.   I  further  find
             that the appellant gave no detailed evidence  of  the  alleged
             torture that he suffered.  For example he made no  mention  of
             where on his body he was hit, whether he asked to see a doctor
             and whether he has any lasting injuries or scars as  a  result
             of the ill treatment.  I find that there  is  no  credible  or
             corroborative evidence that he was ill-treated as he claims in
             detention."


6.   A point is taken in the grounds in relation to a finding by  the  judge
    that it would not be  credible  that  the  appellant  would  leave  HDP
    donation invoices at his home in the full knowledge that  if  his  home
    was searched by the authorities the  documents  could  be  found.   The
    judge accepted that the appellant came from  a  Kurdish  village  where
    there was considerable support for the HDP and the PKK.  She noted that
    reliance  was  placed  upon  the  determinations  in  respect  of   the
    appellant's two cousins who  had  applied  for  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant's cousin HS did not give evidence at the appeal
    hearing although his determination was in the appellant's bundle.   She
    found that the circumstances in the case of HS, who came from the  same
    village as the appellant, differed from the appellant's  asylum  claim.
    HS supported  the  PKK,  his  father  was  tortured  in  1994  and  his
    grandmother was shot and killed.  He was detained  on  three  occasions
    for three days.

7.   In  paragraph  20  of  her  determination  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had never been charged or convicted of any offence in  Turkey
    and there was no evidence he was  wanted  and  there  was  no  credible
    evidence that he had been ill-treated in detention.  The appellant  had
    had an opportunity to talk to his cousins about his  and  their  claims
    for asylum.   HS  had  also  stated  that  he  was  arrested  on  three
    occasions.  It was submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  any
    similarity between the case of  the  appellant  and  his  cousins  were
    explicable because they came from the same part of Turkey  where  there
    was PKK support and the family was politically active.  The judge found
    that each case should be decided on  its  own  facts.   She  took  into
    account the fact that two of the appellant's cousins had  been  granted
    refugee status and that they came from the same village.

8.   Counsel argued that there had been  no  challenge  to  the  appellant's
    claim that he had been arrested and detained on three occasions but the
    judge found that there had been no explicit acceptance of  that  aspect
    of his case.  The Presenting Officer confirmed that the respondent  had
    not accepted that the appellant had ever been detained or  arrested  in
    Turkey.

9.   The witness ES confirmed that he had had no problems with  the  Turkish
    authorities because he held a British passport.  The judge nevertheless
    found that he had never been  questioned  by  the  authorities  despite
    having the same surname as the appellant and attached limited weight to
    what he said he had been told  by  members  of  the  family  about  the
    interest of the authorities in the appellant.

10.  The judge found that the appellant had not been  arrested  or  detained
    and even if he had attended some protest rallies in Turkey relating  to
    Kurdish rights he  had  not  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities.  Any political activism in London had been orchestrated to
    support a weak asylum claim.  Having considered  the  country  guidance
    the judge did not find that the appellant would be at  risk  on  return
    even if his surname was known to the authorities  and  his  cousin  had
    frequently returned to Turkey.  Accordingly  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

11.  Grounds of appeal were settled and  I  have  already  referred  to  the
    principal  complaint  relating  to  paragraph   16   of   the   judge's
    determination.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  A response was filed  by  the  respondent  on  15
    September 2017 in which it was contended that the judge had  "robustly"
    considered the appellant's claim and had made findings with respect  to
    the core aspects of it.  She had  given  adequate  reasons  by  way  of
    reference to the evidence.  She was not obliged to find the appellant's
    claim credible despite the determinations of the  appellant's  cousins.
    It was open to the judge to find that the cousins and the appellant had
    discussed their claims.  When read as a whole the judge's findings were
    open to her.

12.  Mr Bonavero  concentrated  his  argument  on  what  had  been  said  in
    paragraph 16.   The  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  had  never
    referred to suffering injuries during his detention  was  difficult  to
    reconcile with paragraph 6 of the witness statement where the appellant
    had referred to being beaten  up,  kicked  and  punched  and  hit  with
    truncheons and subjected to falaka and  verbal  abuse.   He  refers  to
    bruises and marks on his body at that time but they faded away.  He had
    gone to get some painkillers on his way home and had taken about a week
    to recover having been pain.  Moreover Counsel pointed  to  the  answer
    given by the appellant in question 44 of the  interview  where  he  had
    said that he had been in a lot of pain after being beaten up during the
    detention and had had some bruises and had gone to the chemist's  where
    he had bought medicine and painkillers.  In relation to the point  made
    by the judge Counsel submitted that the appellant  had  been  asked  in
    question 39 of his interview what had happened in detention and he  had
    said he had been beaten up and tortured and ill-treated  and  had  been
    released due  to  a  lack  of  evidence  and  he  had  not  been  asked
    supplementary questions about where he had been  hit.   The  judge  had
    taken a point that at the screening interview the appellant had  stated
    he had refused to become  an  informer  but  Counsel  argued  that  the
    appellant had been asked to be brief in explaining why he was  claiming
    asylum and his recorded reply was "because authorities are looking  for
    me because during my last detention  they  asked  me  to  become  their
    informer but I refused to do that".  In relation to scars the judge was
    not a medical expert and it was not clear  that  the  ill-treatment  of
    which the appellant complained would leave lasting  marks.   The  judge
    had erred in looking for corroboration.  The point  taken  on  the  HDP
    donation invoices was not a good one,  it  being  a  legal  party.   In
    relation to the appeals lodged in respect of  the  appellant's  cousins
    there had been a very important overlap and parts of HS'  case  married
    with the case put by the appellant.  The judge appeared to take a point
    that there might have been collusion but this ignored the fact that the
    appellant's claim had been made first.

13.   Mr  Bates  accepted  that  the  findings  in  paragraph  16  were  not
    necessarily clear.  It was a medical issue.   There  was  the  informer
    point in paragraph 17 of the determination and the HDP  donations.   HS
    had not given  evidence  at  the  hearing.   The  judge  had  correctly
    reminded herself that each case depended on its own merits.   While  it
    was claimed that the family name was a red flag ES had returned on four
    occasions without problems.  It was open to the judge to find collusion
    - the parties could have discussed matters  prior  to  the  appellant's
    arrival.  In relation to the point taken about the  claimed  concession
    in the decision letter Mr Bates pointed out that at paragraphs  23  and
    24 it had been made quite clear that the only matter accepted was  that
    the appellant was a national of Turkey and that it  was  expressly  not
    accepted that the appellant was wanted by the  authorities  in  Turkey.
    Nothing else had  been  accepted.   The  judge  had  not  accepted  the
    appellant's sur place activities as genuine.

14.  In reply Counsel submitted that the key point was  the  issue  of  ill-
    treatment.  The appellant had not been inconsistent at  his  interview.
    The answer to question 56 of the substantive  interview  only  differed
    because he had given more detail.  The HDP  donation  receipts  at  his
    home were unsurprising given that the party was a legal party.  It  was
    further unsurprising that ES had returned to Turkey without problems as
    a British passport holder whereas the appellant would be returned as  a
    failed asylum claimant.  There were still the issues about  the  extent
    of any concession made  by  the  respondent  in  the  decision  letter.
    Counsel submitted that the  appeal  should  be  remitted  for  a  fresh
    hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.   At  the  conclusion  of  the
    submissions I reserved my decision.

15.  I have  carefully  considered  all  the  material  before  me  and  the
    representations that have been made.

16.  In my view Counsel correctly focused on the point taken in relation  to
    paragraph 16.  Even Mr Bates, who put up a valiant effort on behalf  of
    the respondent in relation to the other arguments advanced,  found  the
    judge's reasoning in this paragraph unclear.  As I  have  said,  it  is
    extremely difficult to reconcile what  is  said  with  the  appellant's
    witness statement.  First of all the appellant had given details of his
    ill-treatment and had  also  explained  the  transient  nature  of  the
    injuries and the steps he had taken to obtain painkillers  and  it  had
    taken him a week to recover.  What he said in his witness statement was
    not radically inconsistent with what had been said at interview.

17.  Points are taken in relation to the other issues raised  by  the  judge
    but I think, as is rightly recognised, it is what  the  judge  said  in
    this particular paragraph - paragraph 16  -  that  raises  concerns.  I
    agree with Counsel that the assessment of the appellant's ill-treatment
    in detention was a key issue in the case and the  judge  erred  in  her
    consideration of it.  In the circumstances I accept the  argument  that
    the determination is materially flawed as claimed in the grounds and  I
    accede to Counsel's suggestion that the appeal must be remitted  for  a
    fresh hearing before a different First-tier Judge.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed to the extent indicated.

Anonymity Order

I deem it appropriate in this case to make an anonymity order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 7 November 2017

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
