
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
pa/04443/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th July 2017                         |On 19th July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              parvin doost ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Gayle, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Monaghan
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 15th December 2016.

 2. Mr Gayle established that the judge materially erred in law in reaching
    her decision and Mr Diwnycz did not seek to make any  argument  against
    him in his submissions.  The decision is set aside  for  the  following
    reasons.

 3. The judge wrote at paragraph 44 of the determination that her  starting
    point in relation to the appellant's husband's  asylum  claim  was  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Lawrence   who   had   made
    comprehensive adverse credibility findings in relation to  his  appeal.
    However she did not consider  the  decision  of  AS  &  AA  (effect  of
    previous linked determination) Somalia [2006] UKAIT 00052  which  makes
    clear the need for caution when  relying  on  a  determination  from  a
    relative.  In particular the conclusion of the previous decision  maker
    is not in itself any evidence of the facts upon which  the  conclusions
    appear to have been based.  It is only a starting point for the  second
    Tribunal.

 4.  The wholesale adoption of Judge Lawrence's determination led the judge
    into error in relation to the findings in relation to  this  appellant,
    which is based on a wholly different factual matrix.  For  example  she
    rejected the evidence of the second witness  solely on the basis of the
    previous findings of Judge  Lawrence  when  he  gave  evidence  in  the
    husband's appeal on an unrelated matter.   Moreover  the  judge's  view
    that it was wholly incredible that Judge Lawrence would make no mention
    of a crucial piece of documentary evidence if it had been presented  to
    him, is problematic when Mr Gayle  established  that  in  fact  it  was
    before him.

 5. Second, the appellant produced a large bundle of  documentary  evidence
    and oral evidence from two witnesses in support of her claim  to  be  a
    member of the Bah'ai faith.  The judge acknowledged that she  displayed
    considerable knowledge of the faith at interview albeit  that  she  was
    critical of her lack of  knowledge  in  some  important  respects.  The
    documents included a somewhat unusual one, the quashing of  a  property
    transaction on the grounds that she had not informed  the  vendor  that
    she was of the Bah'ai faith. It required  some  analysis  and  was  not
    considered in the round but rejected in a generic sentence in which the
    judge said that it had been manufactured to support her  claim  because
    she did not accept that the appellant was Bah'ai.

 6. The judge, furthermore, at paragraph 59, the judge made  a  mistake  of
    fact in finding an inconsistency in relation to the date of the  Bah'ai
    holy day, which was correct  in  the  Persian  calendar  and  found  an
    inconsistency in her evidence in relation to the reason for fasting for
    reasons which are unclear. She made an adverse credibility finding on a
    third witness because he provided only his return ticket from Iran  and
    not his outward ticket, which  on  the  face  of  it  does  not  appear
    logical.

 7. Accordingly the decision will be re-made by an alternative  Immigration
    Judge at Bradford.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Taylor
  Date 18 July 2017


