
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04470/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2020                           |On 10 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     MBU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, counsel instructed by Lawmatic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Head, promulgated on  24  September  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 13 January 2020.

Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is  reiterated  below  because
    this is a protection matter.

Background

 3. The appellant, now aged 37, entered the UK  on  24  October  2009  with
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 migrant valid until 1 April 2011. That leave
    was extended until 29 October 2012 and again to 20 September  2014,  in
    the same capacity. The appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain
    under Tier 4 on 19 September 2014, but varied  that  application  to  a
    human rights application, which was refused and  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded   on   30   March   2016.    After   unsuccessfully   seeking
    reconsideration, the appellant  twice  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain under the Tier 1 Exceptional Talent  route  during  2016.  Those
    applications were promptly refused. Thereafter  the  appellant  applied
    for leave to remain on private life grounds, which was  refused  on  12
    July 2017. The appellant applied for asylum on 17 August 2017.

 4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he  was  engaged  in
    political activities in Bangladesh, with the Bangladesh Islami  Chhatra
    Shibir (BICS) and Jamaat-e-Islami (JEI), that he  was  attacked  during
    2006 and 2007 owing to his membership of BICS and that as  of  2014  he
    learned that he was of adverse interest to the  Bangladesh  government.
    Those claims were rejected by the respondent owing to  the  appellant's
    failure to provide a consistent and credible account. His knowledge  of
    the said parties was accepted and considered  understandable  owing  to
    the appellant's degree in Al-Hadith  &  Islamic  Studies.  It  was  not
    accepted that the appellant had been politically active in the  UK  nor
    that his father was a war criminal. The credibility of the  appellant's
    account was said to have been damaged by his  immigration  history  and
    his failure to claim asylum before being  notified  of  an  immigration
    decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Following the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, despite accepting
    that the appellant  and his friend, AAM had been attacked  in  2006  by
    members of opposition student groups at the time they were active  BICS
    members, the judge  concluded  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    claimed problems arising since 2014 was a fabrication.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal are as follows

     - There was a material error  of  fact  as  to  whether  there  was  a
       material inconsistency in the appellant's  evidence  at  the  appeal
       hearing of his friend and in addition no credit was  given  for  the
       appellant having been found to be a credible witness.

     - There was a failure to take into  account  that  the  Awami  League,
       whose supporters had attacked the  appellant  had  his  friend,  had
       taken office in 2009

     - The judge failed to determine whether  the  appellant's  father  was
       alleged to have perpetrated war crimes  and  whether  the  appellant
       would be at risk

     - There was a  failure  to  consider  the  impact  of  suppression  of
       political beliefs.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

The hearing

 8. Mr Symes made the following points. Starting with  the  second  ground,
    the judge had accepted that the appellant and his friend were attacked.
    In relation to the comments that the Awami League  (AL)  were  not  the
    ruling party, they had been dominant since 2009 and the appellant  must
    be in more danger now as AL were more powerful now than  they  were  in
    2006. Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules was in play as there  was
    a presumption of future  persecution  unless  good  reason  to  suppose
    otherwise.  As for the  third  ground,  the  judge  was  alive  to  the
    activities of the appellant's father in the  1970's  and  made  several
    references to it. The appellant's concern was that  he  feared  ongoing
    harassment and it was unclear what the judge made of this evidence  and
    whether it would  raise  problems  for  the  appellant  in  Bangladesh.
    Regarding the fourth ground, the judge accepted that the appellant  was
    active in the past and therefore the question was  what  the  situation
    would be on return. Reference was made to  the  extract  from  a  Human
    Rights Watch report which was before the judge regarding  the  risk  of
    abuse to supporters of JEI and BISC. The evidence before the  judge  as
    to how the appellant would act on return to Bangladesh was found in his
    witness statement where he  described  himself  as  "hardcore"  in  his
    beliefs. While the point was not developed in  the  statement,  if  the
    appellant did not act in a similar  way  in  the  future  it  would  be
    because he felt obliged to keep his head down owing  to  the  political
    situation in Bangladesh.  Mr Symes did not place any  emphasis  on  the
    first ground as he accepted that the judge's finding that the appellant
    was attacked along with his friend was not harmful to  the  appellant's
    case.

 9. Mr Jarvis  made  the  following  submissions.  The  appellant  had  not
    challenged the judge's findings regarding  the  documents,  the  events
    since 2006 and the UK activities. The judge rejected the  material  put
    forward to show an ongoing interest in the appellant and provided  good
    reasons. The background evidence could not lead the judge to  reach  an
    alternative conclusion in circumstances where, on the  appellant's  own
    evidence, neither he, his father nor family had experienced problems.

10. At the end of the hearing I announced that the First-tier Tribunal made
    no material errors of law and the decision was upheld in its  entirety.
    I give my reasons below.

Decision on error of law

11. As accepted by Mr Symes, there was no material  error  of  fact  as  to
    content of the appellant's  evidence  at  the  appeal  hearing  of  his
    friend, given that at [53],  the  judge  was  willing  to  accept  that
    "during their time as active BICS member at university,  the  appellant
    and AAM were subject to attacks by members of  the  opposition  student
    groups including the AL."

12. The second ground concerned a failure by the judge to take into account
    that the AL had taken office in 2009. That  argument  is  unsustainable
    because at [54] the judge demonstrated that he was aware that  AL  took
    office in 2009 when he found  that the appellant ceased his involvement
    in BICS in 2007 and  "faced  no  further  issues  during  his  time  in
    Bangladesh...he left and returned to  Bangladesh  without  incident  or
    adverse attention from the authorities, even when the AL came to  power
    in 2009."

13. In relation to the third ground, it was contended that the judge failed
    to determine whether the appellant would be at risk as a result of  the
    allegation that his father had  perpetrated  war  crimes.  The  judge's
    treatment  of  this  issue  was  impeccable.  At  [73-74],  the   judge
    replicates the relevant part of the Bangladesh CPIN which refers to war
    crimes allegations as well as the position of political party activists
    and at [75], the judge found there to be evidence that  senior  leaders
    of JEI had been charged with war crimes and  that  those  charges  were
    likely to be politically motivated and persecutory. At [76], the  judge
    asked the correct question, was there a  real  risk  of  the  appellant
    being subject to such  politically  motivated  persecution.  The  judge
    proceeds to answer that question in the  following  paragraphs,  giving
    wholly sustainable reasons for concluding that there was no such  risk.
    Those reasons included that by the appellant's own account he  had  not
    been actively involved in BICS for  13  years,  he  was  not  currently
    actively involved in JEI,  there  was  no  credible  evidence  why  the
    government in Bangladesh would show any interest in him and that he had
    attempted to provide unreliable documents to  the  Tribunal  [73].  The
    judge further noted that the appellant's father, aged 90, remained free
    and that he continued to live without incident in Bangladesh in his own
    home or that of his daughters [55] and that the appellant had not given
    consistent evidence regarding how this  could  be  if  his  father  was
    wanted for war crimes. The judge further found that the  appellant  had
    failed to demonstrate any credible current connection to  BICS  or  JEI
    and that there was no evidence that all those associated  with  JEI  or
    BICS,  past  or  present,  were  at  real  risk  of  serious  harm   in
    Bangladesh[78].

14. It was said that there was a failure  by  the  judge  to  consider  the
    impact of the appellant suppressing his political beliefs on return  to
    Bangladesh. This argument takes no  account  of  the  judge's  findings
    regarding the appellant's claimed political activity in the  UK,  which
    is set  out  at  [69]  of  the  decision.  The  judge  notes  that  the
    appellant's oral evidence was that  "he  did  not  involve  himself  in
    politics in the UK to protect his family in Bangladesh"  and  that  the
    appellant's witness confirmed that "the appellant had not attended  any
    demonstrations with him in the UK and the appellant's evidence was that
    he had only attended two demonstrations in  the  last  11  years."  The
    evidence before the judge did not, therefore, support  the  appellant's
    claim, made in his witness statement, that he was a "hardcore" BICS/JIE
    supporter, let alone the suggestion that he would recommence  political
    activities on return to Bangladesh.

15. Lastly, Mr Jarvis' made a valid point  regarding  the  absence  of  any
    challenge to the judge's  comprehensive  findings  on  the  substantial
    quantity of documents relied upon by the appellant to support his claim
    that the Bangladesh authorities have a current or  recent  interest  in
    him. Briefly, at [47] the judge commented that the appellant was unable
    to give a cogent reason for discrepancies and issues in  the  documents
    and at [59] the judge finds that a newspaper article produced, made  no
    sense, did not stand up to basic scrutiny,  was  not  an  independently
    published news article and was deserving of no weight. Referring to the
    FIRs, the judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  given  contradictory
    evidence as to potential cases against him in Bangladesh [61] and  that
    the documents related to another person  and  events  which  had  taken
    place when the appellant was in the UK [62]. There were also  a  number
    of other unchallenged findings, adverse to the appellant set out in the
    decision and reasons.




16. The grounds fail to identify any material errors of  law.  Accordingly,
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date 28 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


