
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04924/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 September 2017                      |On 5 October 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    S S H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel, instructed by Milestone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Aujla (the judge), promulgated on 30 June 2017, in which
    he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  That  appeal  arose  from  the
    Respondent's decision of 13 May 2017,  refusing  protection  and  human
    rights claims made by the Appellant on the basis that he  was  gay  and
    would be at risk on return to Pakistan for that reason.

The judge's decision

 2. The judge was clearly not impressed with the Appellant's  own  evidence
    and  the  lack  of  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  his   claim
    (paragraphs 43 to 49).  Particular emphasis was placed upon the failure
    of the Appellant to have made a protection claim sooner  than  he  did.
    The judge found that  the  Appellant  was  not  in  fact  gay  and  had
    fabricated his entire account (paragraph 50).

 3. In the context of the appeal before  me  paragraph  42  is  of  central
    importance and I set it out in full:

         "Whilst I have considered the evidence of the  three  witnesses  in
         addition to that of the Appellant's partner, for the reasons I have
         given below, I have serious  concerns  about  the  Appellant's  own
         credibility.  I find that the evidence of the three  witnesses  was
         not an independent source of evidence.  They were  the  Appellant's
         friends  who  no  doubt  were  attempting  to  advance  his   claim
         regardless  of  what  the  facts  were.   Their  evidence  and  the
         photographic evidence in the bundle was  nothing  more  than  self-
         serving.  As I have serious  concerns  about  the  Appellant's  own
         credibility, I have  concluded  that  the  evidence  of  the  three
         witnesses, and the photographic evidence, did not  assist  me  much
         and I therefore choose not to give much weight to that evidence."

                                                           Underlining added

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. Ground 1 asserts that the judge has erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
    witnesses' evidence.  It is said that the judge has failed to  consider
    the Appellant's own evidence in the context of their evidence.   It  is
    also said that the judge was wrong  to  have  regarded  their  evidence
    simply as being self-serving without giving any additional  reasons  as
    to why he was placing no weight upon it.  Ground 2  suggests  that  the
    judge erred  in  his  application  of  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.   Ground   3
    indicates that there has been a misdirection in the application  of  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  It is said that in paragraph 51 the  judge  has
    misstated the law: the avoidance of persecution did not have to be  the
    only reason why a gay man  may  act  discretely  in  their  country  of
    origin.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge Lambert on 31 July
    2017.  Although the wording of the grant is not  entirely  clear,  both
    representatives at the hearing before me were  agreed  that  permission
    must have been granted on all grounds or else the point concerning  the
    HJ (Iran) issue would be of no relevance.



The hearing before me

 6. Mr Briddock referred me to paragraph 42 (set out in  full  above).   He
    submitted that in cases concerning sexuality there would very often  be
    a number of witnesses, all of whom would know the Appellant  and  could
    in one sense be described as friends.  However, this did not mean  that
    their evidence could properly be discounted simply on that  basis.   He
    submitted that in any event one of those witnesses had not in fact been
    a friend but a member of an organisation (NAZ),  which  had  interacted
    with the Appellant over the course of time.  It was said that all three
    witnesses had provided material evidence relating  to  the  Appellant's
    sexuality.  If the judge had found  the  witnesses  to  be  unreliable,
    either because they were lying or had been manipulated  in  some  other
    way by the Appellant, and had provided independent reasons for  such  a
    finding, there would be no error. However, the judge  appears  to  have
    rejected their evidence out of hand, and had put the "cart  before  the
    horse".

 7. Mr Armstrong submitted that weight was a matter for  the  judge  alone.
    The judge had clearly found  against  the  Appellant  in  a  number  of
    respects, and had made this clear in paragraph 42.  Even if  the  judge
    had been wrong in his treatment of the witnesses' evidence it  was  not
    material in light of the decision as a whole.

Decision on error of law

 8. As I announced to the parties at the hearing I conclude that there  are
    material errors of law in this case.

 9. The evidence in any appeal has to be assessed in the  round.   I  fully
    appreciate that the  judge  has  stated  that  this  is  what  he  did.
    However, the contents of paragraph 42 give rise to real concerns as  to
    what approach was  in  fact  adopted  in  relation  to  the  witnesses'
    evidence.  There is clear reference to the adverse findings relating to
    the Appellant's own evidence in this paragraph, and such findings  were
    quite clearly something that the judge was bound to  take  account  of.
    When it comes to the evidence of the three witnesses though, the  judge
    makes four comments which give rise  to  the  real  risk  that  he  has
    rejected their evidence purely on the basis that they were known to the
    Appellant.  First, he states that the witnesses' evidence was not  from
    an independent source.  One of the witnesses was clearly not in fact  a
    friend of the Appellant but somebody who  worked  for  an  organisation
    (NAZ).  Second, and in any event,  the  fact  that  witnesses  are  not
    wholly independent of an Appellant (friends, for example) does  not  in
    and of itself mean that their evidence should be rejected out of  hand.
    Third, the judge states that the witnesses "no doubt were attempting to
    advance his claim regardless of what the facts  were".   This  strongly
    indicates that he was starting from the position  that  their  evidence
    was inherently unreliable, and their  status  as  friends  justified  a
    rejection of their evidence, without more.  Fourth, their  evidence  is
    deemed to be "self-serving".  This  epithet  is  potentially  dangerous
    when assessing credibility.  It is not of itself justification for  the
    rejection of potentially material evidence. This much is clear from the
    recent Upper Tribunal decision in SS [2017] UKUT 164 (IAC).

10. No other freestanding reasons have been given by the judge as to why he
    was rejecting all of this evidence.  The only basis upon which  he  was
    proceeding (aside from an erroneous rejection  based  solely  upon  the
    fact that the witnesses were known to the Appellant) was  that  he  had
    concerns about  the  Appellant's  own  evidence.   These  concerns  are
    clearly expressed and, seen in isolation, appear to have been  open  to
    the judge.  The point is however, that the evidence had to be  assessed
    as a whole, including what the witnesses had to say.   This  could  not
    have been done on a sound basis if the  witnesses'  evidence  had  been
    rejected for unsustainable reasons.

11. I also note the following matters.  Having read  the  relevant  witness
    statements for myself, I am satisfied  that  all  three  witnesses  had
    material evidence to give regarding the Appellant's  sexuality.   Their
    evidence was direct in nature, and capable of  supporting  his  claimed
    sexuality.  I also note that three witnesses were not cross-examined by
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing, and that in her submissions  she
    relied upon the reasons for refusal letter and had nothing to add  (see
    paragraphs 32 to 35). Therefore, whilst the witnesses'  evidence  would
    not necessarily have to be taken at face value, it had not been  tested
    and had been left effectively unchallenged before the judge.  This adds
    to my concerns about the judge's treatment of the  witnesses'  evidence
    overall.

12. Overall, I conclude that  the  judge  has  erred  in  relation  to  his
    approach to the witnesses' evidence.

13. I have considered whether the errors of approach are material  in  this
    case.  It is quite true that  the  judge  made  a  number  of  findings
    against the Appellant, and these make it a lot more difficult  for  him
    to succeed.  Having said that, if  the  witnesses'  evidence  had  been
    accepted, it clearly provided support for the Appellant's claim  to  be
    gay, and was capable of affecting the outcome of the  appeal.   I  find
    the judge's errors are material in this regard.

14. In relation to the HJ (Iran)  point  there  was  no  suggestion  by  Mr
    Armstrong that the judge had in fact correctly applied the law.   There
    is a clear misdirection in paragraph 51 of the decision.  The  fear  of
    persecution need only be an operative reason for acting discretely, and
    it does not need to be the sole reason.  The  errors  relating  to  the
    core factual issue of whether the  Appellant  is  gay  or  not  is  not
    therefore rendered immaterial by what the judge has said  in  paragraph
    51.

15. In light of the above I set aside the judge's decision.

Disposal

16. Both representatives were agreed that if I were to  find  there  to  be
    material errors of law this appeal would have to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a complete re-hearing.  Having  regard  to  the
    nature of the errors I have found and paragraph  7.2  of  the  relevant
    Practice Statement, I deem  it  appropriate  to  take  this  course  of
    action.

17. The appeal is therefore remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

 1. There should be a complete rehearing of this appeal with no findings of
    fact preserved;

 2. The core factual issue is whether the Appellant is in fact gay;

 3. If the Appellant is in fact gay there will need to be consideration  of
    how he might act on return to Pakistan, and the reasons  for  any  such
    actions, in light of HJ (Iran).




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   [pic]                  Date: 3 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


