
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04242/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th March 2018                            |On 6th April 2018             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    [m a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Khan of Buckingham Legal Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1981.   He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  respondent  taken
    on 21st April 2017 to refuse to grant him asylum.  His appeal was heard
    at Columbus House, Newport by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Trevaskis  on
    2nd June last and in a determination promulgated on 12th June 2017, the
    judge  dismissed  the   appellant's   asylum   claim,   dismissed   the
    humanitarian protection  claim  and  dismissed  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim.

2.   In dismissing the appellant's claim,  there  appears  to  have  been  a
    problem with the typing in that at the end of paragraph  39  the  words
    "Regarding his activities in the United Kingdom," appear followed by  a
    blank space.  It appears that this might have  been  the  beginning  of
    paragraph 40, which appeared to deal with the appellant's activities in
    the United Kingdom.  However, the first part of paragraph 39 says  "The
    credibility of his claim depends upon his own  account.   There  is  no
    support for his claims regarding the difficulties  which  he  faced  in
    Pakistan".  As a matter of asylum law of course an appellant  does  not
    need to corroborate their claim.  The judge should  have  proceeded  to
    make findings in respect of whatever the appellant claimed had happened
    to him in Pakistan.  He made no findings on those "difficulties".

3.   The judge then considered the appellant's period of stay in the  United
    Kingdom when he entered in 2012 and at paragraph 43 he  said  that  "On
    the basis of the adverse credibility findings mentioned above,  and  in
    the absence of supporting evidence for his claim, I am not satisfied to
    the  required  standard  that  the  appellant  is  gay".   The  adverse
    credibility  findings  referred  to  were  findings  made  against  the
    appellant's witnesses,  not  against  the  appellant,  and  as  I  have
    indicated the absence of  supporting  evidence  is  not  fatal  because
    appellants are not required to corroborate their claim.

4.   Both representatives agreed that the determination of  Judge  Trevaskis
    could not stand.  The findings, insofar as there are any,  lack  proper
    reasoning and what reasoning there is, is  wholly  inadequate.   I  set
    aside the determination in its entirety.

5.   Given lengthy delays which can  occur  when  part-time  judges  adjourn
    matters, I have decided not to adjourn this  to  myself  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal but to remit for hearing afresh by a judge  other  than  Judge
    Trevaskis.  I believe that  three  hours  should  be  allowed  for  the
    hearing of the appeal since the appellant and  two  witnesses  will  be
    giving oral evidence and an Urdu interpreter will be required.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                                           Date
    28th March 2018

