
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04968/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by skype for Business                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 January 2021                           |On 09 February 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S L
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Greer, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with  permission,   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ali) promulgated on  13
    March 2020.  By its decision,  the  Tribunal  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision, dated 13 May 2019  to
    refuse his protection and human rights claim  in  the  context  of  the
    decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department as the respondent and to SL as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the  proceedings  relate
    to the circumstances of a minor. Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity in  the  light  of
    having made a protection and  Article  3  claim.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 4. In the light of  the  COVID-19  pandemic   the  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge
    Sheridan) issued directions  ,  inter  alia,  indicating  that  it  was
    provisionally of the  view  that  the  error  of  law  issue  could  be
    determined without a face -to- face hearing and that  this  could  take
    place via Skype. Both parties have indicated that they were content for
    the hearing to proceed by this method. Therefore, the  Tribunal  listed
    the hearing to enable oral submissions to  be  given  by  each  of  the
    parties.

 5. The hearing took place on 13  January  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
    parties. A face-to-face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
    practicable,  and  both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could   be
    determined in a remote hearing.   I  conducted  the  hearing  with  the
    advocates attending remotely  via  video.  There  were  no  substantial
    issues regarding sound, and  no  substantial  technical  problems  were
    encountered during the hearing and I am satisfied both  advocates  were
    able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

 6. I am grateful to Ms  Pettersen  and  Mr  Greer  for  their  clear  oral
    submissions.

Background:

 7. The Appellant is a citizen of the DRC. He claims to  have  entered  the
    United Kingdom with his aunt in 1999. The respondent  in  the  decision
    letter set out  that  there  had  been  no  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant to support this claim and that his first  encounter  with  UK
    immigration was on 18 July 2002 at Coquelles  UK  border  control  port
    where it is said that the appellant attempted to enter the  UK  with  a
    Belgium ID card in the identity of  another  person.  The  Home  Office
    records indicated that he wished to claim  asylum  but  as  he  was  in
    France his claim was not considered by the UK.

 8. Further Home Office records were said to show that on 29 June  2007  he
    made an application for leave to remain in the  name  of  xx  xx  as  a
    Congolese national.

 9. On 18 November 2009 he was convicted of failing to surrender to custody
    at the appointed time and received one day's detention.

10. On 15 November 2010 at the Crown Court he was convicted on three counts
    of robbery and one count of attempted robbery and on 15 April 2011  was
    sentenced to 18 months imprisonment.

11. The circumstances of the offence set out in the sentencing  remarks  at
    [116 RB]. On the date of his sentence he was 22 years of age. The judge
    referred to the CCTV footage and that the appellant went to the back of
    a bus where there was no way out for those  people  at  the  back.  The
    appellant beckoned others to come on the bus.  There  was  a  crowd  of
    people-nine and certainly more than seven- some wearing Halloween masks
    it being 31st of October 2009. The  appellant  took  mobile  phones  of
    three boys. The fourth one had the presence of mind to deny that he had
    a mobile phone and at that point it is said that the appellant  decided
    to leave the bus and  thus  the  fourth  count  was  one  of  attempted
    robbery. The judge stated "there was a gang of you. That is undoubtedly
    an aggravating feature. This is a public place, but once on the top  of
    the bus escape is very limited and I  regard  that  as  an  aggravating
    feature. I do not think that this was planned. I do not  know  why  you
    beckoned to the others to come onto the bus, but I do  not  think  that
    you were planning a robbery from the moment you got onto the bus. There
    was no violence used. All that happened was  you  made  clear  by  your
    presence that you wanted the phones to be handed over.  It  was  menace
    more than violence and in those  circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that
    whilst there is the aggravation that there was more than one of you and
    whilst it was on a bus it was a relatively spontaneous low-level street
    robbery carried out on a bus." The judge  noted  that  it  crossed  the
    custody threshold, and it was agreed that it was treated as level I  in
    the sentencing guidelines. The appellant  had  pleaded  guilty  on  the
    first occasion the case was listed for trial and  therefore  the  judge
    gave him some limited reduction on account of his plea. The judge  also
    stated that "the other mitigation that I accept is that you have  since
    shown genuine remorse".

12. On 17 May 2011, the appellant was served notice that he was liable  for
    deportation and invited to make any  representations  as  to  why  this
    should not take place. He was interviewed regarding his  appeal  on  30
    August 2012.

13. On 18 September 2012, the appellant made an asylum claim  as  a  Somali
    national. He was interviewed on 5 October 2012 and further attempts are
    made to interview him on 9 November 2012 and 4 January 2013, but he did
    not attend.

14. On 16 May 2013 he withdrew the asylum claim as a Somali national. On 23
    May 2013, a further interview was conducted where he confirmed he was a
    Congolese national.

15. On 19 July 2013, a decision for automatic deportation and a deportation
    order was served and the appellant's outstanding application for  leave
    to remain was also refused.

16. On 1 September 2014, the appellant  made  further  representations  and
    protection  grounds  and  on  5   November   2015   he   made   further
    representations on human rights grounds.

17. On 24th February 2017 he was served with a section 120 notice and on 26
    June 2017 further representations were received  in  response  to  that
    notice, confirming that his  representations  relied  on  the  previous
    submissions dated 5 November 2015.

18. There followed further representations made on 30 January 2018, 15 June
    2018, and 10 January 2019.

19.  Whilst  the  appellant's  deportation  proceedings  were  ongoing  the
    appellant was convicted on 20 March 2019 of "battery" and  "destroy  or
    damage to property". There are no details  of  those  offences.  It  is
    recorded that on 10 April 2019  he  received  a  community  order,  and
    unpaid work requirement and also a rehabilitation activity requirement.

20. On 13 May 2019, a decision was made to refuse a  protection  and  human
    rights claim.

The decision of the FtTJ:

21. The appellant appealed that decision, and the appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ali) on 13 November 2019 and in  a  decision
    promulgated on the 13 March 2020 his appeal was allowed.

22. In view of the  medical  evidence  in  the  report  of  the  consultant
    psychiatrist Dr Q, the FtTJ  treated  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness and did so in accordance with the joint  presidential  guidance
    note No. 2  of 2010 and the decision in AM (Afghanistan) V SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123.

23. At paragraphs 25 - 26 the FtTJ considered an application made on behalf
    of the respondent to adjourn the hearing on the  basis  that  the  Home
    Office had withdrawn the CPIN relating to returns to the DRC  and  that
    they were currently reviewing the matter and needed three months to  do
    so. It is recorded that Counsel on behalf of the appellant opposed  the
    adjournment request and reference is made to a previous application for
    an adjournment made  in  June  2019  which  had  been  refused  by  the
    Tribunal. The judge refused the application for the adjournment on  the
    basis that there had been  no  change  from  the  previous  adjournment
    request to the current one and that there had been a period of nearly 5
    months between the two adjournment requests and that the respondent had
    five months to review the CPIN if they were unhappy with it and issue a
    new one but had failed to do so.

24. The FtTJ's assessment of the evidence and his analysis is  set  out  at
    paragraphs 48 - 57.

25. At paragraphs 48 - 50 the FtTJ began his consideration  as  to  whether
    the appellant should be excluded from refugee status  and  humanitarian
    protection, on the  basis  of  upholding  the  section  72  certificate
    (although no reference is made to S72 in his decision).

26. The FtTJ stated as follows:

         "49. The appellant was sentenced  to  18  months  imprisonment  for
         three counts of robbery and one count of attempted robbery. I  take
         note of the sentencing judge's  remarks  he  states  "a  relatively
         spontaneous low-level street robbery carried out on a bus"  falling
         within level I of the sentencing  guidelines  (sentencing  remarks,
         page 3, paragraph C, D). I find that as this was not an offence  of
         armed robbery and the fact that the appellant  did  not  commit  or
         threaten violence, that it does not fall  within  the  respondent's
         policy as being a particularly serious crime  therefore  this  does
         not fall within paragraph 334 (iii) or( iv) of  paragraph  339D  of
         the nationality, immigration, and Asylum act 2002.


         50.  I find that the appellant has demonstrated that  he  does  not
         pose a sufficiently serious  threat  so  as  to  be  excluded  from
         refugee status. I find having considered all of the evidence in the
         round that he is showing considerable  remorse  and  I  have  again
         taken into account the  sentencing  judge's  remarks  at,  page  4,
         paragraph C. I note that he is a person who  was  rehabilitated  in
         prison and  has  not  engaged  in  similar  offending  since  being
         released. The conviction for which he was sentenced to  is  rightly
         submitted  by  Mr  Greer  is  spent  under   the   terms   of   the
         Rehabilitation of offenders Act 1974. This is not  a  matter  which
         was challenged by Mr Mullarkey. I also find that the respondent has
         not adduced evidence nor produced the OASY's report  to  show  that
         the appellant is an individual who is prone to offending  again  or
         prone to repeat the offences for which he was  sentenced  and  thus
         conclude to say that I do not find him to be a person who  poses  a
         danger to the community of the United Kingdom."


27. The FtTJ then addressed the asylum/protection claim at [51].

28. The FtTJ stated as follows:

         "51. Mr Mullarkey submitted that  the  findings  in  BM  should  be
         followed and that there is no cogent evidence before  the  Tribunal
         to depart  from  those  findings.  I  find  to  the  contrary.  The
         respondent withdrew their own CPIN  on  the  DRC  in  reference  to
         "unsuccessful asylum seeker/foreign national offenders" and  in  an
         interim operation instruction it, dated August  2019,  stated  that
         their policy is to refrain from pursuing the  enforced  returns  of
         DRC nationals. I note that reports highlight and record the returns
         to the DRC are unsafe and reports of  those  individuals  who  were
         returned before 2012 and were detained,  tortured,  and  mistreated
         were not brought to the attention of the Tribunal in BM, given  the
         seriousness and significance  of  the  evidence.  In  addition,  BM
         recognises that  the  authorities  in  the  DRC  will  question  an
         individual on return. Since the hearing there has been  an  updated
         CPIN- DRC -unsuccessful asylum seekers (January 2020). I have taken
         this into consideration, but I am concerned by the  fact  that  the
         CPIN does not exclude the possibility that a returnee may still  be
         at risk on return. I note the following, at paragraph 7.2.2 of  the
         CPIN, "there is limited publicly available  information  about  the
         treatment  of  unsuccessful  asylum  seekers  or  foreign  national
         offenders from the UK(or other Western European  states)  published
         since March 2015" and also at paragraph, 2.4.32, "if a  person  has
         family, NGO or other assistance on  arrival  these  are  likely  to
         assess their progress through  immigration  and  security  control.
         Conversely, an  inability  to  communicate  clearly  in  French  or
         Lingala,  a  mental  health  condition  that  affects  a   person's
         behaviour or being able to pay a bribe may increase the  likelihood
         that they are detained for one day or more and faces  a  breach  of
         Article 3. However, no single factor is likely to be  determinative
         as to whether a person is delayed or detained." Therefore,  I  find
         given the above that  I  can  depart  from  the  case  of  BM  with
         reference to this appellant. In addition to the  above  findings  I
         find that the risk to the appellant will be exacerbated by the fact
         that the appellant has been absence (sic) from the  DRC  20  years,
         the  authorities  of  the  DRC  are  likely  to  be  aware  of  the
         individual's criminal records and the detention of individuals with
         mental health continues to be a concern. For those reasons  I  find
         that the appellant will be at risk on return to the DRC."


29. The FtTJ then considered  Article  3  at  [52].   The  FtTJ  stated  as
    follows:

         "52. In reference to the issue of whether the appellant has a claim
         under Article 3 of the ECHR in reference to his medical issues. The
         appellant has submitted a report by Dr  Q,  a  consultant  forensic
         psychiatrist. I have already made reference to this at [24] and  so
         do not intend to repeat my findings in [24]. However,  the  medical
         expert report submitted by the appellant's and  challenged  by  the
         respondent. In any event I would have attached weight to the report
         and find that the report independently confirms the following,  the
         appellant suffers from a severe mental illness best categorised  as
         a severe  depressive  episode  and  psychotic  symptoms  (paragraph
         8.17), should be placed in custody to be deported, he would  become
         severely depressed, psychotic and acutely suicidal (paragraph 8.12)
         and thus I find that given all of the above there would be a breach
         of Article 3 of the ECHR."


30. The FtTJ then addressed Article 8 at paragraphs 54 -57 as follows:

         "54. The appellant was sentenced to 18 months in November  2010.  I
         find that by virtue of this he falls within the lowest category  of
         offending under section 117C. I find that the weight to be attached
         to the state's interest in removing him  in  pursuit  of  effective
         immigration control is lessened by the fact that, nine  years  have
         passed since his conviction,  he  has  been  detained  on  numerous
         occasions without attempts being made to remove  him,  causing  him
         psychiatric issues (as set out in the report of Dr Q), the offences
         committed  took  place  before  the  statutory  provisions  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  inserted  by  the
         Immigration Act 2014) came into effect and but for  the  delay  the
         appellant by the respondent in considering the  appellant's  claim,
         those provisions would not apply.


         55.  I find that Article 8 is engaged. The appellant left  the  DRC
         around the age of 7 and has been residing  in  the  United  Kingdom
         since 1999, when he was aged 10. The appellant is now  aged  around
         13 has been living in the UK for  approximately  20  years  of  his
         life. I accept that he has no family or  friends  in  the  DRC.  Mr
         Mullarkey referred to the biodata form that  he  submitted  at  the
         hearing; however, it has not been signed by the appellant to verify
         the contents are accurate and true. In the absence of his signature
         and the fact that he had  mental  health  issues  I  cannot  attach
         weight to the accuracy of the content within the  biodata  form.  I
         accept that he is not lived independent in the DRC. I accept he has
         mental health issues and thus accept that it is  reasonably  likely
         that he will suffer stigma as a result. Given all of  the  above  I
         accept  that  he  will  not  have  enough  inside  information   or
         understanding of how life in the DRC is and thus would not have the
         capacity to participate in it.


         56.  I find that the respondent's interference  with  his  and  his
         families right and Article 8 is lawful and for a legitimate aim.  I
         now consider whether his removal  is  proportionate.  Section  117C
         provides the additional considerations in cases  involving  foreign
         criminals. The starting position is  that  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals is in the public interest in the more serious the offence
         committed by foreign criminal, the greater is the  public  interest
         in their deportation. In this instance the appellant was  sentenced
         to 18  months  imprisonment  and  such  the  consideration  of  the
         Exceptions under Section 117C(3) is engaged.  The  first  Exception
         applies where the appellant  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the
         United Kingdom for most of his life,  is  socially  and  culturally
         integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  there  would  be   very
         significant obstacles to his integration into Zimbabwe.


         57.  It is not disputed that the appellant has  not  been  lawfully
         resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life. I make finding
         that during this time the appellant is both socially and culturally
         integrated in the United Kingdom. He has lived here  20  years  and
         has been supported by the leaving care team at X  (reference letter
         at page 40). I find my findings at [56] that there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to his integration in the DRC".


31. The FtTJ therefore allowed the appeal on asylum grounds and on Articles
    to 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

32. The respondent sought permission to appeal and on 21  July  2020  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith granted permission stating:

         "Grounds 2 and 3 are adopted  from  those  which  featured  in  the
         permission to appeal application to the First-tier Tribunal. It  is
         arguable that, for the reasons given  in  the  grounds,  the  judge
         erred in relation to Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

         Ground 4; arguably, the judge should have  given  the  parties  the
         opportunity to address the Tribunal concerning the  impact  of  the
         January 2020 Country Policy and Information Note, which  post-dated
         the hearing, but which predated the  promulgation  of  the  judge's
         decision (which was some five months after the hearing).

         In turn, the arguability of ground 4 underlines the arguability  of
         ground 1: arguably the judge should have adjourned  to  enable  the
         respondent to consider her position concerning returns to the  DRC.
         Had he done so, it could have  enabled  the  adjourned  hearing  to
         focus on the new CPIN which was subsequently to be  published,  the
         prospect of which formed the basis for the adjournment application.
         Instead, the judge's decision to  press  ahead  with  the  hearing,
         combined with the reliance  on  the  CPIN  which  was  subsequently
         published without  giving  the  parties  the  opportunity  to  make
         submissions in relation to it, was arguably unfair."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

33. Before the Upper Tribunal, the Secretary of State was represented by Ms
    Pettersen and the appellant represented by Mr Greer of Counsel.

34. Mr Pettersen relied upon  the  written  grounds  as  drafted  and  made
    additional oral submissions.

35. In relation to ground 4, she submitted that as  UTJ  Smith  had  stated
    when granting permission, this was linked to ground 1 and  the  request
    made by the presenting officer for an adjournment to produce  the  CPIN
    in relation to returns to the DRC. The FtTJ went on  to  consider  this
    document but did not recall the parties for their  submissions  on  the
    document and therefore the grounds of procedural fairness  are  plainly
    made out.

36. In relation to the Article 3 assessment made by the FtTJ, Ms  Pettersen
    submitted that this was tied in with the asylum risk.  There  had  been
    evidence before the FtTJ that medical treatment was available  for  his
    psychiatric condition, but the judge failed to deal with this  evidence
    in his assessment on risk on return.

37. Mr Greer on behalf of the appellant had prepared  a  Rule  24  response
    which he relied upon for the hearing.

38. In his oral submissions Mr Greer submitted that in relation to  grounds
    1 and 4 he had set out  his  submissions  in  the  written  grounds  at
    paragraph 19 and at paragraph 29 - 32. He submitted  that  he  was  not
    instructed to concede the appeal on the basis of the grounds set out in
    the Secretary of State's response but that did not  seek  to  take  his
    submissions any further than that set out in the Rule 24  response   he
    had drafted.

39. He submitted that the real issue is that set  out  at  ground  2  which
    addressed the findings made by the FtTJ in relation to  Article  3.  He
    invited the Tribunal to consider paragraph [52] of the FtTJ's decision.
    He submitted that when considering the adequacy  of  reasons,  what  is
    required in a decision is for the losing party to understand  why  they
    had lost. He submitted that the other relevant principle set out in the
    decision of OH (Serbia) is that it is  not  necessary  for  a  Tribunal
    judge to set out specific authorities if the judge properly applies the
    legal principles.

40. Mr Greer submitted that upon reading paragraph 52, the FtTJ had applied
    the correct legal test and had done  so  in  a  way  in  which  it  was
    possible to understand why the appeal had been  allowed  and  that  the
    decision had made  explicit  reference  to  the  medical  evidence.  In
    respect of the psychiatric report,  Mr  Greer  submitted  that  it  was
    recorded in the decision that the medical evidence  contained  in  that
    report was not specifically challenged by the respondent's advocate. He
    submitted that this was important because the contents of the report at
    paragraph 8.12 was therefore not challenged which  concluded  that  the
    appellant if placed  in  custody  to  be  deported,  the  doctor  would
    anticipate that his "mental health will deteriorate significantly,  and
    he would  likely  become  severely  depressed,  psychotic  and  acutely
    suicidal."

41. Mr Greer referred the Tribunal to paragraph 23 of his rule 24  response
    which set out the legal test in the decision of J v SSHD [2005] Imm  AR
    409. He submitted that the presenting officer had  submitted  that  the
    Article 3 was tied in with the asylum claim relying on the fifth  stage
    of the test in J. However, he submitted that  this  is  not  a  foreign
    breach case, but it is a domestic case where the risk of Article 3 harm
    occurs at the point of detention and forced removal  and  therefore  it
    was not a risk that occurred on return to the DRC and the fear  of  the
    DRC authorities and therefore effective mechanisms  do  not  come  into
    play. Mr Greer submitted that the FtTJ  recognised  it  as  a  domestic
    breach case and by reason of the unchallenged medical  evidence,  there
    was sufficient reasons for the Secretary of State to understand why the
    judge had allowed the appeal. The Tribunal should  not  go  behind  the
    SSHD's concession.

42. Mr Greer submitted that the decision of N was raised in the grounds but
    that had been superseded by the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) but that this was not a domestic breach of Article 3 at  the
    point of forced return.

43. Mr Greer submitted that whatever assessment made by  this  Tribunal  in
    relation to grounds 1 and 4, the FtTJ's assessment of Article 3  should
    be preserved. If an error of law is found on the basis of grounds 1 and
    4 together, he submitted that the findings on asylum  would  be  unsafe
    and therefore would need to be remade but that  the  findings  made  in
    Article 3 could be preserved. It would then be  for  the  appellant  to
    decide whether he wished to continue with his asylum grounds.

44. In respect of ground 3 which related to Article 8, he submitted that he
    sought to rely on his rule 24  response  at  paragraphs  25  -  28.  He
    submitted that if ground 2 is made out it would be largely immaterial.

45. By way of reply, Ms Pettersen  submitted  that  whilst  the  presenting
    officer did not specifically challenge the medical  report,  the  judge
    fell into error because the decision-maker would need to  be  aware  if
    there are issues relating to those who need protection from  themselves
    it would be taken into account in any arrangements  made  for  removal.
    She submitted that whilst the doctor had set out that if  the  scenario
    should arise, on a  proper  application  of  the  decision  in  J,  the
    decision-maker would be aware  of  any  problems  and  difficulties  in
    relation to the appellant's removal and all relevant precautions  would
    be taken as flagged up in the medical report.

46. Ms Pettersen submitted that at paragraph [52] the  FtTJ  did  not  deal
    with the duty of care placed on the Secretary of State in  this  regard
    and whilst the doctor's conclusions were not  challenged  per  se,  the
    conclusion was predicated on the basis of him being put in custody  and
    the judge had failed to take into account the steps that the  Secretary
    of State could take to protect those and to avoid any risks of suicide.

47. Mr Greer observed that this point could have been  pursued  before  the
    FtT. He also made the point that the conclusion reached by  the  expert
    was not made in isolation but based on the  history  of  the  appellant
    having been detained on a number of occasions and attempted suicide  in
    the past. Even if the Secretary of State put in place mechanisms,  they
    did not work in the past.

48. Ms Pettersen submitted that  submissions  made  by  Mr  Greer  did  not
    detract from the fact that satisfactory  safeguards  could  be  put  in
    place particularly in the light of the medical evidence  that  was  now
    available and could be put in  front  of  the  decision-maker  to  take
    whatever steps are necessary. Thus she submitted the decision  of  FtTJ
    Ali was flawed in law.

49. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision which I now
    give.

Discussion:

50. I am grateful for the submissions made by  each  of  the  advocates.  I
    confirm that I have taken them into account,  including  their  written
    submission and have done so in the light of the decision  of  the  FtTJ
    and the material that was before him.





Grounds 1 and 4:

51. I begin my analysis by considering  grounds  1  and  4  together.  They
    concern the FtTJ's assessment of the appellant's asylum claim  set  out
    at paragraph [51] of his decision.

52. Having considered the grounds and having done so in the  light  of  the
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant, I am  satisfied  that  the
    judge erred materially in law as the grounds contend and as  the  grant
    of permission succinctly identifies. I shall set  out  my  reasons  for
    reaching that view.

53. The relevant country guidance decision was  that  set  out  in  BM  and
    others (returnees-criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015]  UKUT  00293
    and at the time of the hearing  on  13  November  2019  remained  as  a
    country guidance decision. In order to depart from that  decision,  the
    FtTJ was required  to  identify  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
    evidence (see SG (Iraq)). Whilst the judge identified the correct legal
    test, the judge fell into error by departing from the decision in  such
    a way that  was  demonstrably  procedurally  unfair.  In  reaching  his
    decision to depart from the country guidance decision the judge  relied
    upon the contents of a document that was not available to  the  parties
    at the time of the  hearing  on  13  November  2019.  The  document  in
    question was  the  CPIN  entitled  "DRC  unsuccessful  asylum  seekers"
    (January 2020). As a result neither party had the opportunity  to  make
    any representations in respect of the contents  of  that  document  and
    importantly in the context of the appellant's asylum claim.

54. In my judgement it was procedurally unfair for the  judge  to  reach  a
    decision  on  that  evidence  without  affording  the  parties  and  in
    particular the losing party, the opportunity  to  make  submissions  on
    that evidence which was instrumental  in  his  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal.

55. Furthermore in the light of the FtTJ's rejection of the application for
    an adjournment made  by  the  presenting  officer  in  order  for  this
    evidence to be considered  by  the  Tribunal  inter  parties  upon  its
    publication, it was then procedurally  unfair  to  then  consider  that
    document in  the  absence  of  any  further  representations  from  the
    parties.

56. I reject the submission made by Mr  Greer  (see  paragraph  32  of  the
    written submissions) that it was open  to  the  respondent  to  advance
    written submissions relying on the CPIN. In my judgement there  was  no
    indication to the  respondent  that  the  judge  intended  to  consider
    evidence  that  was  unavailable  to  the  parties   at   the   hearing
    particularly  in  the  light  of  his  rejection  of  the   adjournment
    application which related specifically to that evidence.

57. Whilst Mr Greer relied upon the adjudicator  guidance  note  number  4:
    February 2003 (see paragraph 29  of  the  written  submissions)  in  my
    judgement that  note  is  not  applicable  to  the  particular  factual
    circumstances in play in this appeal. Neither  party  had  any  advance
    notice that the judge intended to rely on that  evidence.  Furthermore,
    as seen above the parties could not have known that in the light of his
    decision to reject the application adjournment for the document  to  be
    available to both parties that the judge would then go on  to  consider
    such a document.

58. This was not evidence that was peripheral to his decision as  seen from
    the contents of paragraph [51]  and   was  instrumental  to  the  judge
    reaching his conclusion that the CG decision in BM should  be  departed
    from and that the appellant was therefore at risk on return. That being
    the case, the judge should have informed the parties that  he  intended
    to take this into account and provide the parties  the  opportunity  to
    make any submissions they considered necessary.

59. The case of E v SSHD [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49  as  cited  in  the  written
    submissions in my judgement have no relevance to the  circumstances  of
    this particular appeal as it relates to procedure  rules  that  are  no
    longer in existence and also refers to circumstances relating to when a
    rehearing might be necessary which is not the position here.

60. The decision of EG (post - hearing Internet  research)  Nigeria  [2008]
    UKAIT 0015 is of some relevance. Whilst the factual circumstances  were
    different from the present appeal (relying on post  hearing  research),
    there were some observations made in the decision which are  applicable
    to the present appeal. The underlying point made in  this  decision  is
    the factual issues  should  be  made  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    presented on behalf of the parties and to base conclusions on  evidence
    post hearing may be procedurally unfair.

61. There was a considerable gap between the  hearing  inter-partes  on  13
    November 2019 and the promulgation of the decision  on  13  March  2020
    (some  four-month  delay).  The  CPIN  was  available  in  January  and
    therefore the judge had a period of two months in which he  could  have
    sought the submissions from the parties. In my judgement, there  was  a
    duty upon  the  judge  to  either  reconvene  the  hearing  or  in  the
    alternative  to  request  written  submissions  upon  the  CPIN  before
    reaching his decision. To reach a decision without taking  that  course
    in my judgement was procedurally unfair.

62. I am therefore satisfied that the  FtTJ  erred  in  law  and  that  the
    assessment made at paragraph [51] relating to the asylum  claim  cannot
    stand and should be set aside.

Ground 2:

63. I now turn to ground 2 which challenges the  FtTJ's  decision  at  [52]
    where the judge allowed the appeal on Article 3 grounds by reference to
    the medical evidence.

64. The FtTJ stated as follows:

         "52. In reference to the issue of whether the appellant has a claim
         under Article 3 of the ECHR in reference to his medical issues. The
         appellant has submitted a report by Dr  Q,  a  consultant  forensic
         psychiatrist. I have already made reference to this at [24] and  so
         do not intend to repeat my findings in [24]. However,  the  medical
         expert report submitted by the appellant's and  challenged  by  the
         respondent. In any event I would have attached weight to the report
         and find that the report independently confirms the following,  the
         appellant suffers from a severe mental illness best categorised  as
         a severe  depressive  episode  and  psychotic  symptoms  (paragraph
         8.17), should be placed in custody to be deported, he would  become
         severely depressed, psychotic and acutely suicidal (paragraph 8.12)
         and thus I find that given all of the above there would be a breach
         of Article 3 of the ECHR."

65. Paragraph 24 stated as follows:

         "having taken into account the report of Dr Q a consultant forensic
         psychiatrist, who notes, "from my review of the records  it  is  my
         view that L was experiencing a severe mental illness that  is  best
         categorised as a severe depressive episode and psychotic  symptoms.
         This is a life-threatening mental illness, as in L's case,  due  to
         the  increased  risk   of   suicide,   depressive   cognitions   of
         hopelessness regarding the future, reduced self-esteem, and chronic
         depressed mood with suicidal ideation (paragraph  8.17).  I  attach
         weight to the report of Dr Q and note that the report has not  been
         challenged by the respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  nor  by  Mr
         Mullarkey on the day of the hearing. I  therefore  found  that  the
         appellant is a vulnerable witness as a result of his mental  health
         issues."

66. Mr Greer submits that it is clear from a fair reading of paragraph [52]
    that the judge reached the decision on Article  3  mistreatment  facing
    the appellant on the point of enforced return and that  the  assessment
    made was one that was reasonably open to him based on the  unchallenged
    evidence in the report of Dr Q.

67. In my judgement it is wholly  unclear  whether  the  FtTJ  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis of Article 3  medical  grounds  (based  on  medical
    evidence and lack of treatment in the DRC) or whether he did  so  based
    on the Article 3 risk of suicide.

68. Furthermore, I reject submission made by Mr Greer that  the  judge  had
    applied the correct legal test set out in the  decision  of  J  v  SSHD
    [2005] Imm AR 409 ("J").

69. Whilst I accept that it is not necessary  for  a  judge  to  cite  case
    authorities, what is  necessary  is  for  the  judge  to  undertake  an
    analysis of the evidence based on the relevant  legal  principles.  The
    decision in J sets out the analysis applicable if indeed the judge  was
    in fact considering Article 3 in the context of the risk of suicide.

70. The relevant jurisprudence is found in the Court of Appeal decisions in
    J and Y (Sri Lanka) and consider a discrete area  of  assessment  under
    Article 3 relating to the risk of  suicide.  The  respondent's  grounds
    refer to the decision in "N".

71. The decisions in J and N were heard at around  the  same  time  in  May
    2005. By the time, the Court of Appeal in J handed down  its  decision,
    it had the benefit of the House of Lords decision in N.  The  Court  of
    Appeal conducted a detailed review of the European  and  domestic  case
    law. The six points it drew from these authorities for the  purpose  of
    assessing Article 3 in the context of suicide risk were:

         "26. First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum  level  of
             severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that the
             assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances of
             the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily be  serious"
             such that  it  is  "an  affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian
             principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at
             risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].

         27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  Article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:

                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).

             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the Article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."

         28.  Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  Article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.



         29.  Fourthly, an Article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).

         30.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of Article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded. If the  fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of Article 3.

         31.  Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her Article
             3 rights."

72. The first three points set out the basic requirements to show a  breach
    of Article 3. The third point made clear  that  there  is  an  enhanced
    threshold in cases that come within the  N  paradigm.  The  last  three
    points went beyond the decision in N to consider the context  in  cases
    involving the assessment of suicide risk. The Court of Appeal in the  Y
    (Sri Lanka) modified the fifth point as follows:

         "15. ... The corollary of the final sentence of ยง30 of J  is  that
             in the absence of an objective foundation for  the  fear  some
             independent basis for it must be established if weight  is  to
             be given to it. Such an independent basis may  lie  in  trauma
             inflicted in the past on the appellant in (or,  as  here,  by)
             the receiving state: someone who has been tortured  and  raped
             by his or her captors may be terrified  of  returning  to  the
             place where it happened, especially if  the  same  authorities
             are in charge, notwithstanding  that  the  objective  risk  of
             recurrence has gone.

         16.  One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J that  what
             may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine
             fear which the appellant  may  establish,  albeit  without  an
             objective foundation, is such as to create a risk  of  suicide
             if there is an enforced return."

73. The assessment of suicide risk is a discrete aspect of the extension to
    Article 3 considered in D and N ( see  MM (Malawi) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 2482 at [63]). The Court of Appeal in J made clear that there was a
    high threshold in 'foreign cases', and acknowledging the decisions in D
    and N, made clear that the threshold was even higher in cases  where  "
    the  alleged  inhuman  treatment  is  not  the   direct   or   indirect
    responsibility of the public authorities of the receiving state".

74. There can be no dispute that the nature of  the  potential  harm  in  a
    suicide risk case is sufficiently serious to engage  the  operation  of
    Article 3 within the meaning of the N, i.e. if a person can  show  that
    there is a real risk that they will commit suicide  on  return  to  the
    receiving state, the feared harm clearly meets  the  minimum  level  of
    severity required  i.e.  intense  mental  suffering  leading  to  their
    imminent death.

75. The fifth and sixth points highlighted in J, modified in Y (Sri Lanka),
    simply focus the assessment on issues  specific  to  the  circumstances
    relating to suicide risk. First, an initial assessment of whether there
    is a real risk that the person is likely to commit suicide if  returned
    to the receiving state. This would normally be assessed with  reference
    to expert psychiatric evidence. Second, whether effective measures  can
    be put in place before, during and after removal to reduce the risk  of
    suicide below a  real  risk.  This  would  normally  be  assessed  with
    reference to evidence relating to the circumstances  in  the  receiving
    state.

76. The advocates did not refer me to any other relevant decisions. In  AXB
    (Art 3 health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 397 the  Upper
    Tribunal concluded that the N paradigm is the threshold  that  must  be
    met in a case  involving  the  assessment  of  suicide  risk,  but  the
    decision does not alter the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in J.
    In that case, the Court of Appeal incorporated the high threshold  into
    the six-point approach to the assessment of suicide risk. The focus  of
    the assessment in a  case  involving  potential  suicide  risk  is  not
    usually the threshold but whether the evidence shows that  there  is  a
    real risk of suicide happening before, during or after removal  of  the
    person to their country of origin.

77. Whilst in his oral submissions Mr Greer made a  brief  refence  to  the
    Supreme Court's decision in AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2019] UKSC 17 he  did
    not make any reference to any particular pargraphs  or how  it  applied
    to the circumstances of this appeal.

78. That decision contains an analysis of the ECtHR decision in  Paposhvili
    v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867. In particular, the Supreme Court clarified
    what was meant by the modest extension of the N test at  [183]  of  the
    ECtHR decision with reference to:

         "... situations involving the removal of a seriously ill person  in
         which substantial grounds have been shown for believing that he  or
         she, although not at imminent risk of  dying,  would  face  a  real
         risk, on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment  in  the
         receiving country or the lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy."


79. The Supreme Court did not make specific findings relating to the effect
    of Paposhvili on the assessment of suicide risk. In my assessment,  the
    substantive Article 3 issues discussed in AM (Zimbabwe)  do  not  alter
    the position relating to the six-point  approach  outlined  in  J.  The
    nature of the risk of suicide is likely to meet the N paradigm  or  the
    Paposhvili extension.

80. Whilst Mr Greer submitted that the medical  evidence  was  unchallenged
    that did not mean that the  FtTJ  was  not  required  to  undertake  an
    analysis of the medical evidence in the context of  the  correct  legal
    principles set out in J and the jurisprudence I have set out above  and
    in the context of the evidence  as  a  whole.  Paragraph  [52]  of  the
    decision does nothing more than cite a concluding paragraph of  Dr  Q's
    report and fails to  make  any  analysis  of  the  issues  beyond  that
    citation. In my judgement the FtTJ  materially  erred  in  law  in  his
    consideration of Article 3.

81. I also accept the submission made by Ms Pettersen that the  judge  made
    no assessment of the duty of care and safeguards the Secretary of State
    were likely to have  in place in the context of  enforced  returns  and
    that the respondent having the requisite evidence in the form of report
    of Dr Q would have a  proper  basis  upon  which  safeguards  could  be
    applied to ameliorate any risk of harm as identified at paragraph  8.12
    of Dr Q's report.

82. In my judgement there was  a  lack  of  analysis  consistent  with  the
    decision in J and consequentially the FtTJ materially erred in  law  in
    his consideration of Article 3.

Ground 3:

83. I now turn to the FtTJ's assessment of Article 8. It  is  submitted  on
    behalf of the respondent that the assessment of Article 8 was flawed in
    a number  of  respects  including  his  consideration  of  Exception  1
    (private life), whether the judge applied the  correct  test  of  "very
    compelling  circumstances  over  and   above"   the   Exceptions,   the
    characterisation of the Secretary of State's delay at [54] and that  in
    determining the public interest the judge failed to take  into  account
    further offending  of  the  appellant  in  2019  at  a  time  when  the
    deportation proceedings were on going.

84. At paragraph 10 of the grounds, it is also submitted the  judge  failed
    to give reasons as to why no weight was attached to  the  biodata  form
    which was relevant to family support available to the appellant in  the
    DRC.

85. Mr Greer relies upon his written submissions set out at paragraphs 25 -
    28. It is submitted that that the FtTJ correctly  identified  that  the
    appellant had not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for over
    half his life. However, it was not on that basis that the judge allowed
    the appeal. Contrary to the submissions made  by  the  respondent,  the
    FtTJ carried out a broad evaluative judgement paraphrasing the test  in
    Kamara at [55]. At paragraph 27, it is  submitted  that  the  issue  of
    delay was a consideration that the judge was able to take into  account
    and that it was referred to in the decision letter at paragraph 89  and
    was consistent with the principles set out in EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL
    41. It is further submitted that it was wrong to state that  the  judge
    did not take into account the full extent of the appellant's offending.
    The 2019 conviction is specifically addressed at [10). As the offending
    did not fall within section 117D it did not go towards  the  assessment
    that the Tribunal was required to perform under section 117C.

86. Having considered the submissions advanced on behalf of the parties,  I
    am satisfied that the decision of the FtTJ discloses the  making  of  a
    material error of law when addressing the Article 8 assessment. I shall
    set out my reasons for reaching that decision.

87. There is no dispute on the factual circumstances of the appellant  that
    he fell within the category of a "foreign  criminal"  who  fell  within
    section  117C(3)  because  he  had  been  sentenced  to  a  period   of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months, but less than four  years  and  was
    therefore a "medium offender".

88. The focus of the FtTJ was upon Exception 1 relating to the  appellant's
    private life, despite the FtTJ's reference to "family life" at [56].

89. I am satisfied that the FtTJ's  assessment  of  whether  the  appellant
    could meet Exception 1 was flawed. There was a factual  dispute  as  to
    whether the appellant had entered the UK in 1999 or in 2002 (as set out
    in the decision letter) and whether the appellant had  entered  the  UK
    using false details. Those matters were referred to in the  appellant's
    witness statement. The factual  issues  do  not  appear  to  have  been
    resolved in the fact-finding undertaken by the judge nor  is  reflected
    at paragraph [55]. Nonetheless, it was accepted by the Tribunal that he
    had not been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of  his  life  (at
    [57]). The judge found that he was socially and  culturally  integrated
    in the UK based on  his  length  of  residence  and  because  this  was
    supported by the leaving care team  as  evidenced  in  the  appellant's
    bundle.  The  judge  also  found  that  there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration" to the DRC.

90. The judge stated at [57] that in reaching  his  conclusions  they  were
    based on his findings at [56]. That must be an error and the judge must
    have been referring to [55]. At this paragraph, the judge set out  that
    he accepted that the appellant had not lived independently in the  DRC,
    and that he accepted he had  mental  health  issues  and  that  it  was
    reasonably likely that he would "suffer stigma" as  a  result.  Pausing
    there, I can find no reference or assessment of any  country  materials
    relating to the DRC in the decision of the FtTJ or the basis upon which
    that finding was made.

91. It is also plain that he attached no weight  to  the  biodata  form  in
    reaching his conclusions at [55]. In my  judgement,  the  FtTJ  was  in
    error  in  his  consideration  of  the  issue  of  whether  there  were
    significant obstacles to his reintegration by the failure to  refer  to
    any country materials relating to medical treatment  available  in  the
    DRC or the circumstances of return.  Furthermore  in  relation  to  the
    evidence in the biodata form, the judge refused to attach weight to the
    document based on the document not having been signed  and  because  of
    the appellant's mental health. However  as  the  grounds  set  out,  no
    reasons were provided as to why the appellant's mental health condition
    rendered the information supplied in that document  to  be  unreliable.
    The document was of relevance  as  it  set  out  family  relatives  the
    appellant had in the DRC which included his mother who was said  to  be
    still living at the family address. This was evidence of  relevance  to
    the establishment or otherwise of Exception 1.

92. Even if it was open to the FtTJ  to  reach  those  conclusions,   I  am
    satisfied that the grounds are made out and that the  judge  failed  to
    apply the correct test. The judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant could not meet Exception 1 (at [57]) but failed to  recognise
    that being the case the appellant would have to  satisfy  the  enhanced
    test of whether there were "very  compelling  circumstances"  over  and
    above the Exceptions ( at S117C (6)).

93. I begin with some general observations concerning  the  test  of  "very
    compelling circumstances". It has been described  as  a  demanding  one
    involving a high threshold (see NA (Pakistan), KO (Nigeria) v SSHD UKSC
    53).  "Compelling"  mean  circumstances   which   have   a   "powerful,
    irresistible and convincing effect." (See SSHD v Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ
    1275.

94. When undertaking such an assessment it includes a  holistic  evaluation
    of all the relevant factors as  identified  at  paragraph  [33]  of  HA
    (Iraq); it is an extremely demanding test but nonetheless  requires  "a
    wide-ranging exercise" so as  to  ensure  Part  5A  produces  a  result
    comparable  with  Article  8  (see  NA  (Pakistan)  "and  includes  the
    principles in the Strasbourg authorities.

95. When applying the statutory test of "very compelling circumstances" the
    Tribunal has an obligation to be more than usually clear as  to  why  a
    conclusion was justified (see OH (Algeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1763.
    I have given careful consideration to the grounds advanced on behalf of
    the respondent. In doing so I have reached the conclusion that the FtTJ
    did not conduct the necessary evaluative exercise. The FtTJ  failed  to
    recognise the enhanced test which the appellant would have  to  satisfy
    of whether there were "very compelling circumstances"  over  and  above
    the Exceptions.

96. Furthermore I am satisfied that the judge failed to take  into  account
    considerations  relevant  to  the  balancing  exercise,  in  particular
    relevant to the public interest. Whilst the judge took into account the
    circumstances of his  offending  in  the  context  of  the  date  those
    offences were committed and the length of time that had elapsed,  there
    was no consideration of the appellant's commission of further  offences
    in 2019  at the time when the deportation proceedings were  ongoing.  I
    do not accept the submission made by Mr Greer  that  the  reference  to
    this at paragraph 10 when recounting the history was sufficient.  There
    was no reference made to that offending in the  judge's  assessment  of
    the public interest and that was a material omission.

97. Insofar as the issue of delay played a part in the decision of the FtTJ
    in my judgement it was not considered in the context  of  the  relevant
    factual background which  included the appellant's immigration  history
    which set out that the appellant made a number of  further  submissions
    and representations which the respondent was required to  consider  and
    also there had been delay on the appellant's  part  during  the  asylum
    process firstly by failing to attend interviews  but  then  pursuing  a
    claim on the basis of his nationality as a citizen of Somalia.

98. I would accept that the issue of delay can be  a  potentially  relevant
    factor in the proportionality balancing  exercise   (see  EB(Kosovo)  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 41) where the House  of  Lords  held  that  delay  may
    reduce the weight otherwise to be accorded to firm and fair immigration
    control if the delay is  a  result  of  a  dysfunctional  system  which
    creates unpredictable, inconsistent, and unfair  outcomes.  The  likely
    effect of a period of delay is that an  applicant  may  develop  closer
    personal and social ties, thereby strengthening a  family  and  private
    life claim to remain in the UK. In MN-T (Colombia) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 893, the Court of Appeal held that delay may lessen the  weight  of
    public interest considerations of deterrence  and  societal  revulsion.
    Further, during lengthy  delay  a  foreign  criminal  may  be  able  to
    demonstrate he has rehabilitated.

99. They are all relevant considerations however whilst  some  points  were
    identified in favour of the appellant, not all of the relevant  factual
    issues were addressed in the FtTJ's decision. Therefore whilst I  would
    accept that there were some valid  points  raised  in  the  context  of
    delay, as not all of the factual considerations  were  considered,  the
    balancing exercise was flawed. I do not consider that the  respondent's
    submissions on this point would be sufficient to set aside the decision
    but when seen in the context of the other issues identified above, I am
    satisfied that when taken cumulatively  the  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8 was not properly undertaken.

100. I remind myself that the  question  whether  the  decision  contains  a
    material error of law is not whether another Judge could  have  reached
    the opposite conclusion but whether this Judge reached a conclusion  by
    appropriately directing himself as to the relevant  law  and  assessing
    the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

101. For the reasons set out I am satisfied that it  has  been  demonstrated
    by the grounds as argued by the respondent that  the  decision  of  the
    FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point of law  and  should  be
    set aside.

102. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In reaching that
    decision I have given  careful  consideration  to  the  Joint  Practice
    Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning  the
    disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

         "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

                (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair  hearing  or  other
                opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to   and
                considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                which is necessary in order for the decision in  the  appeal
                to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding
                objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to
                the First-tier Tribunal."

103.  In light of the grounds which  proceed  on  the  basis  of  procedural
    unfairness and on the basis that further fact finding and  analysis  is
    necessary I am satisfied that the appeal should be remitted to the FtTJ
    for a  rehearing as the appeal falls within paragraphs (a) and  (b)  as
    set out above.

104. Mr Greer submitted that the conclusions reached on  the  issue  of  the
    section 72 certification should be preserved as set out  at  paragraphs
    49 - 50. He submitted that the grounds did not challenge the assessment
    made by the FtTJ. Ms Pettersen agreed that in the event of an error  of
    law being found and  the  appeal  being  remitted  to  the  FtT,  those
    paragraphs should be preserved findings. It is the  position  that  the
    grounds did not seek to challenge the FtTJ's assessment of the  section
    72 certification I therefore preserve those findings.

105. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    allow the appeal shall be set aside and remitted to the  FtT  with  the
    findings preserved at paragraphs 49-50.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated:   19 January 2021




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

