
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04485/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2018                  |On 7 February 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RSS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr H Dieu, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Clemes in which he allowed the appeal of  the
    Respondent (who we shall call  "the  Claimant"),  a  citizen  of  Iran,
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  asylum  and  issue
    removal directions.

 2. We make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    Claimant who claims asylum. This  direction  prohibits  the  disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the Claimant. Any disclosure and breach of this direction may amount to
    a contempt of court.  This  direction  shall  remain  in  force  unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

 3. The application under  appeal  was  refused  on  16  March  2018.   The
    Claimant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    appeal came before Judge Clemes on 11 May 2018  and  was  allowed.  The
    Secretary of State applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lambert on 20 June 2018 in the following terms

         "The judge found  the  Appellant  not  to  have  provided  credible
         evidence of political activity or links to the KDPI in  Iran,  that
         the chances of him having been monitored in the UK  were  'minimal'
         (paragraph 28), but that he was at risk on return due to sur  place
         activity on Facebook, albeit that that was undertaken for  'cynical
         reasons'. The judge's conclusions are  grounded  firmly  in  expert
         evidence from Dr Joffe set out at paragraph 31-32 of the  decision.
         The final sentence of paragraph 31 sets out  the  current  risk  on
         return, according to the expert evidence, of failed Kurdish  asylum
         seekers thought to have defamed the Iranian regime while abroad.

         The grounds rely on the fact that the Appellant's  political  views
         expressed on Facebook could be deleted prior to return and were not
         genuine and contend inconsistency with the country guidance  in  HJ
         (Iran). In so far as the judge's decision does not engage with that
         country guidance or the argument put forward by the  Respondent  at
         the hearing  (cf  paragraph  14  of  the  decision),  they  may  be
         arguable."

Background

 4. The history of this appeal is detailed above. The Claimant is a citizen
    of Iran born on 1 January 1997. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 24
    September 2017 and claimed asylum. The basis of his claim was that his
    political activity in Iran as a member of the KDPI would cause him to
    face persecution on return.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the claim not accepting that  he  was  a
    member of the KDPI or that he  had  carried  out  activities  on  their
    behalf and therefore that he had faced persecution in the past or would
    face  persecution  on  return.  At  the  appeal  hearing  the  Claimant
    maintained his claim to KDPI membership and activity and added that  he
    would also face adverse interest due to his Kurdish ethnicity  and  his
    political activity in the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  found  that  the
    Claimant was not involved in and had no interest in political  activity
    in Iran and that his level of involvement in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    limited to Facebook posts made for cynical reasons.  Because  of  these
    Facebook posts the Judge found that the Claimant  would  be  likely  to
    come to adverse interest for defaming  the  Islamic  Republic  when  he
    faced interrogation on return as failed Kurdish asylum seeker.

Submissions

 6. For the Secretary of State  Mr  Howells  referred  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal. He said that the key finding at paragraph 32 of the decision is
    that the Claimant has defamed the  Islamic  Republic  on  Facebook  for
    cynical reasons. As the Judge made adverse credibility findings  as  to
    the Claimant's involvement in politics the Claimant can  simply  delete
    the Facebook posts before he returns. He does not  genuinely  hold  the
    political beliefs put forward in those posts so there is no reason  why
    he should not delete them.

 7. For the Claimant Mr Dieu said that the Judge accepted that the Claimant
    had a Facebook profile. The fact that he has such  a  profile  was  not
    challenged and this profile would cause him to be seen  to  be  against
    the government. Although the Judge found  that  the  Claimant  was  not
    credible in his beliefs there would be a risk for him at the  point  of
    return because of this profile. There would  be  an  enhanced  risk  of
    questioning  on  return  because  the  Claimant  is  Kurdish,  he  left
    illegally, and he is a failed asylum seeker, and this will bring  about
    a pinch point for interrogation and it is at this point that his social
    media profile may be seen.

 8. Asked by us why the Claimant could not simply delete the Facebook posts
    Mr Dieu said that the Claimant could not be  compelled  to  delete  the
    posts. He accepted that the  danger  to  the  Claimant  comes  down  to
    whether he is prepared to delete the posts.

 9. We said that the appeal of the Secretary of State would be allowed, and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal set aside. A new decision would
    be substituted dismissing the appeal. We reserved our written decision.



Decision

10.  The  issues  in  this  case  are  simple  and  clear.  The  claim   to
    international protection was based on the Claimant's activities in Iran
    which were said to involve membership of and  active  support  for  the
    KDPI. Having arrived in the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed  asylum  the
    Claimant said that there was further danger because  of  his  political
    activities in the United Kingdom exacerbated by posts  made  on  social
    media.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  clear  and
    comprehensive adverse credibility findings were made in respect of  the
    Claimant's political  activities  both  in  Iran  and  United  Kingdom.
    Paragraph 27 of the decision summarises these findings

         "As I have found as a fact  above,  the  appellant  has  no  actual
         background in terms of being a political opponent openly in Iran. I
         am satisfied as above that he did not have any interest in or links
         to the KDPI  or  any  other  similar  Kurdish  political  party  or
         pressure group. His level of involvement in the UK - I am satisfied
         - is limited to the Facebook posts he has made. I accept  and  find
         that these are publicly accessible. I'm also satisfied that he  has
         made these posts for cynical reasons: he wants to attract attention
         to reinforce an otherwise weak asylum claim."

    There is no challenge to these findings on behalf of the Claimant.  The
    challenge by the Secretary of State is only to the question of  whether
    the Facebook postings are publicly accessible. The Secretary  of  State
    submits that the Claimant

         "could delete his post as they do not represent  anything  ...  The
         appellant does not have any genuine political  profile,  and  these
         aren't his genuine feelings"

11. In our judgement the judge erred in law  by  failing  to  consider  and
    apply HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31. In  HJ  (Iran)
    Lord Rodger JSC gave guidance (at paragraph 82) on the approach  to  be
    adopted by Tribunals where any applicant applies for asylum claiming to
    fear persecution on the grounds of sexuality and  fundamental  to  this
    approach is a consideration of what the individual applicant  would  do
    on a return to the home country. This guidance makes it  clear  that  a
    person cannot be expected to live discreetly, subverting his  sexuality
    for fear of persecution. The HJ (Iran) principle applies to a  fear  of
    persecution on any Convention ground. A person cannot  be  expected  or
    required to hide an innate part of their  personality  or  a  genuinely
    held political view to avoid persecution. In HJ (Iran) Sir  John  Dyson
    makes this clear

         "The Convention must be construed in the light of  its  object  and
         purpose, which is to protect a person who  "owing  to  well-founded
         fear  of  being  persecuted  for   reasons   of   race,   religion,
         nationality, membership of a particular social group  or  political
         opinion, is outside the country of his nationality  and  is  unable
         or, owing to such fear,  is  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
         protection of that country". If the price that a person must pay in
         order to avoid persecution  is  that  he  must  conceal  his  race,
         religion, nationality, membership of a social  group  or  political
         opinion, then he is being required to surrender the very protection
         that the Convention is intended to secure for him." (paragraph 110)

12. Had the Judge considered HJ (Iran) he would  have  noted  that  as  the
    political views espoused in the Facebook posts were not genuinely  held
    by the Claimant there was no reason why  they  could  not  be  deleted.
    Whether the Claimant chose to expose himself to danger  by  maintaining
    posts which expressed views  which  were  not  genuinely  held  was  an
    entirely voluntary act. The failure to consider HJ (Iran) was an  error
    of law and this error of law materially affected the  Judge's  decision
    to allow the appeal and for that reason we  allow  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State and we set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

13. In remaking the decision, we  repeat  what  we  have  said  above.  The
    Claimant  is  a  person  who  has  put  forward  a  false   claim   for
    international protection. The findings made that he  had  no  political
    profile in Iran and undertook  no  political  activity  in  the  United
    Kingdom are comprehensive  and  unchallenged.  Social  media  posts  on
    Facebook made by someone else on the Claimant's behalf have been  found
    to be a cynical attempt to bolster a weak asylum claim. As the Claimant
    does not genuinely hold the beliefs  espoused  in  the  Facebook  posts
    there is no reason at all why he  cannot  delete  them.  A  person  who
    voluntarily exposes himself to danger may be entitled to  international
    protection if such voluntary exposure cannot be remedied  but  where  a
    person maintains such voluntary  exposure  in  circumstances  where  it
    could be simply retracted (in this case  by  deleting  Facebook  posts)
    that person cannot  in  our  judgement  be  entitled  to  international
    protection. We therefore remake the decision of the First-tier tribunal
    and dismiss the Claimant's appeal.

Summary of decision

14. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

15. We remake the decision. The appeal of the Claimant RSS is dismissed.


Signed   Date: 31 January 2019

[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

