
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal ref:  PA/04083/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 14 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                CHIMEZIE [O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Burns,  promulgated
    on 7 November 2019.

 2. The UT granted permission on grounds set out by the  appellant  in  his
    application dated 5 March 2020:

         [1]   failure  to  engage  with  an  expert  report  regarding  the
         appellant's late disclosure of his sexuality;

         [2]   too  high  a  standard  of  proof  applied   to   appellant's
         credibility regarding his sexuality;

         [3]  failure to engage with the evidence as a whole,  and  reaching
         erroneous conclusions; and

         [4]  inadequate reasoning; failure to consider the  impact  of  the
         appellant's  medical  and  mental  health  on  his  asylum   claim,
         consistency of scarring, and diagnosis of depression.

 3. The UT issued directions, dated 2 April 2020, with a view  to  deciding
    without a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether  its
    decision should be set aside.

 4. Parties were also given the opportunity to submit on whether a  hearing
    is necessary.  Neither party seeks a hearing.  The UT  may  now  justly
    decide on error of law, based on parties' written submissions.

 5. The appellant's submissions say that he was  a  vulnerable  witness;  a
    Medical Foundation report found no clinical  evidence  of  fabrication;
    the decision was "contrary to the evidence"; and the decision does  not
    refer to HJ (Iran) [2011]  1  AC  596.   The  rest  of  the  submission
    reasserts his case that on return he would be at  risk  as  a  bisexual
    man, would not receive state protection, and  would  be  at  risk  from
    gangs or cultists who persecuted  him  in  the  past,  and  from  money
    lenders.

 6. The SSHD submits firstly that the grounds do not challenge the findings
    on risk from gangsters or cultists, or  from  money  lenders,  only  on
    bisexuality; nor on the internal flight alternative.  On the grounds as
    numbered, the SSHD says [1] the report was  considered,  and  reticence
    about sexuality did not correspond with the long delay  in  the  claim,
    which was on various grounds; [2] the correct  standard  of  proof  was
    stated and applied; [3] the consideration of the evidence was adequate;
    and [4] medical reports and  scarring  were  considered,  and  adequate
    reasons given for finding that these did not significantly advance  the
    case.

 7. The appellant's reply, filed on 14 May 2020, reasserts and  embellishes
    the case - e.g., "failed to consider the appellant's actions  as  those
    of a frightened, celibate, mentally afflicted man living among ...  the
    homophobic Nigerian community not only in Nigeria but in the UK",  and,
    "[the judge] ... has castigated  him  for  failing  to  comply  with  a
    perceived stereotypical norm".  This is disagreement on the  facts,  in
    rather strident terms; it is not legal analysis.

 8. I am  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant's  grounds  and  submissions
    disclose any error by the FtT on a point of law.

 9. The respondent accepted that LBGT persons in Nigeria form a  particular
    social  group  in  terms  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  but  not  that
    membership of that group is sufficient for recognition  as  a  refugee.
    Such cases turn on their own facts, as appears to be accepted  for  the
    appellant.

10. The FtT did not find the appellant's claim of bisexuality credible, for
    reasons specified at [21] - [29].  These are to be taken in context  of
    adverse credibility findings based on long  delay,  and  claiming  only
    when arrested, at [14] - [20]; dearth of evidence  about  gangsters  or
    cultists (a group allegedly made up entirely of bisexual men), at  [30]
    - [32]; and absence of any basis for a threat  from  money-lenders,  at
    [33].

11. The FtT concluded at [36] that it did not accept any of the elements of
    the claim - bisexuality, a gang, or money-lenders - and said finally at
    [37 - 38]:

         "Had I found any truth in the gang / moneylenders aspects  I  would
         have concluded that it was implausible in the  extreme  to  suggest
         that 8 years after he left Nigeria and 6 years  after  his  brother
         died that gang members or money lenders would be  looking  for  him
         and in any event [he] could relocate ... for example to  Lagos  ...
         where he lived and attended university before leaving  for  the  UK
         ... the asylum claims have been invented simply because he wants to
         find a way of staying in the UK."

12. The appellant reasserts his case, and disagrees  selectively  with  the
    FtT's reasons for finding as it did, but, reading the  decision  fairly
    and as a whole, it explains why this was found to be a  belated,  weak,
    and concocted claim in all its aspects.

13. The appellant has not shown that the FtT's overall conclusion,  reached
    for several sound reasons, should be set aside for having involved  the
    making of any error on a point of law.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

16. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.




    Hugh Macleman

    UT Judge Macleman Date 29/06/2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

