
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04505/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 12 April 2019                    |On 30 April 2019                        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  SYED [Z]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dingley
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 15 March  1979  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 22 March 2018 which had refused his  claim
    for international protection/human rights. The First-tier Tribunal,  in
    a decision promulgated on 20 December 2018, dismissed the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Diwnycz,  who
    appeared the Secretary of State, told me that the  respondent  accepted
    that the judge had erred in law such that his decision fell to  be  set
    aside. I shall, therefore, be brief in giving my  reasons  for  setting
    aside the decision.

 3. The appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship in  the  United
    Kingdom with his children one of whom (aged 10 years) had, at the  time
    of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, has been living in  this
    country for more than seven years and who is, therefore, 'a  qualifying
    child' for the purposes of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  The  judge
    makes no reference to section 117B(6). He appears to have been aware of
    the need to consider the reasonableness of expecting a  child  who  had
    been living in the United Kingdom for more than seven  years  to  leave
    but his analysis at [28] consists of no more than the observation  that
    the activities which the child enjoys in this country  (cricket,  going
    to school attending karate classes) could be pursued  in  Pakistan  and
    that the Tribunal had not 'heard  any  evidence  as  to  whether  those
    activities could be carried out in Pakistan.' Such an approach  is  not
    adequate. The assessment of reasonableness does not consist  in  simply
    considering whether activities enjoyed by child in the  United  Kingdom
    might be pursued outside the jurisdiction.

 4. I set aside the judge's decision and I have remade the decision. I  was
    not asked to revisit the First-tier Tribunal's findings in  respect  of
    the asylum appeal which shall stand.  However,  as  regards  Article  8
    ECHR, I am grateful to Mr Diwnycz for his observation that  the  appeal
    should be allowed. In the light of  KO  (Nigeria)  2018  UKSC  53,  the
    assessment of reasonableness is a child-focused exercise. I agree  with
    both representatives that, upon consideration of the relevant evidence,
    it would not be reasonable for the child to be expected  to  leave  the
    jurisdiction in which he has resided for  more  than  seven  years.  In
    consequence, the public interest does not require the  removal  of  the
    appellant and, by extension, his wife.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State is  dismissed  on
    asylum grounds but allowed on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds.


Signed                              Date 22 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
