
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04634/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 August 2020 via Skype for      |On 06 October 2020                   |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     AN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. N. Anwar, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which, once the  issues  had  been  narrowed,
was not objected to by the parties.   The  form  of  remote  hearing  was  V
(video).  A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was   not
practicable, and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.


The documents that I was referred to are in the file from the earlier First-
tier  Tribunal  proceedings  (including  the  appellant's  bundle  from  the
original  FTT  hearing  in  June  2018),  plus  the  additional   background
materials relied upon by the respondent at  the  hearing,  the  contents  of
which I have recorded.


The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


The parties said this about the process: they were content that it was  fair
and that the appellant herself had been involved in the process.


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the respondent dated 2 May 2017
    to refuse the asylum claim made by the  appellant,  AN,  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born in 1979.  Her appeal was originally heard, and dismissed,
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge ST Fox promulgated on  20  February  2019,
    following a hearing on 8 June 2018.  Sitting at  the  Royal  Courts  of
    Justice, Belfast on 13 February 2020, I  found  that  the  decision  of
    Judge Fox involved the making of an error of law,  and  set  it  aside,
    with no findings of fact preserved, and directed  that  the  matter  be
    reheard in the Upper Tribunal.  It was in those circumstances that  the
    appeal returned to me to be remade.

 2. I attach my error of law decision as the Annex to this decision.

Factual background

 3. The appellant claimed asylum on the basis that she was a member of  the
    particular social group women in Pakistan.  She claimed she was  forced
    to marry her husband in  2004  by  her  abusive  father.   The  husband
    subjected her to years of violent and sexual abuse  in  Pakistan,  and,
    when she later sought a period of separation from him in  her  father's
    home, her father was abusive towards her and her son (now aged 14)  and
    her daughter (now aged 12).  The appellant came to this country in 2014
    to study, and her husband joined her shortly afterwards.  Although  she
    hoped that the international move would be a "fresh start", it was not,
    and her husband continued to be violent and abusive, culminating in the
    police removing him from the family home  shortly  after  his  arrival.
    The appellant claims that  she  cannot  return  to  her  home  area  of
    Pakistan as she will continue to face threats from her father,  husband
    and wider family from which, she contends, there is no effective  state
    protection.  As  a  single  woman  in  the  process  of  divorcing  her
    estranged husband, she cannot relocate to  another  area  of  Pakistan.
    She lacks the required male guardianship to be  able  to  survive,  and
    even if she managed to find a women's shelter that did not  expose  her
    to more risk, she would be at risk of losing her son,  as  it  is  very
    unlikely that he would be admitted to a shelter, too, she claims.  As a
    single mother in  those  circumstances,  her  earning  power  would  be
    minimal.

 4. The respondent now simply contends that it would not  be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to relocate to a different part of Pakistan.  She  is
    highly educated and would be well placed to live,  with  her  children,
    elsewhere.

Procedural issues

 5. Ms Anwar  applied  to  adjourn  the  proceedings.   Counsel  originally
    instructed was unable  to  attend,  and  even  though  Ms  Anwar  would
    ordinarily have been able to appear on behalf  of  the  appellant,  the
    facilities at her office premises were unsuitable for the appellant  to
    give evidence remotely, given the need for social  distancing  to  take
    place. In addition, the sensitive nature of the appellant's  claim  for
    asylum,  which  included  allegations  of  sexual  abuse  and  domestic
    violence, were not suitable for discussion over a  remote  video  link.
    This was a  case,  submitted  Ms  Anwar,  which  could  and  should  be
    conducted on a face-to-face basis.

 6. Before deciding whether to grant the adjournment request,  and  mindful
    of the delay the appellant had already experienced (at no fault of  her
    own; the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was not promulgated  until
    some eight months after the original hearing, and the re-hearing in the
    Upper Tribunal was further delayed by the Covid pandemic),  I  narrowed
    the issues with the parties. As set out in more detail below, Ms  Cunha
    realistically accepted  that  the  appellant  had  given  a  plausible,
    consistent and credible account of the  domestic  violence  and  sexual
    abuse she claimed to have experienced in Pakistan  and  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and that the sole issue  in  the  case  was  whether  internal
    relocation to another part of Pakistan  would  be  unduly  harsh.  That
    represented a change  in  the  position  of  the  respondent  from  the
    original  refusal  letter,  which   accepted   that   the   appellant's
    relationship with her husband had broken down but rejected her  claimed
    fear of her family.  At  the  error  of  law  hearing,  the  presenting
    officer had submitted that the case turned on internal relocation:  see
    [21] of my decision in the Annex.  In  light  of  that  concession,  Ms
    Anwar agreed that  the  matter  could  proceed  on  submissions  alone,
    addressing the ability of the appellant internally to  relocate  within
    Pakistan.  It was not, therefore, necessary to  grant  the  adjournment
    request.  I was satisfied that the matter could proceed fairly  on  the
    day, in particular as the social distancing  arrangements  which  would
    have been required were the appellant to give evidence did not apply to
    Ms Anwar making submissions.

 7. During closing submissions, Ms  Cunha  sought  to  rely  on  additional
    background materials concerning the position of women in Pakistan.  The
    materials had not been served on  the  tribunal  or  the  appellant  in
    advance, although Ms Cunha had emailed some links to  the  tribunal  on
    the day of the hearing. It was unfortunate that the  respondent  waited
    until the door of the court, as it were, to rely  on  these  additional
    materials.  I  directed  that  the  respondent  serve  any   additional
    materials on the appellant and the tribunal,  along  with  post-hearing
    submissions, within 14 days (the case was not adjourned part-heard,  as
    subsequently suggested  in  the  respondent's  written  submissions;  I
    simply gave permission for post-hearing submissions to be made).   That
    would have been 1 September 2020. I directed that the  appellant  could
    respond to those submissions within a further 14 days, by 15  September
    2020, and make any further post-hearing submissions concerning internal
    relocation.

 8. By 11 September, there had been no compliance with the  directions.   I
    arranged for the tribunal administration to issue  a  reminder  of  the
    directions that  had  been  given  at  the  hearing,  highlighting  the
    original timetable for compliance, which had, by  then,  been  all  but
    lost.  It was incumbent upon any  party  seeking  to  make  submissions
    after the time limit for doing so had passed to make an application for
    relief from sanctions.

 9. The respondent complied with the directions on 17 September 2020.

10. Pursuant to Denton v White [2014] EWCA Civ 906, [2014] 1 W.L.R. 3926 at
    [24] and following, Hysaj v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1633, [2015] 1 W.L.R. 2472 at [39] - [48], there  is  a
    three-stage  test  for  relief  from  sanctions.   The  matters  to  be
    addressed under the three stages of analysis are as follows:

          a. Is the breach significant?

          b. Why did the default occur?

          c. Evaluate all the circumstances of the case, so  as  to  enable
             the [tribunal] to deal justly with the application.

11. As to (a), applied to the facts of the present matter, the  breach  was
    significant.  Post-hearing submissions were invited by  the  respondent
    by 1 September 2020, with  a  consequential  deadline  imposed  on  the
    appellant of 15 September.  The effect of the delay has meant that  the
    appellant was unable to comply with her own deadline, necessitating her
    to make an application for an extension, on an anticipatory basis.

12. As to (b), it is not clear why  the  breach  occurred.   There  was  no
    explanation for the delay, nor was there an application for relief from
    sanctions by reference to the established criteria.   The  cover  email
    from the presenting officer simply stated,

         "The Respondent apologises for the  inconvenience  caused  by  such
         delay  in  complying  with  the  direction.   She  understands  the
         detrimental impact this delay  may  have  on  the  outcome  of  the
         Appellant's appeal.  Nonetheless, she would be  very  grateful  for
         the extension in retrospect ..."

    Paragraph 6 of the respondent's written  submissions  stated  that  the
    respondent "avers that such delay was necessary to  provide  the  court
    with clarity of position and  to  assist  with  the  administration  of
    justice..."

13. This tribunal expects the respondent to have "clarity of position"  and
    "assist  with  the  administration  of   justice"   without   breaching
    directions.   These are not reasons for the delay, but a description of
    some of the duties the Secretary of State owes towards the tribunal  at
    all times.

14. As to (c), looking to all the circumstances  of  the  case,  I  do  not
    consider it to be necessary in the interests of justice  to  grant  the
    application for relief from sanctions.

          a. Procedural rigour is important in this jurisdiction.

          b. As the Court of Appeal held in Hysaj at [46], "[o]nly in those
             cases where the court can see without much investigation  that
             the grounds of appeal are either very strong or very weak will
             the merits have a significant part to play when  it  comes  to
             balancing the various factors that have to  be  considered  at
             stage three  of  the  process."   Having  had  regard  to  the
             underlying  merit  of   the   materials   contained   in   the
             submissions, this is not  a  case  where  the  respondent  has
             provided  compelling  post-hearing  submissions   which,   for
             example, throw into sharp relief the existing country guidance
             and background materials.  The  submissions  do  not  seek  to
             demonstrate that  the  criteria  for  departing  from  country
             guidance cases have been met.  In SG  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940,  the  Court
             of Appeal addressed the  ability  of  judges  to  depart  from
             country guidance decision, in these terms, at [47]:

                  "... tribunal judges are required to take Country Guidance
                  determinations into account, and  to  follow  them  unless
                  very strong grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence,  are
                  adduced justifying their not doing so."

             The  Secretary  of  State's  submissions  do  not  reach  this
             threshold for reasons which include:

                   i. The submissions themselves  note  that  some  of  the
                      equality reforms in Pakistan they seek  to  highlight
                      are a "working progress" [sic] (see [13]).

                  ii. Elsewhere, the written submissions refer to Court  of
                      Appeal authority on the concept of "unduly harsh"  in
                      the context of the public interest in the deportation
                      of  foreign  criminals,  and  its   impact   on   the
                      requirement in Januzi v Secretary of  State  for  the
                      Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006]  2  AC  246  to
                      consider all relevant circumstances  surrounding  the
                      prospective  internal  relocation   of   the   person
                      concerned: see the reference at [20] of  the  further
                      submissions to SC (Jamaica) v Secretary of State  for
                      the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2112.    SC
                      (Jamaica) is not  of  significant  relevance  to  the
                      prospective internal relocation of a female victim of
                      domestic violence where  there  are  no  criminality-
                      based public interest concerns which could  calibrate
                      what amounts to "unduly harsh" for  the  purposes  of
                      internal relocation (c.f. [40] of SC (Jamaica)).

                 iii.  At  [21],  the  respondent's  submissions  seek   to
                      distinguish  SM  and  MH  (lone  women  -  ostracism)
                      Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC) on the  basis  of
                      the  facts  of  one  the  appeals  before  the  Upper
                      Tribunal  on  that   occasion;   that   approach   is
                      misconceived, as SM is significant  for  the  country
                      guidance  it  gives,  not   for   the   fact-specific
                      application of that guidance to  the  appeals  before
                      it.

                  iv. At other points, the submissions simply cover matters
                      upon which Ms Cunha addressed me at  the  hearing  in
                      any event, or which featured in the  refusal  letter.
                      See for example [22], which refers to paragraph 2.4.3
                      of the relevant Country Policy and Information  Note.
                      I refer to that  document  at  [38],  below,  in  any
                      event.    Paragraph   [26]   of   the    post-hearing
                      submissions addresses the impact of  the  appellant's
                      education, perceived wealth and linguistic skills  on
                      her ability  internally  to  relocate.   That  was  a
                      matter in issue at the hearing, and which I  consider
                      at [45] and following, below.

             The Secretary of  State's  post-hearing  submissions  do  not,
             therefore, add significantly to the matters which have already
             received full argument.  To the extent  the  submissions  make
             additional arguments, those additional arguments  are  not  of
             such gravitas so as to merit an extension of time.

          c.  Permitting  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  post-hearing
             representations had, itself, been a generous approach,  in  an
             attempt to avoid  unnecessary  formality  in  response  to  Ms
             Cunha's attempted reliance on  new  materials  during  closing
             submissions.  That  is  a  factor  which  is  relevant  to  my
             assessment of "all the circumstances of  the  case",  and  one
             which militates in favour of not permitting further procedural
             non-compliance.  The respondent was generously  provided  with
             the ability to make post-hearing submissions, and  even  then,
             took twice as long as the permitted time, for no good reason.

          d. Finally, were I to allow the Secretary of State to rely on the
             late  post-hearing   materials,   it   would   necessitate   a
             corresponding extension to be given  the  appellant;  14  days
             further would have taken the appellant's revised deadline well
             into October.  The hearing before me had been in August.   The
             original refusal decision  was  taken  on  2  May  2017.   The
             overriding objective of this tribunal  includes  the  need  to
             avoid delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration of
             the issues (rule 2(2)(e)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
             Tribunal) Rules  2008).   Admitting  these  late  post-hearing
             submissions, with the consequential additional delay doing  so
             would introduce, would be  incompatible  with  the  overriding
             objective.

15. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's application for an
    extension of time within which to  make  post-hearing  submissions  and
    decline to consider the respondent's post-hearing submissions.

16. It follows that an extension of time for the appellant  to  make  post-
    hearing submissions in response was unnecessary.

Legal framework

17. The burden is on the appellant to establish  that  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof she meets the requirements of the Refugee  or  Person
    in Need of International Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006
    ("the Qualification Regulations"). The appellant must establish to  the
    reasonable likelihood standard that she falls within the definition  of
    "refugee" contained  in  Article  1(A)  of  the  Geneva  Convention  as
    incorporated into domestic law by Regulation 2(1) of the  Qualification
    Regulations.

18. Directive 2004/83/EC, known as "the Qualification Directive",  provides
    at Article 8, under the heading, "Internal Protection":

         "1.  As part of the assessment of the application for international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.

         2.   In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant."

19. The lead authority on internal relocation  is  Januzi  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5.The burden of proof  is  on
    the appellant to demonstrate that it would not be reasonable for her to
    relocate internally within Pakistan:  see  MB  (Internal  relocation  -
    burden of proof) Albania [2019] UKUT 00392 (IAC).    The principles are
    not in dispute and I need say no more about them.

Submissions

20. I am grateful to Ms Anwar and Ms Cunha for their helpful  and  succinct
    oral  submissions  at  the  hearing.   I  will  summarise  the  salient
    submissions made by each party during my analysis of  the  submissions,
    below.

Findings of fact

21. In light of the respondent's concession,  both  at  the  error  of  law
    hearing, but more significantly on the part of Ms Cunha at the remaking
    hearing, that this case rests on internal relocation, it  follows  that
    the summary  of  her  case  set  out  below  is  not  disputed  by  the
    respondent.  I consider that the  concession  was  appropriately  made.
    The appellant has given a credible, consistent and (bearing in mind the
    extensive background materials concerning  the  position  of  women  in
    Pakistan) plausible account of a childhood of sexual abuse at the hands
    of her father, followed by forced marriage to a  sexually  abusive  and
    violent husband (which included abuse inflicted in the United Kingdom),
    and threats from her wider family.

22. The following summary of the appellant's case is taken  primarily  from
    her witness statement dated 6 June  2018,  prepared  for  the  original
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, and from her substantive asylum
    interview conducted on 26 January 2017.

23. The appellant is from a large and relatively wealthy family in  Lahore,
    Pakistan, which has now disowned her. Her  mother  died  when  she  was
    seven years old, leaving her an inheritance of land and money.  Due  to
    her age, her  father  was  entrusted  with  the  inheritance,  but  has
    withheld most of it from her.  The appellant's case is that it would be
    more convenient for her father if she were simply dead,  for  it  would
    end once and for all the continued inheritance dispute  that  catalysed
    the difficulties she experienced in Pakistan.  Her father  and  one  of
    her uncles have built factories and farms on the land  she  owns.   The
    appellant's father sexually abused her during her  childhood,  starting
    when she was aged seven.  It is not clear if the sexual  abuse  started
    upon the death of her mother, or whether it is otherwise  connected  to
    it.  Nevertheless, it took place the beginning of an abusive  childhood
    and upbringing, which culminated in the appellant being forced  by  her
    father and the  wider  family  to  marry  BK  in  November  2004.   The
    appellant was so unhappy at the prospect of the  forced  marriage  that
    she attempted suicide.  She was raped and beaten by  her  husband;  her
    father encouraged the violence (statement, [5]) and acquiesced  in  the
    rape (statement, [10]).  In 2006, the appellant's son  was  born.   The
    violence and sexual abuse from  her  husband  continued  following  the
    birth.  In 2008, it reached a peak, and the appellant had to leave him;
    after being refused a place at her sister's home, she  stayed  with  an
    aunt for a few days, who subsequently took her  back  to  her  father's
    home.  The aunt convinced her father to let the appellant stay for  the
    summer vacation, despite his reluctance.

24. In July 2008, the appellant's daughter was born.  It  was  a  traumatic
    home birth.  The appellant's family refused to take her to hospital and
    forced her to give birth with no  medical  assistance,  with  only  the
    family maid to help.  The appellant lost a lot of blood.  It  was  only
    when she was visited by her sister later that evening that she was able
    to get to hospital.  She fears that she would have been killed  by  her
    family had she not been taken for medical assistance by her sister.

25. The appellant stayed with her  father  from  2008  to  2011.   She  was
    subject to  repeated  pressure  to  return  to  her  husband,  who  was
    permitted to visit her at the family home, even  though  the  appellant
    did not want to see him again.  He would rape her during these  visits.
    The family were cruel to her during this  time.   They  hid  food,  and
    would take her son from the house, withholding his location  from  her.
    He would often be beaten  by  the  appellant's  stepbrother  and  would
    emerge from  a  period  of  absence  with  unexplained  injuries.   Her
    daughter contracted pneumonia, but her father refused  to  help  or  to
    take the child to hospital.

26. The family generator was not connected to the appellant's  room  during
    power outages, and she was denied hot water during cold winters.   This
    led to her children becoming sick.  The appellant's son  was  ridiculed
    by her father;  the  appellant's  case  is  that  he  was  specifically
    targeted as he is the male heir to the inheritance.

27. The appellant had a low-paid teaching job in Pakistan,  which  did  not
    provide enough money to support her or her family.  She sold  the  gold
    jewellery she was given as a wedding present  to  fund  her  children's
    school fees in Pakistan, supplement her income, and to fund her studies
    here.  Her brother sold some  of  the  land  he  inherited  from  their
    mother, and he gave her a share of that, too.  In her asylum interview,
    she describes how she had a total of 8 gold bangles, and that  she  has
    now sold them all: question 95.

28. The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2014  on  a
    student visa.  Her husband followed in December  2014,  accompanied  by
    their children.  The children had been left in the care of her  sister,
    M, when the appellant first left Pakistan.

29. Shortly after his arrival, the appellant's husband resumed his violence
    towards her and was controlling and abusive.  He told  their  son  that
    all white people are infidels and  they  were  obliged  to  join  jihad
    against them.  The husband was verbally and physically abusive  towards
    their daughter and threatened the appellant that if she tried to  leave
    him, "he would not spare me in a condition  worth  living"  (statement,
    [15]).  The violence culminated in an incident later in  December  2014
    in  which  the  appellant's  husband  threatened  her  with  a   knife,
    threatened to set fire to their home and strangled her.  The  appellant
    called the police and the husband  was  arrested.   The  appellant  was
    provided with emergency accommodation, and the proceedings for the non-
    molestation order and subsequent occupation order were  commenced.   In
    June 2016, he sent her a photograph of a dead woman  in  a  shroud  via
    social media.   She  understands  that  her  husband  is  now  back  in
    Pakistan.

30. The appellant states that her mental health is poor, and that  she  has
    been prescribed with Sertraline.  There is no medical report,  although
    her GP provided a letter dated 5 March 2018 which  confirmed  that  she
    was then receiving treatment for anxiety.  The  letter  summarises  the
    account provided by  the  appellant  of  the  traumatic  birth  of  her
    daughter in  terms  which  are  consistent  with  the  account  in  her
    statement, adding:

         "This  has  caused  significant   and   deep-seated   psychological
         difficulties and physical difficulties with urinary  frequency  and
         occasional urge incontinence."

    The appellant also has Thalassemia, which is a genetic blood  disorder.



31. In her asylum interview, the appellant said that she did not  seek  the
    assistance of the authorities in Pakistan as she was afraid  that  they
    would offer her no assistance and side with  her  husband.    She  said
    that the police have a very bad reputation and  often  refuse  to  help
    women (question 89).

32. I adopt the above  summary  as  my  findings  of  fact  upon  which  my
    assessment of the reasonableness of the appellant's  possible  internal
    relocation must be based.

Country guidance

33. In SN & HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG  [2004]  UKIAT
    00283,  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  held  that  the   following
    questions must be addressed when considering the prospect  of  internal
    relocation:

         "(a) Has the claimant shown a real risk or reasonable likelihood of
         continuing hostility from her husband (or former  husband)  or  his
         family members, such as to raise a real risk of serious harm in her
         former home area?

         (b)  If yes, has  she  shown  that  she  would  have  no  effective
         protection  in  her  home  area  against  such  a  risk,  including
         protection available from the Pakistani state, from her own  family
         members, or from a current partner or his family?

         (c)  If yes, would such a risk and lack of protection extend to any
         other part of Pakistan to which she could reasonably be expected to
         go (Robinson [1997] EWCA Civ 2089, AE and FE [2002] UKIAT  036361),
         having regard to the  available  state  support,  shelters,  crisis
         centres, and family members or friends in other parts of Pakistan?"

    Pursuant to paragraph (1) of the Headnote in SM and MH  (lone  women  -
    ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC), the guidance in SN & HM
    remains applicable.  I will therefore  consider  the  above  questions,
    before addressing the specific guidance given in SM  and  MH  which  is
    most relevant to question (c), quoted above.

(a) Has  the  claimant  shown  a  real  risk  or  reasonable  likelihood  of
continuing hostility from her husband (or  former  husband)  or  his  family
members, such as to raise a real risk of serious harm  in  her  former  home
area?

34. The appellant has demonstrated that there is a real and continuing risk
    of harm in her home area, when assessed to  the  lower  standard.   Her
    husband's hostility towards her commenced with  their  forced  marriage
    and continued over the following four years while they  both  lived  in
    Pakistan.  The violence flared up almost immediately upon her husband's
    arrival in the United Kingdom, resulting in  his  arrest,  and  a  non-
    molestation order and an occupation order being made against him and in
    favour of the  appellant.   In  June  2016  he  sent  the  appellant  a
    photograph of a dead woman.  Given the context of the  earlier  threats
    and violence, I find  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  that  was
    intended to be understood as a threat of  fatal  violence  towards  the
    appellant herself.  The husband is now thought to be back  in  Pakistan
    but there is absolutely no suggestion  that  his  violent  and  abusive
    attitude has changed.  The appellant's unchallenged evidence is that he
    is now  manifesting  radicalised  views.   Similarly,  the  appellant's
    father has caused serious harm  to  her  in  the  past,  including  the
    withholding of medical treatment during the birth of her daughter,  and
    acquiescing, if not actively encouraging, further harm on the  part  of
    her husband.  At [25] of her statement, the appellant  writes  that  in
    August 2017, her husband's brother threatened to take her children away
    upon her return.

35. On that basis, the appellant's husband and her father pose a real  risk
    of serious harm to the appellant in Lahore.

(b) If yes, has she shown that she would have  no  effective  protection  in
her home area against such a risk, including protection available  from  the
Pakistani state, from her own family members, or from a current  partner  or
his family?

36. In the respondent's Country Policy and  Information  Note  -  Pakistan:
    Women fearing gender-based violence, version 4.0, February  2020  ("the
    CPIN"), it states at [2.4.1]:

         "Although women are protected by  law,  in  practice  this  is  not
         systematically enforced because of deep-rooted social, cultural and
         economic barriers and prejudices. A woman's status - and  therefore
         her ability to exercise her social, economic  and  human  rights  -
         varies  according  to  her  social  position  in  terms  of  class,
         religion, education, economic  independence,  region  and  location
         (urban  or  rural),  cultural  and   traditional   values,   caste,
         educational profile, marital status and number of  children.  Women
         face direct, cultural and  structural  violence  through  a  deeply
         entrenched system of patriarchy in all tiers of public and  private
         life..." (Emphasis added)

37. Paragraph [2.4.2] records the World Economic Forum's Global Gender  Gap
    Index as ranking Pakistan as the second lowest country in the world  in
    2017, 2017 and 2018 in terms of gender  equality  relating  to  various
    matters including survival.  The same paragraph adds that  Pakistan  is
    rated, presumably also by the World Economic Forum, as the  sixth  most
    dangerous country in the world for women.

38. At [2.4.3], the CPIN states the respondent's view that "Women in  large
    urban areas such as Lahore, Karachi and Islamabad  often  can  actively
    participate in society, i.e. are able to access  education,  employment
    and health services, socialise and travel, without a  male  chaperone."
    This general observation is tempered by what follows at [2.5.3],  which
    is of direct relevance to the specific question under consideration  in
    this part of my decision:

         "Pakistan has a functioning criminal justice system;  however,  the
         authorities are sometimes unwilling to provide protection for women
         fearing sexual or gender-based violence as police  and  judges  are
         reluctant to take action in domestic violence cases,  viewing  them
         as family problems. Instead of  filing  charges,  police  typically
         responded by encouraging the parties to reconcile and returning the
         victims to their abusers. It is common  for  police  to  refuse  to
         register  reports  of  rape.  Some  police  demand  bribes   before
         registering cases and investigations are often superficial.  Courts
         often perceive rape victims as immoral in character  and  therefore
         to blame..."

39. At [2.5.4], the  CPIN  reports  that  many  so-called  "honour"  crimes
    against women go unpunished.  While  there  are  some  police  stations
    staffed by women, they are an insignificant minority;  women  accounted
    for less than 1% of the police force in 2017,  and  such  stations  are
    often under resourced: [2.5.5].   Female testimony is worth  half  that
    of male testimony in the courts (see [2.5.6]).

40. At [63] of SM and MH, it was held that:

         "The generic country evidence  indicates  that  despite  protective
         legislation  introduced  in  2010  and  after,   sufficient   state
         protection will normally not be available  in  the  home  area,  in
         circumstances where a real risk of persecution or serious harm  has
         been shown to exist there  from  a  female  applicant's  family  or
         husband. Any assessment  of  international  protection  needs  will
         require a careful and fact specific assessment as  to  the  nature,
         source and scope of the risk  to  the  applicant  at  the  date  of
         hearing, including taking into  account  the  possibility,  if  the
         woman has  family  support,  a  male  protector,  or  is  educated,
         wealthy, or older, of internal relocation  to  one  of  the  larger
         cities." (Emphasis added)

41. The emboldened text demonstrates that, in general, there is unlikely to
    be sufficient state protection available in the home area  of  a  woman
    facing gender-based violence, where, as here, it has  been  shown  that
    there is a real risk of serious harm from the family.  The  appellant's
    now unchallenged account records that she was subject to  violence  and
    abuse at the hands of her father and husband for  many  years.   During
    the birth of her daughter, it was her uncle's wife who was instrumental
    in forcing the maid  away  from  her  in  order  to  prevent  her  from
    receiving any form of medical or  other  assistance  (see  [7]  of  her
    statement).

42. Although she has five sisters in Pakistan, they  were  unable  to  help
    prevent that violence.   One of them  lives  with  the  sister  of  her
    husband and refused to house  her  during  the  initial  phase  of  her
    separation from her husband in 2008: see [6]  of  her  statement.   The
    remainder were unable to help with the  subsequent  violence  over  the
    years that followed.

43. While the appellant is from  a  wealthy  family,  and  had  independent
    wealth of her own, she has now exhausted her supply of gold  jewellery,
    which she had previously been able to sell  to  raise  funds,  and  her
    inheritance has been withheld from her.  She  writes  at  [27]  of  her
    statement that she has no remaining savings, and nothing left to sell.

44. The appellant has no male protector.  Although her brother shared  some
    of his inheritance with her prior to her  departure,  her  unchallenged
    evidence (see question 26 of the asylum interview) is that his focus is
    now on her returning to Pakistan, and that he is "pushing"  her  to  do
    that. There is no suggestion that  she  will  have  his  protection  or
    assistance on her return, and he is, in any event, resident in Denmark.
     Her stepbrother was instrumental in beating her  son  when  she  lived
    with her father and his current wife.

45. The main factor the appellant has in her favour is  her  education  and
    work history, as noted by the refusal letter at [68] to [72].   She  is
    highly educated.  She speaks English, Urdu,  Hindi  and  Saraiki.   She
    received a Master's degree, taught in  English,  in  Pakistan,  and  is
    currently studying for a further Master's degree at  a  prestigious  UK
    university, on a fees scholarship.  She worked as a teacher in Pakistan
    in the past and has worked as  a  research  assistant  at  her  current
    academic institution.  In  her  bundle  are  two  references  from  her
    supervisors which speak of her skills, abilities and resolve in glowing
    terms.

46. Despite her educational  achievements,  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant would enjoy a sufficiency of protection in Lahore.   She  had
    the benefit of her Master's degree and some work  experience  prior  to
    her  departure.   Neither  enabled  her  to  enjoy  a  sufficiency   of
    protection in the past, in her home area.  Her studies and limited work
    experience here (in her asylum interview she spoke of  a  total  of  20
    hours' work as a research assistant), while impressive, are not of  the
    order that  will  enable  her  to  overcome  the  family  violence  and
    hostility that has marred much of her life.  As  the  CPIN  notes,  the
    police,  if  approached,  would  be  likely  to  seek  a   family-based
    resolution to the problem.  Women's police stations are under resourced
    and few and far between.

47. For these reasons, I reject the analysis at [51] to [60] of the refusal
    decision.  Accordingly, the appellant has shown that she would have  no
    effective protection in her home area.

(c) If yes, would such a risk and lack of protection  extend  to  any  other
part of Pakistan to which she could reasonably be expected to  go  (Robinson
[1997] EWCA Civ 2089, AE and FE [2002] UKIAT 036361), having regard  to  the
available state support, shelters, crisis centres,  and  family  members  or
friends in other parts of Pakistan?

48. In SM and MH, this tribunal gave further guidance on the considerations
    which must be taken into account when, "having regard to the  available
    state support, shelters, crisis centres, and family members or  friends
    in other parts of Pakistan."  The relevant questions, as summarised  in
    the headnote, are set out below.  I address each factor in turn.

          a. Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her home
             area for a single woman or a female head of household, there
             may be an internal relocation option to one of Pakistan's
             larger cities, depending on the family, social and educational
             situation of the woman in question. (Headnote (2))

             The  appellant  would  return  as  the  female  head  of   her
             household, including her two children aged  12  and  14.   Her
             family situation is such that  she  cannot  expect  assistance
             from her immediate family, and  her  sisters  were  unable  to
             prevent the abuse  she  experienced  previously.   Her  social
             situation would be one of isolation, as a single mother.   She
             does  have  education,  though,  and  this  may  be  of   some
             assistance.

          b. It will not be normally be unduly harsh to expect a single
             woman or female head of household to relocate internally
             within Pakistan if she can access support from family members
             or a male guardian in the place of relocation. (Headnote (3))

             The appellant has no male guardian anywhere in Pakistan.   The
             appellant  has  two  sisters  and  three   stepsisters.    The
             stepsisters are the daughters of her father's  wife  (referred
             to by the appellant as  her  "second  mother"  in  her  asylum
             interview), and there is no reference in any of  the  evidence
             to the stepsisters being of any support to her at  all,  still
             less is there a basis  to  conclude  that  they  would  be  of
             support in the putative place of relocation.  The  appellant's
             two birth sisters live in Lahore and so are not  available  to
             assist in an alternative city, such as Karachi.  Both  sisters
             are married and live in their own family units in Lahore;  one
             lives with her husband and his parents, the other  lives  with
             her own husband and their four children.  One of  her  sisters
             previously refused to provide her with a place of refuge.  The
             respondent has not suggested that it is reasonable  to  expect
             either sister, assuming they were willing to move  to  another
             city to facilitate the appellant's relocation  and  I  do  not
             consider that it would be appropriate to speculate  that  they
             would be willing and able  to  do  so.    The  appellant  also
             writes at [26] of her statement that if she were  to  maintain
             contact with her sisters upon her  return  to  Pakistan,  that
             would risk revealing her location to her wider family.   There
             is force in  that  suggestion,  as  the  background  materials
             suggest, that it is very difficult for married women  to  keep
             any areas of their lives independent from their wider families
             and male protectors; as the respondent notes at [2.4.1] of the
             CPIN, "Women face direct,  cultural  and  structural  violence
             through a deeply entrenched system of patriarchy in all  tiers
             of public and private life."  See  also  the  results  of  the
             Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey summarised  at  [6.3.2]
             which records the prevalence of domestic violence and  control
             experienced  by  women  in  Pakistan,  confirming   that   the
             appellant's fears  about  her  sisters'  ability  to  withhold
             information about her  location  from  her  wider  family  are
             reasonably likely to be well-founded.

          c. It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,
             or older women to seek internal relocation to a city. It helps
             if a woman has qualifications enabling her to get well-paid
             employment and pay for accommodation and childcare if
             required. (Headnote (4))

             The appellant is very well educated and has previously  worked
             in Pakistan.  However, her unchallenged evidence is  that  her
             work as a teacher paid poorly.  She undertook that work  while
             living with her husband and his mother, in their family  home.
             She did not have to pay the rent for that property as  it  was
             covered by her mother in law, meaning that  her  past  earning
             history is no basis to conclude that she would  be  able  earn
             enough  to  pay  for  her  own  accommodation  and  childcare.
             Moreover,  her  earnings  did  not  provide  enough  money  to
             purchase medicine for their children or pay for school for her
             children.  See the answers to  questions  29  and  95  of  the
             asylum  interview.    See  also  the  appellant's  answer   to
             question 108, in which she states that the highest salary  she
             was ever offered in Pakistan would  not  cover  the  rent.   I
             accept that the appellant would be returning with the  benefit
             of further education secured in  this  country,  but  for  the
             reasons set out below, I do not consider that  that  would  be
             sufficient properly to restore her situation, in view  of  her
             irregular social situation and the absence  of  a  significant
             earnings history in the past.

          d. Where a single woman, with or without children, is ostracised
             by family members and other sources of possible social support
             because she is in an irregular situation, internal relocation
             will be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will be
             a question of fact in each case. (Headnote (5))

             The  appellant's  unchallenged  evidence  is  that   she   was
             ostracised by her family for the separation from  her  husband
             between 2008 and 2011, and that the hostility and estrangement
             has continued.  She would be returning as  a  separated  woman
             with two children,  seeking  to  divorce.   While  divorce  is
             available to women in Pakistan (as to which, see  (8)  of  the
             Headnote in SM and MH), the appellant would not  be  returning
             with a new partner, and would not  enjoy  the  benefit  of  no
             longer being  ostracised,  in  contrast  to  the  hypothetical
             divorced returning woman with a new partner or husband in  (8)
             of the Headnote in SM and MH.

          e. A single woman or female head of household who has no male
             protector or social network may be able to use the state
             domestic violence shelters for a short time, but the focus of
             such shelters is on reconciling people with their family
             networks, and places are in short supply and time limited.
             Privately run shelters may be more flexible, providing longer
             term support while the woman regularises her social situation,
             but again, places are limited. (Headnote (6))

             The appellant has  no  prospect  of  reconciliation  with  her
             family network, given the risks of doing so identified  above,
             with the effect that the likely  focus  of  a  state  domestic
             violence shelter would  be  inappropriate.    A  privately-run
             shelter is unlikely to be of assistance because of the limited
             places available and, significantly, the appellant's children.

          f. Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk but
             where they are used by women with children, such shelters do
             not always allow older children to enter and stay with their
             mothers. The risk of temporary separation, and the
             proportionality of such separation, is likely to differ
             depending on the age and sex of a woman's children: male
             children may be removed from their mothers at the age of 5 and
             placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until the family situation
             has been regularised (see KA and Others (domestic violence
             risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC)). Such
             temporary separation will not always be disproportionate or
             unduly harsh: that is a question of fact in each case.
             (Headnote (7))

             It is not reasonably likely that the family situation  of  the
             appellant  will  regularise,  meaning  that  the  prospect  of
             separation from her 14 year  old  son  will  be  anything  but
             temporary.  If the only way the appellant  would  be  able  to
             secure accommodation upon her return would be to give  up  her
             son to an orphanage or madrassa, that would be  unduly  harsh.
             There is no suggestion that such separation would only be on a
             temporary basis.

49. In summary, the factors mitigating against  internal  relocation  being
    reasonable include the following: the appellant would return as a  lone
    female head of a household; she would have no  prospect  of  assistance
    from her family in the  place  of  relocation;  she  would  suffer  the
    constant fear of being located by her husband; her earning  history  in
    Pakistan has never been sufficient to  meet  the  costs  of  an  entire
    household, for even when she did not have to contribute  to  the  rent,
    she had to sell wedding jewellery to  fund  her  children's  education,
    medical care, and other daily living costs (see question 95).

50. The main factor militating in favour  of  a  conclusion  that  internal
    relocation would be reasonable and not unduly harsh is the  appellant's
    education.  She is highly educated and speaks four languages.   Despite
    being subject to the most horrific abuse throughout her  childhood  and
    early adult life, she was able to study, move to this country, and  has
    commenced further study at a prestigious institution.  Ms Cunha submits
    that she will be well placed to commence  work  in  one  of  the  major
    cities in Pakistan such that she would be able to support  herself  and
    her family.  She would have the benefit of the  Home  Office  "Assisted
    Voluntary Return" programme,  which  would  provide  up  to  1,500  to
    facilitate her return, and, contends Ms Cunha, she would be assisted by
    the International Organisation  for  Migration  ("the  IMO")  upon  her
    return.  In relation to the prospect of assistance  from  the  IMO,  in
    response to a question from me, Ms Cunha accepted that neither the CPIN
    nor the other background materials before the tribunal  outlined  those
    arrangements,  so  I  place  minimal  weight  on  that  aspect  of  the
    submission.  But the fact of returning as a highly educated individual,
    with improved qualifications, and possible AVR support,  is  a  weighty
    matter.

51. For completeness, I have navigated the  links  that  Ms  Cunha  emailed
    during the hearing.  Nothing accessible via these  links  calls  for  a
    different approach.

52. For example, nothing in the respondent's Country Policy and Information
    Note Pakistan: Background information, including  internal  relocation,
    Version 3.0, June 2020, purports to call into question the  conclusions
    of the country guidance authorities outlined above.  What it does  say,
    though,  underlines  the  difficulties  the  appellant  is  likely   to
    encounter seeking to obtain housing with her children.  In relation  to
    the position of women, at [25.1.1] the  CPIN  simply  cross  refers  to
    Country Policy and Information Note - Pakistan: Women  fearing  gender-
    based violence, version 4.0, February 2020, referred to and  considered
    at [36], above.

53.  Nothing  accessible  via  https://www.un.org.pk/unwomen/  (UN   Women,
    Pakistan) provides any concrete reasons  to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance set  out  above.   Similarly,  nothing  on  the  World  Bank's
    Pakistan page (https://www.un.org.pk/unwomen/) militates in  favour  of
    an alternative approach.



Conclusion

54. The appellant has demonstrated that it would be unduly harsh for her to
    be expected to relocate to another city in Pakistan.  Although  she  is
    educated and may be in a  better  position  than  some,  with  no  male
    support she would struggle to find accommodation, and with no  prospect
    of family reconciliation.  Her  past  history  of  being  a  victim  of
    domestic violence places her in a vulnerable  position.   Her  earnings
    history in Pakistan has been minimal, and she has no access  to  family
    wealth, and has no savings.  She is likely to face  significantly  more
    than a temporary separation from her son, who would  not  be  permitted
    into any shelters with her.  It is unduly harsh for the appellant to be
    expect to return to  Pakistan,  with  her  two  children,  under  these
    circumstances.

55. This appeal therefore succeeds on asylum grounds. The appellant  has  a
    well-founded fear of being persecuted in Pakistan  on  account  of  her
    membership of the particular social group women in Pakistan.   Although
    the threat is from non-state agents, she would not enjoy a  sufficiency
    of protection in Lahore, and relocation to another city would be unduly
    harsh.

56. This appeal is allowed.

57. In light of the sensitive nature of the contents of this decision,  and
    the risk I have found the appellant to face, I maintain the  order  for
    anonymity I made previously.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen  H  Smith                               Date  23  September
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the  following  reason.
The appellant was successful in  the  proceedings.   There  were  sufficient
materials originally before the Secretary of  State  to  enable  her  asylum
claim to  have  been  allowed,  without  the  unnecessary  recourse  to  the
litigation that followed.


Signed   Stephen  H  Smith                               Date  23  September
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04634/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice,     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Belfast                                   |                                 |
|On 13 February 2020                       |                                 |
|                                          |.................................|
|                                          |......                           |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     AN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Connolly, BL, instructed by NA & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, AN, is a female citizen of Pakistan, born in 1979.   She
    appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  ST  Fox
    promulgated on  20  February  2019  dismissing  her  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 2 May 2017 to  refuse  her  claim  for
    asylum, made on 3 August 2016.



Factual background

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on the basis that she was a member of  the
    particular social group women in Pakistan.  She  claims  to  have  been
    forced to marry her husband in 2004 by her abusive father.  The husband
    subjected her to years of violent and sexual abuse  in  Pakistan,  and,
    when she later sought a period of separation from him in  her  father's
    home, her father was abusive towards her and her son (now aged 14)  and
    her daughter (now aged 11).  The appellant came to this country in 2014
    to study, and her husband joined her shortly afterwards.  Although  she
    hoped that the international move would be a "fresh start", it was not,
    and her husband continued to be violent and abusive, culminating in the
    police removing him from the family home  shortly  after  his  arrival.
    The appellant claims that  she  cannot  return  to  her  home  area  of
    Pakistan as she will continue to face threats from her father,  husband
    and wider family from which, she contends, there is no effective  state
    protection.  As  a  single  woman  in  the  process  of  divorcing  her
    estranged husband, she cannot relocate to  another  area  of  Pakistan.
    She lacks the required male guardianship to be  able  to  survive,  and
    even if she managed to find a women's shelter that did not  expose  her
    to more risk, she would be at risk of losing her son,  as  it  is  very
    unlikely that he would be admitted to a shelter, too, she claims.  As a
    single mother in  those  circumstances,  her  earning  power  would  be
    minimal.  Internal relocation would be unduly harsh, she claims.

 3. The respondent accepted the  appellant  to  be  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence at the hands of her husband  but  did  not  accept  her  wider
    account of abuse at the hands of her family to be  credible.   Internal
    relocation would be an option, considers the respondent.

 4. In a decision promulgated eight months after  the  hearing,  Judge  Fox
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    that she had chosen previously to live  with  her  father  following  a
    period of estrangement from her  husband,  her  children  were  treated
    properly by him when, and  they  were  not  at  risk:  see  [17].   The
    appellant's cousin in Denmark had not  attended  the  hearing  to  give
    evidence in her support, and neither had her two cousins who  lived  in
    this country: [19]. Judge Fox considered at [22]  that  the  background
    information:

         "clearly confirms that help, assistance and support  [sic]  various
         NGOs and the [sic] course the state itself or  [sic]  available  to
         her in Pakistan."

    At [23], the judge said:

         "she claims that she would receive  less  money  and  education  to
         claim [sic] she had  to  teach  the  school  [sic],  compared  with
         lecturing in the University. That claim has not been  supported  by
         any objective material before me today."

    Judge Fox considered that a "letter" from the  appellant's  sister  was
    "self-serving", but that would not "be unduly held  against  her",  but
    added that the letter was "late coming"  and  that,  accordingly,  "the
    intention that they have may be [sic] behind the submission of  such  a
    letter could be the [sic] less than genuine." See  [24]  to  [25].  The
    appellant's husband had returned Pakistan,  and  she  had  "failed"  to
    demonstrate that there had been  any  specific  threats  since  he  had
    returned: [26].

 5. Even taking the appellant's case at its  highest,  internal  relocation
    would be an option to her: [28]. The judge said he was "satisfied  that
    the appellant is  erudite,  extremely  well  educated,  competent  hair
    [sic], talented and  resource  full  [sic]."   She  would  be  able  to
    establish herself and have "no difficulty"  in  securing  accommodation
    and employment elsewhere in Pakistan.

 6. Part of the appellant's case had been that her husband began to espouse
    radical and extremist Islamic views. This,  said  the  judge,  provides
    "added comfort", for the authorities may already be aware  of  him  and
    there would, therefore, be an "open door" should she wish  to  approach
    the authorities about him. Prior to coming to the United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant had  taken  no  steps  to  engage  any  assistance  from  the
    authorities, and the delay in making a claim for asylum  following  her
    arrival in the United Kingdom was "of some considerable measure and  as
    yet unexplained to any satisfactory degree." See [31].

 7. The judge concluded his findings of  fact  at  [37]  stating  that  the
    appellant was "not a good witness  as  to  fact  and  truth."  She  had
    "sought to embellish" the fear that she had upon her return and had not
    supported or corroborated "to any meaningful degree" the central tenets
    of her claim. As such, the judge dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Norton-Taylor
    on the basis that  the  judge  had  arguably  failed  to  consider  the
    extensive background materials before him concerning  the  position  of
    women in Pakistan and had arguably failed to  give  sufficient  reasons
    for his decision.

Discussion

 9. The judge erred in law.  The reasoning  given  by  the  judge  for  key
    features in his findings was wholly at odds with  the  evidence  before
    him.

10. Pursuant to R (Iran) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [9], making perverse or irrational findings on a
    matter or matters that were material to the outcome is an error of fact
    which may amount to an error of law. I consider the judge's findings at
    [17] to fall into this category. There is simply no evidential  support
    for the judge's findings in that paragraph. The appellant gave detailed
    evidence of the physical, sexual and emotional  abuse  she  experienced
    during the period from 2008 to 2011 when she returned to  her  father's
    house to escape the abuse from her husband.

11. Recalling that the judge's findings at [17] were that, in  relation  to
    this time, the appellant was able to cite "a number of examples how her
    and her children were properly treated", it is necessary to turn to her
    evidence. In her statement dated 6 June 2018, adopted before Judge Fox,
    the appellant gave the  following  examples  of  treatment,  which  was
    anything but "proper":

          a. At [7], the appellant describes abuse from her father when she
             became pregnant with her first child, and how  her  stepmother
             used force to prevent the family maid from providing her  with
             any assistance during labour. The appellant had to give  birth
             in her father's home, and the umbilical cord was  aggressively
             pulled from her. There was significant amount of bleeding,  as
             the appellant suffers from  a  haemorrhaging  condition  which
             required  urgent  medical  treatment,  but  which  her  father
             prevented her from receiving.  Eventually,  she  was  able  to
             persuade her sister to take her to hospital, and the appellant
             believes that she would have been left to die were it not  for
             the presence of one of her aunts who would have been a witness
             to the murder.

          b. At [8], the appellant describes her father  hiding  food  from
             her and locking the cupboards. Her son would be taken from the
             house, without warning, and her  father  would  not  tell  her
             where he was, resulting in the appellant  frantically  looking
             for him, and the rest of her family refusing to say  where  he
             was. Her son's head was banged against the wall of a  swimming
             pool by the appellant's cousins. He was thrown into the  water
             and almost drowned. The appellant's stepbrother beat  her  son
             and threw him into a hole  that  had  been  dug  outside.  The
             family generator, which was essential  for  power  during  the
             frequent  outages  which   are   common   in   Pakistan,   was
             disconnected from the appellant's  room.  She  was  forced  to
             remain in there with her  children,  in  freezing  conditions,
             during the cold winters. Her  children  would  get  sick.  The
             appellant's father would beat her son.

          c. At [10], the appellant describes how her father began to touch
             her daughter in a sexually  inappropriate  way,  in  behaviour
             which appeared to replicate that which he had subjected her to
             when she was seven years  old.  The  appellant  described  his
             behaviour as grooming her daughter.

12. I have not been presented  with  any  submissions  or  other  basis  to
    conclude that the appellant's account as set out above  was  challenged
    successfully by the respondent at the hearing before the judge. Indeed,
    the presenting officer submits that this  is  a  case  which  turns  on
    internal relocation, accepting the premise of the primary thrust of the
    appellant's case that she faces a real risk of harm at the hands of her
    family, and that she does not enjoy a sufficiency of  state  protection
    in her local area.

13. As such, against that background, there is  simply  no  basis  for  the
    crucial finding at [17] of Judge Fox's decision that the appellant  had
    given a number of examples  of  she  and  her  children  being  treated
    "properly" by her father.

14. The language used by Judge Fox ("she chose to live with her father  for
    a number of different reasons...") woefully  understates  the  horrific
    reality faced by the appellant. She was a highly vulnerable  victim  of
    domestic violence; the only reason she had been forced to fall back  on
    her father at home was because her own husband was being physically and
    sexually abusive to her during their marriage, and as an otherwise lone
    female, again, she would have had very  few,  if  any,  other  options.
    There was no element of choice; the appellant had been  forced  by  the
    compulsion of circumstances.

15. At [18], the judge addressed the evidence of  the  appellant's  sister,
    which he described as a "letter". The judge  notes  that  the  sister's
    letter provided "some support" for her account of what  took  place  at
    her father's house, but observed that it was  "delivered  late  in  the
    day" and did not "fully support some of  the  crucial  material  detail
    given by the appellant". That sentence itself is surprising, as in  the
    previous paragraph the judge had found that the evidence the  appellant
    had given was of proper, as opposed to improper, treatment at the hands
    of her father.

16. In fact, the sister's evidence was not  a  "letter",  it  was  a  sworn
    affidavit issued before a magistrate of the Lahore District Court.

17. At [24], the judge said that the document "is open to the  charge  that
    the claim are [sic] self-serving". In the case of R (on the application
    of SS) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  ("self-serving"
    statements) [2017] UKUT 00164 (IAC) Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane, as
    he then was, held the following at [1] of the headnote:

"The expression self-serving is, to a large extent, a protean one.  The
expression itself tells us little or nothing.  What is needed is a reason,
however brief, for that designation.  For example, a letter written by a
third party to an applicant for international protection may be 'self-
serving' because it bears the hallmarks of being written to order, in
circumstances where the applicant's case is that the letter was a
spontaneous warning."

18. The description of the document as "self-serving" fails to engage  with
    its contents, of which  the  judge  did  not  conduct  any  qualitative
    analysis. As held in SS, the term "self-serving" can be used to  denote
    a document which has been written to  order,  purporting  to  give  the
    appearance of authenticity or reliability, in circumstances when it  is
    anything but. However, the judge's application  of  the  term  to  this
    document, taken to its logical conclusion, would result in no witness's
    evidence ever attracting weight for, on Judge Fox's approach, all  such
    evidence would be self-serving.

19. The fact that the statement was "late in the day" is  a  factor  which,
    provided there was sufficient additional analysis of  the  contents  of
    the document, taken in the round, is capable of  forming  a  legitimate
    part of a  judge's  analysis.  The  judge  must  have  been  using  the
    terminology metaphorically, as  the  document  was  provided  with  the
    appellant's bundle ahead of the hearing before Judge Fox,  rather  than
    on the day of the hearing, at a late stage. However, it  is  not  clear
    why the  timing  of  the  appellant's  statement  was  a  factor  which
    detracted from its weight. Given the absence of qualitative analysis on
    the part of the judge, this was an observation that was not  reasonably
    open to him, in the circumstances.

20. I consider that the grounds of appeal are made out in relation  to  the
    judge's analysis of the risk faced by the appellant  from  her  family.
    The judge failed to give sufficient reasons for his findings,  in  that
    the reasons that he did provide were at odds with the  evidence  before
    him. In order for the judge to have reached  the  conclusions  he  did,
    against the background of that evidence, clear and cogent reasons would
    have been necessary.

21. In the presenting officer's submission, this was a case  which  centred
    on the appellant's ability so to relocate.  I consider that  the  judge
    failed to give sufficient reasons for his findings that the  background
    materials to relocate internally in Pakistan.

22. In this respect, also, Judge Fox's analysis was  flawed.  At  [22],  he
    wrote:

         "I have noted the  background  information  clearly  confirms  that
         help, assistance and support [sic]  various  NGOs  and  the  course
         [sic] the state itself or available to her [sic] in  Pakistan.  She
         demonstrated that she was able to leave her husband without serious
         repercussions, while a lived together there  [sic].  She  does  not
         have to live with her father." (Emphasis added)

    I have already explained  why  Judge  Fox  erred  in  relation  to  his
    treatment of what  took  place  when  the  appellant  returned  to  her
    father's home, so it is not necessary  for  me  to  engage  in  further
    detailed analysis of  why  the  judge  was  wrong  to  state  that  the
    appellant  had  been  able  to  "leave  her  husband  without   serious
    repercussions".

23. If the background materials confirm that the appellant  would  be  able
    internally  to  relocate  within  Pakistan,  then  the  judge's  flawed
    findings in relation to what took place  in  her  home  area  would  be
    otiose.

24. The judge had before  him  the  respondent's  Country  Information  and
    Guidance - Pakistan: women fearing gender-based harm/violence,  version
    3.0, February 2016. He had also been provided with a "list of essential
    paragraphs" by counsel who appeared before him  on  that  occasion.  An
    examination of  those  materials  demonstrates  that  the  question  of
    whether a woman would enjoy the ability internally to  relocate  within
    Pakistan  is  an  inherently  case-specific  question,  which  must  be
    answered against the backdrop of well-documented and  systemic  gender-
    based discrimination and harm directed against women in Pakistan.

25. First, it is not clear how the judge was  able  to  conclude  that  the
    background materials "clearly confirm" that help  would  be  available.
    The judge did not give reasons for this finding.  He did not  cite  any
    extracts from the background materials, nor reconcile  his  conclusions
    on this point with the detailed materials before  him  which  militated
    towards the opposite conclusion being reached.

26. The following extracts from the respondent's guidance  note  concerning
    gender-based violence in Pakistan are relevant:

          a. Paragraph 1.1.6, quoting the Immigration and Refugee Board  of
             Canada in January 2013,  concerning  police  stations  with  a
             female presence: "women police stations were  considered  'not
             very effective', too few and therefore  difficult  to  access,
             and under-resourced with insufficiently trained staff and that
             most women police stations do not register  first  information
             report..."

          b. Paragraph 11.2.1, "there are very few  shelter  homes  against
             the number of women seeking refuge. Going to a shelter home is
             still considered taboo and perceived as  the  last  resort  of
             women who have been turned away by respectable society."

          c. Paragraph 11.2.5, government-run shelters were too few, didn't
             house women for long enough, were overcrowded,  suffered  from
             poor facilities and inadequately  trained  staff.  There  were
             reports of abuse at some shelters. The focus of many,  due  to
             the difficulties of single  women  living  alone  in  Pakistan
             society, was family reconciliation.

27. In SM and MH (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00067
    (IAC), to which the judge was referred, this tribunal  accepted  expert
    evidence that boys aged over five would be unlikely to be  accepted  by
    shelters, given the cultural perception that they should be with  their
    fathers. See the headnote at (7). This appellant would, of  course,  be
    returning to Pakistan with her 14 year old son. The position the  judge
    should have engaged with, therefore, was how, against the background of
    difficulties (only a selection of which have been outlined above), this
    appellant could be expected to avail herself of what  limited  services
    are reasonably likely to be available, given  she  would  be  returning
    with her two children, one of whom would be  prevented  from  accessing
    what limited shelter support there would be available to her.

28. The judge does appear to have attempted to engage with one facet of the
    appellant's personal  circumstances,  namely  the  fact  she  is  well-
    educated. See [28]. It is right that the education  of  a  woman  is  a
    factor which must be considered, when determining whether it  would  be
    reasonable for her internally to relocate. This tribunal in SM  and  MH
    held at [54] that "highly educated and economically independent  women"
    may be able to live alone in an urban environment. The difficulty  with
    the judge's analysis in this respect is  that,  although  he  correctly
    identifies  one  factor  which  is  likely  to  be  relevant   to   the
    reasonableness of internal relocation, he did so against  a  background
    of flawed findings concerning the domestic violence the  appellant  had
    experienced, and her inability to rely on male sponsors  or  guardians.
    In reaching his finding at [22] that the appellant  had  been  able  to
    leave her husband without serious repercussions, the  judge  fell  into
    error, and approached his entire analysis of the question  of  internal
    relocation on a flawed premise.

29. The "added comfort" provided by the fact that the  appellant's  husband
    was wanted in connection with suspected extremist Islamic links is  not
    a factor which finds any support in the background materials.  There is
    absolutely no suggestion in any of the background  materials  that  the
    anti-terror  police  in  Pakistan  would  provide  a   sufficiency   of
    protection to a vulnerable victim of domestic and sexual abuse  who  is
    linked by marriage to a suspected extremist.  This was pure speculation
    on the part of the judge which featured no evidential basis.

30. For the above reasons, I find that the decision of Judge  Fox  involved
    the making of an error of law  in  relation  to  his  analysis  of  the
    appellant's account and internal relocation.  The judge failed to  give
    sufficient reasons for his  findings  concerning  the  ability  of  the
    appellant internally to relocate, given the background  materials  that
    were cited to him which militated in favour of the opposite conclusion.
      He  based  part  of  his  conclusions  on  his  own  conjecture   and
    speculation.

31. There is also a  risk  that  the  frequent  typos  which  littered  the
    decision could give rise to the impression that  Judge  Fox  failed  to
    engage in sufficiently anxious scrutiny of his  decision,  although  in
    light of my findings, above, it is not necessary  for  me  to  reach  a
    final view on that concern.

32. I set the decision of Judge Fox aside with no findings preserved.

33. I consider that it is consistent with the overriding objective for  the
    matter to be reheard in the Upper Tribunal.

34. I maintain the anonymity order previously made.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Fox involved the making of an error of law and is  set
aside with no findings preserved.  The matter  is  to  be  re-heard  in  the
Upper Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                  Date 2 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

