
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04494/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 11 September 2020                 |On 10 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 19 October 1998 and is a  female  citizen  of
    Pakistan. She appealed against a decision of the  respondent  dated  30
    April 2019 to  refuse  her  international  protection.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 28 October 2019,  dismissed  her
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The issue in the appeal is so distinctly summarised  by  the  grant  of
    permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith:

         "Arguably, it was an error of the judge  to  hypothesise  that  the
         appellant's brother's asylum claim would be unsuccessful and  that,
         accordingly, the brother would be able to accompany  the  appellant
         in Pakistan and act as her male  guardian.  Arguably,  this  was  a
         finding based on speculation and unsupported by  evidence,  as  the
         judge was seized only of the appellant's appeal,  and  not  of  her
         brother's. Arguably, the position as at the date of the hearing was
         that the appellant's brother could not be returned to  Pakistan  as
         his asylum claim was pending and a statutory bar would prevent  his
         removal until it had been finally determined."

 3. I heard oral submissions from the representatives of  both  parties  at
    the remote hearing which I conducted  at  Manchester  on  11  September
    2020.  I  invited  the  representatives  to  submit   further   written
    submissions. Mr Lindsay, who appeared for the Secretary of State, wrote
    on 24 September 2020 accepting that the judge had  erred  in  law  such
    that his decision should be set  aside.  The  Secretary  of  State  now
    considers that the First-tier Tribunal  should  not  have  taken  'into
    account the  likely  outcome  of  the  separate  appeal  (that  of  the
    appellant's brother, [HK]) which had not yet been heard or decided.'

 4. I agree with both representatives that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    law for the reason given by the Secretary of  State.  I  therefore  set
    aside the decision. None of the findings of fact shall stand. Given the
    difficulty which arose on the previous occasion, I consider that it  is
    of utmost importance that the decision is remade by the same  judge  in
    the First-tier Tribunal who hears the appeal of the appellant's brother
    (HK) which bears the reference PA 506892020. I  therefore  direct  that
    both appeals shall be listed to be heard together by the same judge.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (not  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly;   Bradford;   first
    available date; face to face hearing) for that Tribunal to  remake  the
    decision at or following a hearing de novo. I direct that  the  hearing
    shall be listed on the same day and before the same First-tier Tribunal
    Judge who also hears the appeal PA 506892020.


    Signed   Date 30 October 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
