
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04298/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2019                   |On 16 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     a m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Abdullah, instructed by Hazelhurst Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tann, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a  court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication  thereon  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    appellant.

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bannerman promulgated on 11  September  2019  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  18
    April 2019 to refuse his  application  made  on  8  November  2018  for
    international protection on the basis of political opinion, having been
    a low-level member of the Muslim Brotherhood.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf granted permission  to  appeal  on  23
    October 2019.

 4. For the reasons set out below, I am not  satisfied  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the making of the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such as to require it to be set aside.

 5. Judge Shaerf granted permission largely on the concern that  the  judge
    may have been looking at a different screening interview record to that
    in the respondent's bundle and indicated in  the  grant  of  permission
    that this should be clarified at the Upper Tribunal  hearing.   It  was
    clarified before me. Both representatives, Mr  Abdullah  and  Mr  Tann,
    indicated that there is no error in relation to  that  issue  and  that
    what Judge Shaerf was referring to  was  page  13  of  the  appellant's
    bundle where, on 18 April,  the  appellant's  representative  submitted
    proposed amendments to his screening interview.  Judge Shaerf may  have
    been confused by that, but it is accepted by both representatives  that
    the judge of the First-tier Tribunal made no error in relation  to  the
    screening interview record, as there was  only  one  record.   However,
    Judge Shaerf also found in any event that it  is  arguable  that  Judge
    Bannerman attached  more  than  appropriate  weight  to  the  screening
    interview and therefore granted permission on all grounds.

 6. I have heard from Mr Abdullah and Mr Tann and have  listened  carefully
    to the submissions made and taken them into account  before  making  my
    decision.

 7. In essence, Mr Abdullah's argument is that the whole of the decision is
    tainted by  the  judge's  heavy  reliance  on  the  credibility  issues
    starting at paragraph 67 of the decision, where the judge takes account
    of the fact that the appellant previously  used  a  false  name,  false
    nationality and false date of birth in a previous attempt to enter  the
    United Kingdom, pretending to be a Syrian, when he is in fact Egyptian.
     At paragraph 67 the judge concluded that this showed the appellant  to
    be a man who is prepared to go  to  great  lengths  to  hide  his  true
    identity even though he now claims his true identity is one that  would
    place him at great risk on return to Egypt.  Mr Abdullah  accepts  that
    the judge was entitled to take into account that the appellant had been
    untruthful in  2016  and  effectively  had  attempted  to  deceive  the
    immigration authorities.  The judge stated that this showed the lengths
    he would go in order to enter the United Kingdom.

 8. In the following paragraph, paragraph 68,  the  judge  dealt  with  the
    Section 8 issue.  The judge is required to consider as damaging to  the
    appellant's credibility the issues as set out there. I  need  not  deal
    with them in any detail, but the appellant spent some four years before
    entering the UK in various European countries, during which time he had
    made absolutely no claim for asylum in any  other  safe  countries.  Mr
    Abdullah complains that the judge should not have  considered  that  as
    "determinative". However, at the second sentence of that paragraph  the
    judge plainly said it is not determinative  of  the  case,  but  "is  a
    factor I must take into account in looking at weighing  the  issues  of
    credibility". It follows that there is no error  in  the  judge  taking
    into account Section 8 matters, provided he does  not  use  that  as  a
    conclusion or a frame through which he looks at all the other evidence.
    There is no evidence that he did.

 9. The difficulty for the  appellant  in  this  case  is  that  the  judge
    identified early on in  the  decision  very  significant  discrepancies
    between what the appellant had claimed in his screening  interview  and
    his later claims in his asylum interview and his witness statement.  Of
    note is that in his screening interview he denied being involved with a
    political organisation or a religious organisation,  whereas  he  later
    claimed to both as a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.   He  also  said
    that he had not been accused of or  committed  an  offence,  yet  later
    claimed  that  he  had  been  sentenced  in  absentia  to  five  years'
    imprisonment.  The judge within paragraph 70 of the decision took  into
    account the appellant's explanations for the contradictory  answers  or
    inconsistent answers, but even making allowance for some parts  of  the
    answers not making any sense, the  judge  concluded  that  taken  as  a
    whole, his screening interview was directly contradictory to his  later
    claim.

10. It was entirely open to the judge, whose task  it  was  to  assess  the
    evidence, to conclude that even applying the lower standard  of  proof,
    the appellant was a man who would do anything to get into  the  UK  and
    was not a man who was telling the truth.  None of that is a prejudgment
    based upon the use of a false  identity,  or  the  Section  8  matters,
    although they are certainly relevant to  that.  Thereafter,  the  judge
    went on to consider the rest of the evidence.  The grounds  argue  that
    the judge gave too much weight to the appellant's  past  behaviour  and
    too much weight to  the  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies  mentioned
    above. It is also argued that insufficient  weight  was  given  to  the
    appellant's oral evidence, in which he gave a detailed account  of  his
    support of the Muslim Brotherhood  in  Egypt,  which  was  said  to  be
    consistent with the country background information.  It is also  argued
    that the judge erred in giving no weight to the consistency between the
    oral evidence given and the background information, and that the  judge
    failed to consider material evidence  regarding  core  aspects  of  the
    appellant's case. Those grounds were rehearsed before me again today by
    Mr Abdullah and I have carefully considered them.

11. However, I am satisfied that the grounds largely relate to  the  weight
    that was, or was not, accorded to the various aspects of  the  evidence
    supporting the appellant's case.  However, the according of  weight  to
    evidence is a matter entirely for the judge.  It  is  not  an  arguable
    error of law for a judge to give too little or too  much  weight  to  a
    relevant factor unless the decision becomes irrational. Nor  is  it  an
    error of law for a judge to fail to deal with every  factual  issue  or
    argument. A disagreement with the judge's factual  conclusions  or  his
    appraisal or assessment of the weight with the credibility does not  in
    and of itself give rise to an error of law.

12. The judge made clear at the outset of his findings in paragraph 65 that
    he had given very careful consideration to  all  of  the  evidence  put
    before him in the case, both written and oral, and one  must  take  the
    judge at his word unless it can be demonstrated otherwise.   The  judge
    was entitled to take account of the  past  history,  which  was  highly
    relevant to any assessment of the appellant's credibility, and there is
    nothing to suggest that the judge did other than  make  a  careful  and
    detailed assessment of the appellant's claim  before  actually  putting
    his findings to paper in a relatively short form in the  decision  that
    we  have  before  us.  The  truth  is  that  there  were   very   clear
    discrepancies between the appellant's earlier statements and his  later
    account,  which  clearly  undermined  his  credibility.    Whilst   the
    appellant made a claim that he had not understood the  interpreter,  on
    the contrary, the interview record shows that he stated at the  end  of
    the interview that the interpreter had  explained  everything  well  to
    him.

13. On the evidence, I am satisfied it was open to the judge to  reach  the
    conclusion that even though the appellant gave such a detailed  account
    in his oral evidence, his witness statement, and perhaps  even  in  his
    asylum interview, the fact is that much of what  was  said  is  in  the
    public domain.  I accept the point made by Mr Abdullah that that may be
    true in many cases, that  whatever  an  appellant  may  say  about  the
    matters of country background or events it might well be in the  public
    domain. However, it was certainly a matter the  judge  was  allowed  to
    reach a conclusion on.   On  any  such  case,  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence, the weighing of factors for and against the appellant is  the
    essential judicial exercise. It is not an error of law  simply  because
    the judge reached a conclusion that  the  appellant's  account  is  not
    credible.

14. Mr Abdullah took me to paragraph 76 of the decision where it is  stated
    that the appellant was found not to be a member of or even a  supporter
    of the Muslim Brotherhood and was  considered  to  be  an  opportunist,
    utilising whatever he could to make a claim in the UK.  The judge said,
    "I don't  even  consider  that  he  is  a  political  opponent  of  the
    government and his claim now to be sentenced in his absence is, I find,
    simply untrue."  However, at the beginning of that paragraph the  judge
    said he would take account of all the factors  raised  in  the  country
    background, including, by way of example, the CPIN.

15. Looking at the decision in the round, taking into  account  the  points
    made by Mr  Abdullah,  and  giving  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  judge's
    reliance on the credibility findings, I am satisfied that it  would  be
    difficult for any judge to reconcile the appellant's later claim, given
    the findings about the inconsistency between those later claims and his
    earlier account. Those matters were highly relevant,  highly  material,
    to a claim which turned entirely on the appellant's  credibility,  with
    no supporting documentation from Egypt.

16. In all the circumstances I am satisfied that the decision was well-made
    and that the findings in relation to the appellant's  credibility  were
    ones which were entirely open to the judge on  the  available  evidence
    and for which adequate reason has been provided.  For those  reasons  I
    find no error of law in this decision.

Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 11 December 2019



To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 11 December 2019


