
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04020/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24th January 2018                  |26th January 2018                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                    L R A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W McCready (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge  Hollis
    following a hearing at Bradford on 2nd June 2017.  In  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 13th June 2017 the appeal was dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who claimed asylum on the basis that
    she was at risk of an honour killing on  account  of  an  extra-marital
    affair with Mr T.  She arrived in the  UK  with  her  eldest  child  in
    October 2016.  Mr T came to the UK in 2003.  The couple  live  together
    in the UK. Mr T was granted leave to remain and then  Indefinite  Leave
    to Remain in the UK. They live with their two children, the eldest born
    in Iraq in 2014 and the younger born in the UK in  December  2016.   By
    reason of her father having Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  that  younger
    child is a British citizen.

 3. The matter came before  me  to  decide  first  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had made a material error of law and if so whether and to what
    extent the Decision and Reasons should be set aside.

 4. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted  argue  firstly
    that the  Judge  erred  in  dismissing  the  Article  8  claim  without
    reference to the Secretary of State' policy in relation to  whether  it
    is reasonable to expect British children to leave the UK.  This  arises
    in considering s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 5. After I gave an indication that I did consider that  failure  to  be  a
    material error of law, the Appellant, after receiving advice  from  her
    representative,  withdrew  the  remaining  grounds  which   sought   to
    challenge the adverse credibility findings.

 6. The Secretary of State's guidance to  her  case  workers  states  that,
    absent criminality, it is never reasonable to expect a British child to
    leave the UK.  That guidance does not sit easily with  Appendix  FM  or
    s.117B(6) but it nevertheless remains her published guidance.   If  the
    Secretary of State's view is that the British child in this case cannot
    be expected to leave the  UK  then  she  cannot  go  behind  it.   Miss
    Patterson accepted that to be correct.  Clearly given that the child is
    an infant, her parents and older sibling must remain with her and  thus
    the Appellant and her dependants all succeed on Article 8 grounds.

 7. Thus, having found the Judge made a material error of  law  in  dealing
    with Article 8, I set aside that part only of the Decision and  Reasons
    and in redeciding that part of the appeal  I  allow  it  on  Article  8
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


Signed                              Date 24th January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
