
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04710/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2018                  |On 27 December 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   Mr HAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Nicholson, counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          ________________________

                             DECISION & REASONS
                          ________________________

1.    The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for a  decision  on  whether
or not the decision of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  contained  any  material
errors of law on 5 September 2018. In a decision and reasons promulgated  on
18 September 2018, I found material errors of law and adjourned  the  appeal
for a resumed  hearing  in  order  to  determine  whether,  it  having  been
accepted that the Appellant is a non-Arab Darfuri, it would be unduly  harsh
to expect him to relocate within Sudan. A copy of that decision and  reasons
is appended.

2.    The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for the resumed  hearing  on
26 November 2018, when Mr McVeety indicated that he did not wish  to  cross-
examine the Appellant thus the appeal proceeded on the basis of  submissions
only. Mr McVeety submitted that the main issue is  clearly  the  Appellant's
ethnicity. He acknowledged that  the  Appellant  had  raised  the  issue  of
previous arrest and detention by the authorities and sought to rely  on  the
decision in Devaseelan [2002]  UKAIT  00702  in  respect  of  the  issue  of
whether the Appellant had been arrested for political reasons.

3.    Mr McVeety submitted that what caused FtTJ Walker to depart  from  the
previous finding was the evidence of the witnesses but they did  not  engage
with any political activity but focused on the evidence  of  his  ethnicity.
He sought to rely on the up to date Country Policy Information Note  [CPIN],
September 2018.  In respect of internal relocation or  return  to  Khartoum,
he submitted that the Appellant's last address is in  Khartoum  although  he
has a family home in Darfur. Mr McVeety acknowledged that  Darfur  is  still
problematic so the issue is  return  to  Khartoum  and  he  sought  to  rely
specifically on the following provisions:

    "5.1.1:      There are no recent and reliable census data available for
           the ethnic composition of the population of Sudan in general  or
           Khartoum in particular. However, the CIA Factbook estimated that
           the  country's   main   ethnic   groups   are   'Sudanese   Arab
           (approximately 70%), Fur, Beja, Nuba, Fallata'.

    ...

    5.1.4: Janes noted  that  Khartoum's  population  included  '2  million
           displaced persons from the southern war zone as well as  western
           and  eastern  drought  affected  areas.'  According   to   Sudan
           government figures, released in April 2010, cited in an Overseas
           Development Institute (ODI) paper, there were over 600,000  IDPs
           in  Khartoum.  This  was  in  addition  to  over   1.5   million
           'integrated' IDPs in the city - 59% of  whom  were  from  Abyei,
           Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, with  the  remaining  41%  were
           from other parts of the country. While  the  percentage  of  the
           city's population who were IDPs was estimated in 2008 by another
           source cited in the ODI paper to be between 18-23% (around 1  to
           1.5 million) of the total.

    5.1.5: During the joint UK-DIS FFM of February - March  2016,  the  FFM
           team were provided with estimates of the Darfuri  population  in
           Khartoum by a range of sources:

           'Sources  consistently  observed  that  there  was  a  lack   of
           empirical data to verify  the  actual  number  of  persons  from
           Darfur and the  Two  Areas  residing  in  Khartoum,  whilst  the
           figures referred to by sources ranged widely.

           'However, several sources referred to very sizeable  populations
           from Darfur and the Two Areas residing in  Khartoum,  either  in
           the actual numbers mentioned, or in the description  given.  For
           example  Freedom  House  mentioned  "sizeable   populations   of
           Darfuris residing [in Khartoum] ..."; the regional  NGO  advised
           that the number was 'substantial and increasing' with "sizeable"
           Darfuri populations, whilst the diplomatic  source  referred  to
           persons from Darfur and the Two Areas  as  constituting  a  'big
           community' in Khartoum. Other sources made similar statements.

           'A  couple  of  sources  provided  estimates  of  the  size   of
           populations from  Darfur  and  Two  Areas  living  in  Khartoum,
           ranging from hundreds of  thousands  and  up  to  a  million  or
           greater. The highest figures estimated  was  five  million.  Two
           sources referred to the size of these communities as  60  or  70
           per cent of the total population of Khartoum.

           'Sources  provided  limited  information  on   specific   tribal
           representations or numbers in Khartoum. The  civil  society  NGO
           referred to one million from the Fur  tribe  living  in  Greater
           Khartoum... whilst the international consultant noted  that  one
           could find Darfuris from all tribes living in Khartoum, although
           no reference was made to numbers or size.'

    5.1.6: The British  Embassy  in  Khartoum  noted  that  many  Darfuris,
           including non-Arabs, are represented at a senior  level  in  the
           government, academia, the security  forces,  the  media  and  in
           other  institutions.  The  human  rights  activist,  Abdelrahman
           Elgasim, contacted by the Belgian  authorities  in  early  2018,
           stated that a number of Darfuris hold senior  positions  in  the
           Sudanese  government  but  most  are  members  of  the   Islamic
           Movement; and, the majority are tied through their  religion  to
           the  Islamic  government'.  The  Darfur  Students'   Association
           estimated that in 2016 there were 18,000  students  from  Darfur
           enrolled in  universities  in  Khartoum,  with  Darfur  students
           representing an estimated 7% (26,000)  of  the  country's  total
           student population of 360,000.

    ...

    5.2.3: The ODI  paper  of  2011  on  settlement  patterns  in  Khartoum
           observed:

           'Khartoum can sometimes appear  to  have  a  split  personality.
           Strict Islamic behavioural codes and the veneer of control  that
           the city exudes mean that Khartoum is often touted as one of the
           safest capitals in Africa. Yet beyond the inner city is another,
           hidden world of frustration, desperation, poverty and crime...

           'Settlement patterns in Khartoum have long  been  influenced  by
           political, economic and tribal or family factors'

    ...

    5.2.6: The same submission  reported  without  specifying  whether  the
           observations  applied  to  Sudan  generally   or   Khartoum   in
           particular:

           '[Amnesty International] AI noted widespread suppression of non-
           Muslim and Muslim minority groups [...]

           'JS2 reported that the Indigenous People  Economic,  Social  and
           Cultural rights  were  violated  with  denied  access  to  trade
           markets. Shops in town centres allocated  to  particular  groups
           are intentionally denied  to  the  indigenous  population.  They
           recommended Sudan to protect ethnic  and  religious  minorities,
           apply equal citizenship rights  and  prosecute  perpetrators  of
           these fundamental rights violations.'

    ...

    5.2.8: The USSD human rights report  for  2016  observed:  'The  Muslim
           majority government continued to discriminate against ethnic and
           some religious minorities in almost  every  aspect  of  society.
           Citizens in Arabic-speaking  areas  who  did  not  speak  Arabic
           experienced discrimination in education, employment,  and  other
           areas'. The USSD human rights report for 2017 did not note this.

    5.2.9: The USSD 2017 report noted:

           'In  September,  NCP-aligned  students  killed   three   Darfuri
           students  on  the  campus  of  Omdurman  Islamic  University  in
           Khartoum. The authorities did not make public any  investigation
           into the killings. Credible reports stated that  throughout  the
           country, some groups of NCP-aligned students were heavily  armed
           and  kept  weapons,  including  Kalashnikovs  and  machetes,  in
           mosques on campuses. There  were  credible  reports  of  routine
           verbal  and  physical  harassment  by  NCP-aligned  students  of
           Darfuri students...

           'Government forces reportedly  used  live  bullets  to  disperse
           crowds of protesting Darfuri  students  on  multiple  occasions,
           including at the University of Kordofan in Obeid in April and at
           Khartoum University and al-Zaeem al-Azhari  University  in  May.
           Darfuri students also reported being attacked  by  NCP  student-
           wing members during protests. There were no known  repercussions
           for the NCP youth that participated in violence against  Darfuri
           students.  There  were  numerous  reports  of  violence  against
           student activists' family members...

           'More than 10,000 women  in  the  informal  sector  depended  on
           selling  tea  on  the  streets  of  Khartoum  State  for   their
           livelihoods after having fled conflict in  Darfur  and  the  Two
           Areas. Despite the collective activism of many  tea  sellers  in
           Khartoum, harassment of tea sellers and  confiscation  of  their
           belongings continued as in previous years.'

    ...

    5.2.11:      The DFAT report also considered that:

           '... individuals from Darfur,  including  individuals  from  the
           Fur, Massalit  and  Zaghawa  groups  could  safely  relocate  to
           Khartoum, pending individual circumstances (such as  whether  or
           not the individual was associated with  the  armed  opposition).
           There  are  some  examples  of  individuals  from  Darfur  being
           targeted in Khartoum... DFAT further assesses  that  individuals
           in areas controlled by the armed opposition in Jebel  Marra  may
           face difficulty in relocating owing to ongoing conflict in  this
           area.

           'Livelihood challenges would  likely  hamper  opportunities  for
           internal relocation in Sudan. The informal nature of the economy
           (particularly outside of Khartoum), the significant reliance  on
           humanitarian assistance in conflict affected areas and reduction
           in informal and low-skilled employment opportunities due to  the
           influx  of  refugees  from  neighbouring  countries  means  that
           individuals would likely face economic hardship  if  relocating.
           In  addition,  the  Government  does  not  recognise  internally
           displaced  people  in   Khartoum,   meaning   that   individuals
           relocating from conflict affected areas do not  have  access  to
           humanitarian assistance in Khartoum.'

    5.2.12.      The UK-DIS FFM report, based on a range of sources, in the
           section on the reasons for  displacement  of  persons  including
           Darfuris to Khartoum  noted  that  sources  were  consistent  in
           identifying two main factors for relocation. One was the  socio-
           economic situation in areas of origin and the relatively  better
           circumstances in Khartoum, the other '... the improved  security
           situation in Khartoum and dire  conditions  in  Darfur  and  Two
           Areas. For example, the UN official remarked that Khartoum was a
           safe place for  many  Darfuris;  Crisis  Group  noted  that  the
           security situation in Khartoum was much better than other places
           in Sudan, and that there had been an increasing "securitisation"
           of the capital in recent years with no major  external  security
           threats.'

    5.2.13:      The UK-DIS FFM report, based on a range of  sources,  also
           noted:

           'Several sources referred to the NISS conducting surveillance of
           persons  in  Khartoum  and  having  a  network  of   informants,
           including within the  Darfuri  and  Two  Area  communities,  for
           example DBA (Khartoum) noted that the NISS had informants in the
           Darfuri student population who had informed the NISS  about  who
           was active in demonstrations. One source referred to  the  NISS'
           use of electronic surveillance, for example tapping phone  calls
           or monitoring online social media.

           'A majority of sources observed that those from  Darfur  or  the
           Two Areas who were critical  of  the  government  and/or  had  a
           political profile may be monitored and targeted by the  NISS  in
           Khartoum. This could include many different forms  of  activism.
           'Several sources identified student activists  from  Darfur  and
           the Two Areas as being at risk of being targeted

           'Several  sources  noted  that  security  operations,  including
           arrest and detention, by the government, including the NISS  was
           not constant, but changed over time. Freedom  House  noted,  for
           example, that the intensity of security operations could be seen
           to reflect the wider political climate  with  periods  when  the
           government would act in a fairly repressive way but during other
           times persons were able to express their views  without  serious
           reaction.

           'Referring more generally to the  issue  of  discrimination  and
           restriction of political freedoms, Crisis Group noted  that  the
           discriminatory practices suffered by Darfuris and  persons  from
           the Two Areas, were systematic, but not constant, and that there
           may  be  periods  where  discriminatory  practices   were   more
           intensely pursued and conversely times when  discrimination  was
           less  pronounced...  The  SDFG  [Sudan  Democracy  First  Group]
           advised that it was difficult  to  say  what  was  happening  in
           Khartoum today or the extent to which persons from Darfur or the
           Two Areas were targeted  by  the  NISS  now.  According  to  the
           source, it was predominantly politically active persons who were
           targeted by the NISS.'

    5.2.14:      The UK-DIS FFM report, citing several sources, stated:

           'Four sources observed that all communities from Darfur  or  the
           Two Areas in Khartoum could be at risk of  mistreatment  by  the
           NISS or indicated that persons from  these  communities  may  be
           targeted by  the  authorities  due  to  their  ethnicity  alone.
           However, none  of  the  sources  provided  specific  information
           indicating that persons from Darfur or the Two Areas were  being
           subjected to mistreatment by the authorities exclusively due  to
           their ethnic background.

           'Faisal Elbagir (JHR [Journalists for Human Rights]) noted  that
           whilst there was no official report on ordinary civilians  (that
           is persons who were not involved in political  activities)  from
           Darfur or the Two Areas being targeted by the authorities merely
           due to their ethnic affiliation, such cases could  be  found  on
           social media. However, the source could  not  give  examples  of
           such cases which had been verified. Elbagir also  remarked  that
           due to media restrictions in Sudan, it was  often  difficult  to
           obtain accurate news reports about cases of detention.

           'Khartoum based journalist (1) noted that it was  the  type  and
           level of political activity rather than one's ethnic  background
           which was the determining factor behind who  was  monitored  and
           targeted by the NISS. ACPJS  [African  Centre  for  Justice  and
           Peace Studies] explained that ethnicity was complicated and that
           ethnic disputes were often exploited by the government to pursue
           political goals. ACPJS highlighted that in  general  anyone  who
           was suspected of political  opposition  against  the  government
           could be targeted, including persons from Arab tribes.

           'Some sources advised with regard to the arrest of  Darfuris  in
           Khartoum that there had been no large scale arbitrary arrest  of
           Darfuris in Khartoum in recent years compared to that  of  2008,
           following the JEM assault on Omdurman.  Sources  noted  that  at
           that time widespread security operations in Khartoum took place,
           which were often based on the skin colour  and  ethnicity  of  a
           person.

           'A number of sources, however, noted that those from Darfur  and
           the Two Areas, and in particular  those  of  African  ethnicity,
           were more likely to be viewed with greater suspicion and treated
           worse in detention than other tribes from  Darfur  and  the  Two
           Areas if they did come to the attention of the NISS due to their
           political activity. Some sources also mentioned  Ingessana  from
           the  Two  Areas  among  the  tribes  being  suspected   by   the
           authorities for political activity. Several sources  noted  that
           the Darfuri and the Two Area communities were perceived  by  the
           NISS  to  be  'rebel  sympathisers'   and   consequently   these
           communities would be more closely monitored  by  the  NISS,  for
           example through the use of informants. Khartoum based journalist
           (3) held the view that it was only those communities arriving in
           Khartoum post 2003 who would be monitored.

           'DBA [Darfur Bar Association] (Kampala) and ACPJS observed  that
           those from other Darfuri tribes (i.e. not the Fur,  Masalit  and
           Zaghawa), would not generally be perceived  as  opposed  to  the
           regime or commonly associated with rebel groups  and  hence  not
           being monitoring by the NISS. However DBA (Khartoum)  noted,  in
           the context of how persons from Darfur and the  Two  Areas  were
           treated on arrest, that other African Darfuri tribes,  including
           the Tunjur, Meidob, Tama, Mima,  Gimir  and  Dago  tribes,  were
           treated  more  harshly  than  Arab-origin  tribes  because   the
           authorities assumed that  these  groups  supported  armed  rebel
           groups. DBA (Kampala)  also  observed  that  activists  of  Arab
           origin may experience harsh treated for advocating in favour  of
           the rights of non-Arab tribes.

           'EHAHRDP  [East  and  Horn  of  Africa  Human  Rights  Defenders
           Project] commented that it  was  difficult  to  be  prescriptive
           about which tribes would be at greater risk, although considered
           those from Arab Baggara tribes  as  less  likely  to  experience
           mistreatment because these tribes were commonly associated  with
           the pro-government Janjaweed militia.

           'UNHCR noted, however, that it  was  difficult  in  practice  to
           treat  persons  differently  on  the  basis  of   their   tribal
           affiliation. The source explained that it was difficult  to  say
           which group would be targeted and which would  not  due  to  the
           sheer number of different tribes in Darfur (over 400),  and  the
           fact that mixed parentage occurred.'

    ...

    5.2.17:      In September 2016, the British Embassy, Khartoum, observed
           that:

           'The British Embassy is in regular contact with  Darfuri  groups
           from civil society, government and  political  parties.  In  the
           course of these contacts,  no  substantial  concerns  have  been
           raised over  the  treatment  of  non-Arab  Darfuris  settled  in
           regions  outside  of  Darfur  that  we  would  consider   ethnic
           persecution, although many face economic marginalisation  having
           been displaced due to conflict. We are also not aware of reports
           of systematic targeting of Darfuris from United Nations agencies
           or other embassies with whom we are in contact.

           'As found in the UK Home Office-Danish Immigration  Service  FFM
           report [of August 2016], we do receive reports of discrimination
           in  education  and  employment.  We  also  receive  reports   of
           harassment of individuals or groups perceived to have  an  anti-
           government   political   stance,   such   as   Darfuri   student
           associations. But these issues are not overriding  for  Darfuris
           as opposed to other ethnicities. Any individual with a perceived
           anti-government stance can face harassment.'

    5.2.18:       The  Belgian  Commissioner  General  for   Refugees   and
           Stateless persons undertook a comprehensive survey of  available
           information on the treatment of returnees to Sudan at the end of
           2017 / early 2018 from a wide range of sources,  which  included
           contacting a number of sources directly. The CGRS  reported  the
           following:

           'The British Sudan researcher Peter Verney considers  that  non-
           Arab Darfuris may also  be  arrested  and  detained  for  racist
           motives, as part of the "genocidal" and "ethnocidal" destruction
           of their societies, and not because of actual evidence of  links
           with  rebel  groups.  The  Sudanese  authorities   attribute   a
           political colour on the basis of ethnicity, and not on the basis
           of a real political profile. According to  Verney,  hundreds  of
           low profile non-Arab Darfuris are being arrested.

           'In a document released in October  2017,  Waging  Peace  stated
           that non-Arab Darfuris still are at risk  in  Sudan,  also  when
           they are sent back  to  Khartoum.  According  to  Waging  Peace,
           ethnic Darfuris (or persons supposed to belong  to  this  ethnic
           group)  face  more  systematic  forms  of   discrimination   and
           persecution in the capital, which prevents their relocation.

           'In 2013, the British embassy in  Khartoum  was  told  by  human
           rights organizations that returnees from  Darfur  and  the  Nuba
           Mountains run a higher risk of arrest upon  arrival  than  other
           Sudanese returnees.

           'Amnesty International considered that Sudanese  from  conflict-
           affected areas such as Darfur and South Kordofan and  Blue  Nile
           States should not be sent back to Sudan, where they would be  at
           real risk of  serious  human  rights  violations.  A  number  of
           sources contacted by  the  CGRS  (Amnesty  International;  Sudan
           expert for an international organization;  Sudanese  journalist;
           DWAG; Tajeldin Adam; ACJPS; DRDC;  KACE  Sudan)  hold  the  same
           view. Suliman Baldo declared that the Sudanese security services
           are more prone to  subject  detainees  from  conflict  areas  to
           racist insults and  illtreatment,  including  torture,  compared
           with detainees from north or central Sudan. Most youths  leaving
           the country come from conflict areas, according to  Baldo.  Some
           sources (DWAG; DBA; human  rights  lawyer  in  Khartoum;  ACJPS;
           DRDC) stated that the Fur, Massalit and Zaghawa are  the  ethnic
           groups which are  most  often  targeted  in  Sudan.  A  Sudanese
           professor of human rights law stated  that  not  every  returnee
           faces problems at KIA but  perceived  a  risk  for  persons  who
           combine a specific ethnic background with political  activities,
           for instance a Darfuri suspected of  involvement  with  a  rebel
           group.

           'A number of sources contacted by the CGRS (Eric Reeves;  Waging
           Peace; Sudanese human rights activist (A); Sudanese human rights
           activist in Khartoum (D)) were of the  view  that  Darfuris  are
           particularly under suspicion, all  the  more  so,  according  to
           Tubiana, when they have requested  asylum  in  the  West  or  in
           Israel. Most sources also  mentioned  other  Sub-Saharan  ethnic
           groups such as the  Nuba.  Darfuris  with  "political  profiles"
           (sometimes based on distant family ties  with  rebel  groups  or
           involvement in some form of  political  activity,  according  to
           Reeves) run a high risk of arrest, detention and torture. Waging
           Peace noted that many activities have a political side and  that
           this could also be the case for the activities  of  journalists,
           teachers, human rights activists, humanitarian aid workers  etc.
           Applying  for  asylum  will  also  draw   attention   from   the
           authorities, according to Waging Peace.

           'Abdelrahman Elgasim (DBA) stated that passports of Darfuris are
           usually confiscated and their  holders  are  interrogated  about
           every aspect of their  life  (place  of  birth,  ethnic  origin,
           parents, brothers and sisters, partners, political  affiliation,
           occupation) and have to sign a written commitment not  to  leave
           the country. They are then blacklisted from leaving the country.
           Elgasim is  aware  that  a  number  of  Darfuris  occupy  senior
           government functions but most of them are members of the Islamic
           Movement, and are tied through their  religion  to  the  Islamic
           government.

           'Other sources stated that an ethnic profile entails  in  itself
           insufficient  risk  upon  return  and   pleaded   for   a   more
           individualized  approach  which  would  take  into  account  the
           returnee's political profile [...]

           'In May 2013,  the  Swiss  Federal  Administrative  Court  (FAC)
           considered that,  although  still  unstable,  the  situation  in
           Darfur was improving and that attacks against non-Arab  Darfuris
           had decreased. The FAC concluded that  Darfuris  had  to  adduce
           additional distinguishing features, such as political  or  other
           affiliations, to substantiate their fear of persecution [...]

           'The ACJPS told the CGRS it did not have any evidence suggesting
           that persons are targeted because of their ethnic background and
           stated that ethnicity is a complicated matter  and  that  ethnic
           disputes  are  used  by  the  government  to  achieve  political
           goals.'"

4.    In  terms  of  the  reasonableness  of  relocation,  Mr  McVeety  drew
attention to 6.1.1 and 6.1.2. and 6.3. in  respect  of  access  to  housing,
given that the Appellant had lived and  worked  in  Khartoum.  He  submitted
that, based on the Appellant's own evidence, there  are  clear  improvements
in the area. He further sought to rely on 8.1.1. in respect  of  the  return
of rejected asylum seekers to Darfur. He submitted that this was  enough  to
go behind the country guidance case. He accept Peter Verney's report  offers
a critique and that the  burden  is  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  show
sufficient change to justify departing from the country guidance.

5.    Mr Nicholson served copies of the  Appellant's  asylum  and  screening
interviews copies, which had not been included on  the  Respondent's  bundle
because there had been a judicial review.  He submitted that Peter  Verney's
report is the  most  up  to  date  evidence  and  that  there  had  been  no
significant change since the last CPIN.  He  submitted  that  there  was  no
reason for Peter Verney not to be an expert on the risk  issue,  given  that
his  evidence  as  to  the  Appellant's  language  and  ethnicity  had  been
accepted. Mr Nicholson stated that he had compared the August 2017  CPIN  to
the  current  version  but  can't  find  any  source  information  that   is
different. He sought to rely upon the following extracts at 2.4.9:

    "The available evidence, therefore, does not establish that  there  has
    been significant or durable improvement in the situation in  Darfur  to
    depart from the caselaw of  AA.  Non-Arab  Darfuris  continue  to  face
    serious human rights violations in  Darfur  at  the  hands  of  various
    actors which are likely to amount to persecution or serious harm."


    ...


    2.4.14.       The  Home  Office  did  not  therefore  have   sufficient
           information to determine if non-Arab Darfuris were generally  at
           risk or not in Khartoum (see section 3.8 of Sudan OGN,  November
           2009). The guidance in AA therefore reflected the Home  Office's
           own position based on a particular set of  circumstances  and  a
           general lack of information about the human rights situation."


Mr Nicholson submitted that there was no source cited  for  this  assertion,
which relies on a report from 9 years ago.

    2.4.15:      "In the country guidance of IM and AI (Risks -  membership
           of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188
           (IAC), heard 28-29 July and 4 November 2015, and promulgated  on
           14 April 2016, the UT took a nuanced position on risks faced  by
           particular groups. Although the UT did not specifically look  at
           evidence on non-Arab Darfuris and did not remake AA and  MM,  it
           did observe that  the  country  evidence  did  not  point  to  a
           generalised risk for specific groups. Rather, UT found that each
           case needs to be considered on its facts taking into  account  a
           person's individual circumstances, profile and activities:


           'The problem that the  evidence  presents  is  that  whilst  the
           categories of those  potentially  at  risk  are  legion,  it  is
           apparent that not all those falling into a  particular  category
           are at risk. It is not enough, therefore, to be a journalist  or
           a student because not all members of these groups are  at  risk.
           So, too, with ethnic or tribal classification. Not all non-Arabs
           are at risk; nor all black Africans are at risk  notwithstanding
           the unchallenged evidence that they are members of  the  various
           tribes associated with  this  group.  Not  all  those  from  the
           troubled regions of Darfur, Southern Kordofan or the  Blue  Nile
           are at risk. Nor are  all  those  who  have  been  arrested  and
           detained. However, all of these matters  are  factors  that  are
           relevant and some,  of  course,  are  much  more  likely  to  be
           significant, such as prior  detention  and  ill-treatment  as  a
           result of  involvement  in  activities  perceived  as  being  in
           opposition to the government. Yet, all of this material must  be
           taken into account.' (para 203)


    ...


    2.4.17:      Sources - primarily information obtained by a joint Danish-
           UK fact finding mission of early 2016, an Australian  government
           report of April 2016, and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in
           a letter of September 2016 - indicate that  Darfuris  have  been
           migrating to Khartoum for several decades and continue to do  so
           because  of  a  variety  of  reasons  including  insecurity  and
           environmental degradation in Darfur. This  includes  people  who
           have moved from Darfur since the conflict began in  2003.  There
           is now, as  a  result,  a  large  -  probably  high  100,000s  -
           established population of different groups of Darfuris dispersed
           across Greater  Khartoum  (see  Migration  and  Khartoum  Ethnic
           demography).


    2.4.18:      Many Darfuris are socio-economically marginalised and face
           obstacles because of their origins in accessing public services,
           employment and ID documentation.  However,  there  are  Darfuris
           across  all  segments  and   sectors   of   society,   including
           government,  academia  (and  as  students  with  around   18,000
           students in  Khartoum),  media  and  the  security  forces  (see
           Khartoum, Ethnic Demography).


    ...


    2.4.25 [3.1.3 in the previous report]:  "The  Home  Office's  view  is,
           therefore, that  there  is  cogent  evidence  which  has  become
           available since the promulgation of AA and MM to depart from the
           caselaw's assessment that all non-Arab Darfuris are likely to be
           at risk  of  persecution  based  on  their  ethnicity  alone  in
           Khartoum. Instead each case must be considered on its facts  and
           the assessment of risk depending on a careful  analysis  of  the
           person's background, individual circumstances and experiences in
           Sudan, with the onus on the person to demonstrate that they  may
           be at risk of persecution."


6.    Mr Nicholson submitted that it is necessary to look at the  individual
case. The Appellant had not been accepted as a political  activist  and  was
not a high profile established person, nor a student. He was born and  lived
in Darfur then moved to Khartoum, where he worked in  the  informal  economy
and returned to his village sporadically, was married  there  and  his  wife
continues to live there and thus he commutes between the two.

7.    He submitted that Peter Verney's  expertise  and  evidence  is  to  be
given a great deal of weight. There are five reports from Peter Verney,  the
most recent of which is in the supplementary bundle and  is  dated  30.8.18.
At page 9, [4]-[19] he sets out his outline view  of  the  country  guidance
and at [15] and [16] states that the Appellant would be recognised from  his
accent and physical appearance and he would be at risk of being stopped  and
interrogated; at [18] he states that it is impossible to predict  but  there
will be adverse treatment and at [33]  onwards,  he  states  that  there  is
profiling in respect of Darfuris and that  all  the  non-Arab  Darfuris  are
disproportionately at risk of targeting and racism.

8.    At [56]-[58] Peter Verney considers the issue of return and IFA;  NISS
methods and he points out at [58] that the  Respondent  accepts  that  being
Darfuri increases the risk of coming to the attention  of  the  authorities.
In respect of difficulties in humanitarian terms, at [68] Peter Verney  sets
out why he believes the UK Danish  mission  report  is  not  safe  and  that
people can  not  simply  relocate  and  that  Landinfo  and  DEFAT  are  not
sufficient in their adequacy to depart from the country  guidance  decision.
He states that  rebel  sympathies  will  be  imputed  to  him  automatically
because of his ethnicity.

Mr Nicholson stated that there is a  previous  report  at  123  of  previous
bundle dated January 2018 which reached  very  similar  conclusions  and  in
October 2017 at page 144 and May 2015 at pages  159-160,  albeit  is  mostly
concerned  with  ethnicity.  He  also  sought  to  rely   on   the   Amnesty
International  report  at  page  94,  which  raises  the  question  of  non-
refoulement from Belgium.

9.    Mr Nicholson submitted that there was no substance to  the  submission
on the part of the Secretary of State, but even if there were, Peter  Verney
has addressed it and that was sufficient for the appeal to  be  allowed.  He
submitted that, following Devaseelan [2002]  UKAIT  00702  the  decision  of
Judge Holt is the  starting  point.  On  the  basis  of  this  decision  the
Appellant was not believed to be a non-Arab Darfuri. Whilst  Judge  Walker's
decision was "rather  confusing"  he  accepted  the  witness  evidence  that
Appellant is Darfuri, but seems by implication to have upheld  Judge  Holt's
other findings.

Mr Nicolson submitted that there had clearly been interpreter confusion  and
the Judge was clearly wrong about the Peter Verney  conclusions  in  respect
of ethnicity and as an expert. Everything else about  the  Appellant's  life
suggests  that  he  is  a  typical  non-Arab  Darfuri,  displaced   by   the
difficulties to Khartoum and there was nothing there to  displace  the  view
he is a simply non-Arab Darfuri and there was nothing to  detract  from  the
general position  that  Peter  Verney  has  emphasised  in  respect  of  the
discrimination, racism and ill-treatment which  amounts  to  persecution  in
law.

10.   I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Findings

11.   It is necessary to determine the appeal on the basis  of  the  country
guidance and up to date background and  expert  evidence.  In  AA  (Non-Arab
Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056, the Upper Tribunal  held
as follows:

    "All non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of persecution in Darfur and  cannot
    reasonably be expected to relocate elsewhere in Sudan. HGMO (Relocation
    to Khartoum) Sudan CG is no longer to be followed, save in respect  of
    the guidance summarised at (2) and (6) of the headnote to that case...


    However, as regards other  aspects  of  the  guidance  given  in HGMO,
    nothing in the recent evidence or  the  OGN  indicates  any  reason  to
    depart from the guidance summarised in paragraphs (2) and  (6)  in  the
    head note to HGMO. These state as follows:


         "(2)     Neither involuntary returnees nor  failed  asylum  seekers
         nor persons of military age (including draft evaders and deserters)
         are as such at real risk on return to Khartoum


         (6)      An appellant will be able  to  succeed  on  the  basis  of
         medical needs only in extreme and exceptional circumstances."


12.   In MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal
held:

    "13.   In such circumstances the appellant is entitled  to  succeed  in
    his asylum appeal unless it can be shown that since AA there  is  now
    cogent new evidence casting a different light on the situation  of  the
    Berti and/or non-Arab Darfuris. On the contrary, we find:-


         (a)      that the respondent  has  maintained  word  for  word  the
         position as set out in her 2009 OGN. In the latest version  (V.17.0
         updated August 1012), the same wording is now contained  at  3.9.12
         and at 3.10.1 it is stated that applicants can base their claim  on
         membership of the Mussaleit, Zaghawa,  Fur  "or  the  other  ethnic
         groups from the Darfur States".


         (b)      The expert evidence from  Mr  Verney  considers  that  the
         current situation in terms of risk for non-Arab Darfuri  (including
         the Berti) has worsened. As already noted, Ms Holmes did  not  seek
         to impugn his evidence nor was  she  able  to  identify  any  other
         evidence pointing in a different direction.


         (c)      Neither the country guidance case of AA nor the  current
         Home Office OGN qualifies its identification of those  who  are  at
         real risk of persecution by reference to whether an element of  the
         risk they face derives from the fact of being a returnee  from  the
         UK, but if that factor is taken into consideration, it seems to  us
         that Mr Verney is right to consider that it is one which  increases
         to some degree the level of risk for such  claimants.  It  is  true
         that according to Mr Verney  the  Sudanese  authorities  operate  a
         highly sophisticated surveillance of Sudanese nationals in  the  UK
         and so might be expected to know through their intelligence who are
         those actively associated with the rebel movement and those who are
         not. However, there is  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
         actions and decisions taken  by  the  authorities  in  Khartoum  or
         elsewhere in Sudan, either at the airport or thereafter, are  based
         on such intelligence.


    14.    In light of the above, our general conclusion is as follows:


         In the country guidance case of AA (Non-Arab  Darfuris-relocation)
         Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056, where it is stated that if a claimant
         from  Sudan  is  a  non-Arab  Darfuri  he  must   succeed   in   an
         international protection claim, "Darfuri" is to be understood as an
         ethnic term relating  to  origins,  not  as  a  geographical  term.
         Accordingly it covers even Darfuris who were not born in Darfur."


13.   First tier Tribunal Judge Walker found that the Appellant  is  from  a
Darfuri tribe (Bargo). Thus in light of the  decision  in  MM  (op  cit)  he
succeeds:" unless it can be shown that since AA there is  now  cogent  new
evidence casting a different light on the situation of the Berti and/or non-
Arab Darfuris."

14.   I have concluded that the evidence contained in the Respondent's  CPIN
of September 2018, much of which was taken from  the  previous  CPINs,  does
not amount to cogent new evidence which  casts  a  different  light  on  the
situation for non-Arab Darfuris. I find that the various  reports  of  Peter
Verney,  most  recently  updated  on  30  August  2018,  have   consistently
maintained that the Appellant would be at risk on return to Sudan:  [9]-[19]
of the supplementary bundle refers. He states therein:

    "4.    I am aware of the Home  Office's  assertion  in  current  asylum
    cases that it is justifiable to depart from current Country Guidance on
    non-Arab Darfuris "AA" [2009] and "MM" [2015] on the basis of the  HO's
    own internal notes.


    5.     I contest this departure because it does not take  into  account
    the continuing war in Darfur and its  repercussions  and  ramifications
    elsewhere in the country.


    6.     There has been no substantial improvement in conditions in Sudan
    since the UK asylum Country Guidance "MM"


    ...


    14.    Mr A is a non-Arab Darfuri who has claimed asylum in the UK  and
    in doing so has given evidence which casts the government of Sudan in a
    bad light. The regime is resentful of such actions, which is treats  as
    betrayal and evidence of a desire to see the government brought down.


    15.    He would be highly  exposed  as  an  individual  on  arrival  at
    Khartoum Airport, if returned.


    16.    He will be recognisable as a western Sudanese non-Arab from  his
    accent and physical appearance and as such will face an elevated  level
    of risk of adverse treatment, starting with being stopped and taken for
    interrogation at the airport


    ...


    77.    He is not necessarily "wanted" as an individual, but in any part
    of Sudan he will be recognisable  as  a  Darfuri  non-Arab  and  easily
    singled out. When the authorities notice him he is liable to  dangerous
    persecution because of  his  ethnic  identity  and  the  imputation  of
    "rebel" sympathies."


15.   I have applied Devaseelan (op cit)  and  note  that  Judge  Holt,  who
determined  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  4   June   2015,   comprehensively
disbelieved his account. Whilst First tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walker  made  a
finding that, in light of new evidence the Appellant  is  indeed  Bargo  and
thus a non-Arab Darfuri, he did not find that the Appellant  is  of  adverse
interest to the authorities. In the absence of any challenge  to  or  reason
for departing  from  the  finding  of  Judge  Holt,  her  finding  that  the
Appellant would not be at  risk  of  persecution  in  Sudan  on  account  of
political activities is upheld.

16.   However, in light of the finding of Judge Walker  that  the  Appellant
is a non-Arab Darfuri and in light of  my  finding  that  the  evidence  the
Respondent seeks to rely upon is not sufficient to show that the  CG  in  MM
(Darfuris) can no longer be relied upon, the appeal falls to be  allowed  on
the basis of the Appellant's ethnicity.

Notice of decision

17.   The appeal is allowed on the basis that the  Appellant  is  a  refugee
within the meaning of the 1951 UN Convention.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

dated 19 December 2018

