
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04238/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Listed at Field House  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 4th September 2018  On 10th October 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                   MR C O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr E Tefan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr P Oyemike of Samuel and Co,Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. Although it is a Secretary of State who is appealing for convenience I
      will hereinafter refer to the parties as in the First Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who came to United  Kingdom  in
      2005 on a visit Visa. Thereafter  he  overstayed.  When  his  presence
      became known he made a claim for asylum.  This  was  on  12  September
      2017, the day after he had been served with notice as  an  overstayer.
      His claim was based upon  his  uncle's  activities  with  the  Biafran
      Zionist Party.

   3. He had earlier made an  unsuccessful  application  based  upon  Treaty
      rights. He stated he was cohabiting with a  Bulgarian  national  since
      2015 and they had a child, Benjamin, born on 21 October 2016.

   4. His claim for protection was refused on 13 March 2018. The  respondent
      did accept that the leader of the Biafran party  was  related  to  the
      appellant but concluded this would not  place  the  appellant  is  any
      risk. He did not have any political  views  and  had  been  away  from
      Nigeria for many years. Regarding his article 8 rights his partner was
      not a British national. She had applied for  a  residency  card  on  6
      October 2017 which was refused. She did not have indefinite  leave  to
      remain. It was not accepted  that  she  was  his  partner  within  the
      meaning of the immigration rules. It was accepted that  the  appellant
      was the father of Benjamin who is a Bulgarian  national  who  did  not
      have indefinite leave to remain and had not lived here seven years.

The First tier Tribunal

   5. His appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  DP  Herbert  OBE
      following a hearing on 3 May 2018.  The  judge  rejected  his  refugee
      claim and found no evidence of  the  appellant  had  been  politically
      active. At paragraph 37 the judge concluded his claim to asylum had no
      merit.

   6. The judge then found that he did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules because his partner was not  a  person  present  and
      settled in the United Kingdom and their child  was  not  British.  The
      judge  did  accept  that  they  were  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
      relationship and considered whether  removal  would  be  proportionate
      bearing in mind his family life.

   7. The judge made the point that the appellant's spouse was  entitled  to
      be here as  an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty  rights.  The  judge
      referred to an unsuccessful application by the appellant to remain  as
      her extended family member under European Treaty provisions. The judge
      recorded that the earlier refusal of a residence document was  because
      he had failed to produce his Nigerian passport and so that refusal was
      not determinative of his status. The judge found that the  appellant's
      partner was exercising Treaty rights. He found that the appellant  was
      in a relationship with her for more than two years.  At  paragraph  45
      the judge concluded that there was every  likelihood  if  he  made  an
      application now he would obtain a residence permit. On this basis  the
      judge allowed the appeal under article 8.



The Upper Tribunal

   8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the judge's analysis was
      flawed because there was no regard to the public interest  factors  of
      section 117 B. Furthermore,  it  was  suggested  that  the  judge  had
      confused European rights of movement with the right  to  family  life.
      The appellant's child was not a qualifying child.

   9. At hearing Mr Tefan made the point  that  the  appellant  could  apply
      under European Treaty provisions for a  residence  permit.  He  argued
      that article 8 had not been adequately considered by  the  judge,  who
      engaged in basic errors about the standard of proof. This was apparent
      at paragraph 32 when he equated it with the lower standard  applicable
      to an asylum claim.

  10. In response, the appellant representative argued  that  the  situation
      was akin to that in  Chickwamba.  He  accepted  that  the  appellant's
      partner was not a qualified person and his child was  not  here  seven
      years. He also acknowledges that the judge had not dealt with  117  B.
      He made the point  that  the  appellant  does  speak  English  and  is
      financially independent. The question of integration into  the  United
      Kingdom was a factual matter.  He  acknowledged  that  the  judge  had
      incorrectly stated the standard  of  proof  but  that  the  difference
      between the  two  standards  made  no  practical  difference.  He  did
      acknowledge that if the decision were remitted the asylum claim  would
      not  be  pursued.  There  is  no  challenge  to  this  aspect  in  the
      appellant's rule 24 response.

Consideration

  11. At paragraph 32 the judge incorrectly sets out the standard  of  proof
      in relation to article 8, equating it to the  lower  standard  in  the
      appellant's asylum claim. If the judge  in  fact  applied  this  lower
      standard in allowing the article 8 claim then this is a material error
      of law.

  12. The judge found the appellant and his  partner  to  be  in  a  durable
      relationship. The judge referred to overwhelming  evidence  that  they
      enjoyed a family life since they started living together in 2015.  The
      judge referred to the evidence of the appellant  and  his  partner  as
      well as photographs. This was a factual finding open to the judge.

  13. The judge accepted at paragraph 38 that there was no claim  under  the
      immigration rules because the requirements  could  not  be  met.  This
      primarily related to his partner's immigration status. The judge  then
      goes on to consider his partner's exercise of Treaty rights. The judge
      was satisfied that she was working and had been doing so  for  several
      months. The judge referred to remittances seen in  her  bank  account.
      Again, this was a factual finding open to the judge.

  14. I do not see anything to suggest that in  accepting  the  relationship
      and the fact his partner was in employment the judge was influenced by
      the incorrect lower standard of proof referred to.

  15. At paragraph 44 the judge refers to being satisfied the appellant  was
      living in a family unit with his partner and their child. It was  open
      to the judge to find as a fact that family life existed.

  16. The judge also found that she was exercising Treaty  rights  and  that
      she and her child had the right to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on
      this basis. The judge found that at that stage  they  had  been  in  a
      durable relationship for more than 2 years. The judge went on  to  say
      at paragraph 45 that in every likelihood he would be  able  to  obtain
      confirmation of his right to reside under European  Treaty  provisions
      if he applied.

  17. The judge  however  errs  in  conflating  this  with  article  8.  The
      immigration rules are intended to be article 8 compliant and have been
      passed through Parliament. The rules are not a complete code  but  the
      approach has been in appropriate circumstances to consider  article  8
      initially through the prism of the rules and then to see if there  are
      particular circumstances which would render the decision in breach  of
      article 8.

  18. Into this must then be factored the public interest considerations set
      out in section 117 B. In any such consideration the judge  is  obliged
      to take these factors into account. It is in  this  context  that  the
      proportionality of the decision is to be evaluated.

  19. The European Treaty provisions are distinct from the immigration rules
      and  have  not  been  supervised  by  Parliament.  The  criteria   are
      completely different. For instance, the Treaty provisions do not  have
      any minimum income concept akin to that in the rules. For this  reason
      the situation is not akin to that in Chickwamba.

  20. The judge found family  life  to  exist.  However  the  assessment  of
      proportionality is fundamentally flawed. This is because the judge has
      sought to apply European Treaty provisions as if they were the same as
      the immigration rules and has failed to  have  regard  to  the  public
      interest considerations in section 117 B. This is aside from potential
      errors in the fact-finding exercise  because  the  wrong  standard  of
      proof was referred to. Consequently, the decision is not sustainable.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge DP Herbert OBE materially errs  in
law in allowing the appeal under article 8 and this aspect of  the  decision
is set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de
novo hearing on the article 8 issue. The rejection of the other elements  of
the claim are maintained.


   Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal                                    Date: 2 October
2018


Directions
   1. Relist in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House excluding First-tier
      Tribunal Judge DP Herbert OBE.
   2. This is to be a de novo hearing on the article 8 issue alone. The
      finding that the appellant is in a relationship with a Bulgarian
      national, Ms Gosheva and they have a child Benjamin, born on 25
      October 2016, is maintained. The dismissal by the First-tier Tribunal
      of the appeal on the other grounds, including the underlying asylum
      claim are maintained.
   3. It is anticipated the hearing should not last longer than 2 hours.
   4. The appellant's representatives are to advise the tribunal if a
      Bulgarian interpreter is required.


   Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal                                Date: 2 October 2018

