
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04667/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 16 January 2019                   |On 20 February 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 JEANCY [L]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodgson, in-house Counsel with Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Caswell promulgated on 6 December 2017 in which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.









Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of the DRC born on  13  March  1999  who
        arrived in the United Kingdom with  a  false  passport  in  October
        2016, claiming international protection  and  leave  to  remain  on
        human rights grounds on 28 October 2016 which was  refused  by  the
        respondent on 28 April 2017. It is the appeal against that decision
        which came before the Judge.
     3. The appellant's case is summarised by the Judge at [4 - 8]  in  the
        following terms:


             "4.  The Appellant's case can be summarised as follows. He was
             born and lived in Kinshasa, N'Djili district. He attended  the
             first year of university, and  after  that  had  to  stop  for
             financial reasons. He lived with  his  family,  including  his
             wife and two children, and sold car parts from home to support
             them. The 2014 the Appellant became a  sympathiser  member  of
             APARECO, a human rights organisation  opposed  to  the  Kabila
             government, having contacted them online.  He  was  given  the
             task of mobilising support from the youth in N'Djili. He would
             hold secret meetings in various locations. Sometimes this  was
             in the compound of a friend's house, and sometimes it  was  in
             public locations, such as football matches, Internet caf�s and
             churches. Effectively the surroundings acted as cover.


             5.   In September 2015, when there was a  UDPS  demonstration,
             the Appellant was caught up in the arrests when he was in  the
             area. He was taken to Makala prison and  beaten  almost  daily
             for three and a half months.  He  was  never  interrogated  or
             charged and was released upon being made to sign  a  document.
             Fortunately, the authorities never discovered that he  was  an
             APARECO member.


             6.   On 19 and 20 September 2016, there was an uprising in the
             DRC against the government.  The  Appellant  and  his  APARECO
             associates joined in at a location on the Matete Bridge.  Many
             people were being arrested but the Appellant was not  and  ran
             away. The Appellant did not go home, but to  the  house  of  a
             friend, whose older brother told him that the government  were
             arresting APARECO members. When he received news of this,  the
             Appellant realised his life was in danger. He again did not go
             home but cashed in the money that he had contributed towards a
             buying fund with others, and fled  overland  to  Angola.  From
             there he came with a false passport to the UK,  helped  by  an
             agent. He claimed asylum on arrival.


             7.   Since being in the UK, the Appellant  has  continued  his
             APARECO involvement. He was given the  position  of  mobiliser
             for the London area, when he  lived  in  London.  He  attended
             meetings in London. After he moved to  Huddersfield,  he  took
             part in telephone meetings. He has posted  extensively  online
             for APARECO, sharing APARECO material on his Facebook page. He
             has made YouTube videos denouncing the Kabila government.  The
             DRC authorities will be aware of his activity for  APARECO  in
             the UK.


             8.   The Appellant's case is that, if returned to the DRC,  he
             will be  arrested  at  the  airport,  detained,  tortured  and
             killed, on the grounds of his political opinion."


     4. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [18] of the decision under
        challenge which can be summarised in the following terms:



               i.  There  are  various  internal  inconsistencies   in   the
                  Appellant's account most notable being discrepancies as to
                  where secret meetings were held by the  appellant  in  the
                  DRC and as to whether he and others in his group  attended
                  the  September  2015  demonstrations  outside   the   UDPS
                  headquarters,  which  were  not  fully  resolved  in   the
                  appellant's oral evidence in which  the  Judge  found  the
                  appellant appeared to be trying to reconcile two differing
                  accounts [18].


              ii. The appellants explanation in his oral  evidence  did  not
                  emerge in a logical or credible fashion and he effectively
                  changed his account. The appellant  was  vague  about  his
                  actual involvement with APARECO in the DRC and  could  not
                  at any point give a clear explanation of what  he  did  or
                  its effectiveness and appeared to have a limited grasp  of
                  politics and of the aims of the organisation often  simply
                  repeating that Kabila was a Rwandan and not  Congolese  at
                  all [19].


             iii. The appellant seemed to be suggesting that  he  was  being
                  directed by his superiors in London whereas the email from
                  the UK Secretary of APARECO indicates there is  no  office
                  in the UK and only  an  office  in  France  which  is  the
                  organisation's headquarters. The  Judge  found  it  lacked
                  credibility,  especially  as  the  appellant  is   French-
                  speaking, the claim he has superiors in London telling him
                  what to do in the DRC. The Judge finds there was  no  real
                  explanation of what is meant  by  the  appellant  being  a
                  "mobiliser" for APARECO or how  the  author  of  a  letter
                  purportedly  from  a  UK  Territorial  Representative  had
                  obtained that information. The author did  not  attend  to
                  give evidence nor did anyone else  from  APARECO  UK.  The
                  Judge finds the fact  the  letter  shows  the  Territorial
                  Representative operates from a flat in Tottenham  confirms
                  the low prominence of APARECO in  the  UK  as  opposed  to
                  France [20].


              iv. When asked about the incident in September 2015 which  the
                  appellant claims prompted him to flee the DRC,  the  Judge
                  found the appellant often delayed in answering  questions,
                  when asked how he obtained the  $1600  to  fund  the  trip
                  events claimed he cashed in a share of a car  part  buying
                  fund whereas there is no mention of this before, which was
                  said to be at odds with his evidence that he was very poor
                  and only just managed to support his family from  the  car
                  parts sales [21].


               v. The appellant could not give a clear consistent account of
                  the way in which he was told about the arrests of  APARECO
                  members or why he believed was in danger such that he  had
                  to flee the country without even going  home  to  see  his
                  wife  and  children  describing  on  the  one  hand  being
                  telephoned by a friend yet in another being told in person
                  by the older brother of a friend. The Judge did  not  find
                  the appellant's explanation for the discrepancy  credible.
                  The Judge did not  find  in  any  the  case  that  it  was
                  apparent why the appellant would need  to  flee  since  he
                  could not identify what led the authorities to believe  he
                  was an APARECO member [22].


              vi. The appellant's account of claimed activism in the DRC  is
                  out of line with objective  and  country  information  and
                  country guidance case law confirming that those  who  have
                  or are perceived to have a military or  political  profile
                  in opposition to the government are persecuted with  there
                  being very little evidence of APARECO activism in the  DRC
                  as opposed to actions by members of the UDPS [23].


             vii. The Judge did not find the  country  information  provided
                  and considered supported the appellant's case that members
                  of  APARECO  face  persecution  as  a  result   from   the
                  authorities even to the lower standard of proof [24].


            viii. The background evidence did not  support  the  appellant's
                  claim that he was an APARECO activist in the DRC  or  that
                  he risked coming to the attention of  the  authorities  as
                  such at the time when he left the DRC [25].


              ix. The appellant's account is rejected. The appellant was not
                  found to be a credible or reliable witness [26].


               x. Country guidance case law does not support the appellant's
                  case that his actions for APARECO in the UK would put  him
                  at a high enough level to attract the adverse attention of
                  the DRC authorities on return. The Judge  did  not  accept
                  the appellant did anything significant for APARECO in  the
                  DRC and the terminology used does not convey someone  with
                  an official role. The Judge does not  find  the  appellant
                  has acquired a significant visible profile within  APARECO
                  UK and does not find he is or is perceived to be a leader,
                  office bearer or spokesperson when applying  the  language
                  of the country guidance case law. The Judge notes there is
                  only one subscriber to the  appellant's  YouTube  channel,
                  and it has attracted very few views and  there  is  little
                  evidence of his Facebook page  being  widely  viewed.  The
                  Judge notes the appellant's claim to have attended  a  few
                  meetings of APARECO but found it is not credible that this
                  would have been of interest  to  the  DRC  authorities  or
                  noted by them  especially  given  the  low  profile  which
                  APARECO apparently has in the UK [27].


              xi. The Judge does not accept the appellant has told the truth
                  about his actions for APARECO, finds he has little  or  no
                  contact with them in the DRC and did little or anything to
                  promote their aims. The Judge does not find the  appellant
                  was involved with demonstrations as he has claimed or that
                  he left the country for political reasons. The Judge finds
                  the appellant has failed to show even  to  the  applicable
                  lower standard of proof that he  has  done  anything  that
                  would be viewed as significant by the DRC authorities  and
                  has failed  to  show  that  they  will  be  aware  of  his
                  involvement in APARECO [28].



     5. As a result of the above finding  the  Judge  finds  the  appellant
        would not face a real risk on return to the DRC for any reason  and
        accordingly dismissed the appeal.
     6. Permission to appeal was sought by the  appellant  but  refused  by
        another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal found the grounds did  not
        identify any arguable material error of law and that there  was  no
        basis on which  to  interfere  with  the  decision  the  First-Tier
        Tribunal.
     7. The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal where  permission
        was granted on 14 May 2018, the operative part of the  grant  being
        in the following terms:


             "I consider that the grounds are arguable in terms  of  First-
             Tier Tribunal Judge Caswell's ("the FtJ")  assessment  of  the
             activities of APARECO in the DRC and the import of the country
             guidance decision of BM and Others (returnees -  criminal  and
             noncriminal) DRC CG [2015]  UKUT  00293(IAC),  notwithstanding
             that the FtJ referred to various items of background  material
             in terms of their activity or presence in the DRC.


             Likewise, I consider arguable the points advanced in  relation
             to the FtJ's adverse credibility assessment in  terms  of  the
             basis of his account and what are said to be  inconsistencies.
             It may be that notwithstanding any errors of fact made by  the
             FtJ her adverse credibility assessment overall can stand,  but
             that is a matter for argument at the hearing. All grounds  may
             be argued."


     8. The Secretary of State has filed a Rule 24 reply dated 25 July 2018
        in which he confirms his opposition to the appeal;  submitting  the
        Judge addressed herself properly to the  evidence  before  her  and
        reached adequately reasoned findings. The  respondent  submits  the
        grounds amount to little more than disagreement with  the  findings
        which were unfavourable to the appellant, that no material error of
        law is established and that any factual errors in the determination
        are minor in the context of the Judge's comprehensive and  detailed
        consideration (paragraphs 18  -  29)  of  the  credibility  of  the
        appellant's account and of the risk to him on return.



Error of law


     9. The documents refer to the country guidance case of BM  and  Others
        (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015]  00293  (IAC)
        in which it was held  that  a  national  of  the  DRC   who  has  a
        significant and visible profile within  APARECO  (UK)  is,  in  the
        event of returning to his  country  of  origin,  at  real  risk  of
        persecution for a Convention reason or serious  harm  or  treatment
        proscribed by Article 3 ECHR by virtue of falling within one of the
        risk categories identified  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MM  (UDPS
        Members - Risk on Return) Democratic Republic of  Congo  CG  [2007]
        UKAIT 00023.  Those belonging to this category include persons  who
        are,  or  are  perceived  to  be,  leaders,   office   bearers   or
        spokespersons.  As a general rule, mere rank and file  members  are
        unlikely to fall within this category. However, each case  will  be
        fact sensitive, with particular attention directed  to  the  likely
        knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents.
    10. On behalf the appellant Mr Hodgson submitted that the  Judge  mixed
        up her assessment of the evidence and findings  of  fact  and  that
        from a reading of the determination it was not clear what the Judge
        had seen and taken into account. The  appellant  argues  there  was
        nothing inconsistent in his account. It is argued that [87]  of  BM
        provides guidance regarding APARECO as an  organisation  confirming
        they operate underground in the DRC which it is argued supports the
        appellants evidence of meetings in public places.
    11. In that paragraph the Upper Tribunal found:


             "We address the discrete question of risk  to  those  who  are
             considered to be opponents of the Kabila regime by  reason  of
             their  sur  place  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.    In
             addressing  and  determining  this  question,  we   make   the
             following specific findings:


             (i)  APARECO is a cohesive, structured organisation which  has
                  its main base in France and strong basis in certain  other
                  European countries, including the United Kingdom.  It also
                  operates in Canada and the United States.


             (ii) APARECO is implacably opposed to the regime of  President
                  Kabila which has governed DRC during the past decade.  Its
                  overarching aims are the defeat of this regime and the re-
                  establishment of the state on a different basis.


             (iii)    APARECO has  no  overt  presence  in  DRC,  where  it
                  operates underground.


             (iv) The external  opposition  of  APARECO  to  the  governing
                  regime of DRC is overt and visible.  Its  highest  profile
                  activities unfold in public  places,  accessible  to  all.
                  Activities of  this  nature  are  accompanied  by  advance
                  publicity.


             (v)  In common with many  comparable  regimes  throughout  the
                  world, both present and past, the  DRC  Government  has  a
                  strong interest  in  opposition  organisations,  including
                  APARECO.  Such organisations are  monitored  and  data  is
                  recorded.  This includes information about the  identities
                  of the most prominent members of such organisations,  that
                  is to say their leaders, office holders and spokespersons.




              vi) The monitoring of APARECO (UK) is likely to be  undertaken
                  by and on behalf of the DRC Embassy in  London.   This  is
                  the agency with the most obvious motivation to  carry  out
                  and co-ordinate such scrutiny.   Such scrutiny  is  likely
                  to generate periodic reports to  the  DRC  Government,  in
                  particular its ANR and DGM agencies.


             (vii)    It is likely that the  leaders,  office  bearers  and
                  spokespersons of APARECO (UK) are  known  to  the  DRC  UK
                  Embassy and the DRC  Government,  in  particular  ANR  and
                  DGM."


    12. The finding at [25] that the background evidence  did  not  support
        the appellant's claim that he was an APARECO activist  in  the  DRC
        may be affected by legal error if the basis for that conclusion was
        that the Judge did not accept that the country material established
        that members of this group were present  in  the  appellant's  home
        state.  It was argued that  the  area  error  is  material  as  the
        appellant's claim was consistent with the country material.
    13. In BM it is identified that APARECO are based  in  France  and  the
        United  Kingdom  which  Mr  Hodgson  submitted  means  it  is   not
        implausible that the appellant  could  have  had  connections  with
        those operating in  the  United  Kingdom  from  where  he  received
        instructions as to his activities in the DRC.  This  submission  is
        noted but as the Judge found the profile of any organisation within
        the UK appears to be very low as opposed to the head office of this
        organisation in France. The finding of the judge that  it  is  more
        likely than not that if the appellant was to  receive  instructions
        from APARECO officials outside the DRC they  would  come  from  the
        head office in France rather than London has not been shown to be a
        finding that is arguably irrational or outside the range  of  those
        available to the Judge considering the evidence as a whole.  Nobody
        from APARECO UK attended to confirm the appellants  claim.  As  the
        source of instruction in relation to what the appellant  claims  to
        have done has been found to lack credibility the  specific  finding
        in [25] becomes more relevant as it is tailored to the appellant as
        an individual and not the group as a whole.
    14. The challenge to the Judge concerning the alleged source of funding
        for the appellant's travel to United Kingdom is noted in  which  Mr
        Hodgson argues that there are no inconsistencies in relation to the
        appellant's  account  when  one  considers  the  written  and  oral
        evidence. It is argued there is no inconsistency in the appellant's
        explanation referred to at [22]  or  [21]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge. I do not accept it is made out that the Judge failed  to
        consider the evidence made available with the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny and the Judge had the advantage of both seeing and
        hearing the appellant give oral evidence. It  was  considering  the
        evidence in the round that led to the concerns in the mind  of  the
        Judge that there were inconsistencies in the  appellants  evidence.
        The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the  Judge.
        It is not made out the conclusions  set  out  in  the  decision  in
        relation to the weight to be given to the evidence  or  the  Judges
        assessment of the same, based upon the opinion she  formed  of  the
        appellant, falls outside the range of decisions reasonably open  to
        the Judge on the evidence.
    15. The  Judge  identified  a  general  vagueness  in  the  appellant's
        evidence in relation to matters of which the Judge was entitled  to
        expect the appellant would have had a more  detailed  knowledge  if
        his activities were as he claimed. Even if the  Judge  did  err  in
        relation to the activities of APARECO within the DRC, in  light  of
        BM, and/or  it  is  accepted  that  in  his  asylum  interview  the
        appellant claimed that the money to pay the agent to bring  him  to
        the United Kingdom came from car parts, these two issues  fails  to
        establish  material  error  in  the  findings  of  the  Judge  when
        considering the evidence as a whole.
    16. I do not find, having  considered  the  determination,  submissions
        made before the Upper Tribunal, and evidence available to the Judge
        that although some concerns arise  the  appellant  has  established
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal.  There
        are a number of concerns arising from the  evidence  identified  by
        the Judge sufficient to justify the adverse credibility findings.
    17. It was not made out anything on the appellant's Facebook account or
        YouTube would have come to the adverse attention of the authorities
        or establish that the appellant's profile is  sufficient  to  place
        him at risk on return in light of  the  findings  in  BM.   As  the
        appellant is not credible any entries do not represent a  genuinely
        held fundamental belief meaning the Facebook account can be  closed
        down and any entries  deleted  without  infringing  the  HJ  (Iran)
        principles if the appellant has any concerns.
    18. I find no error of law material to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal made out. The decision of the Judge shall stand.

Decision

    19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th February 2019
