
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04692/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2017                            |On 16 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     R S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, Counsel instructed by Hunter Stone
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity:
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1982 whose
    protection claim was refused by the respondent on 31 April 2017.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge Devittie.  In a decision promulgated on 7 July 2017 the
    judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant is now appealing against
    that decision.

 2. The appellant entered the UK unlawfully in 2008.  He was arrested in
    November 2016 following which he made his asylum application.

 3. The basis of his claim is that he would be at risk on return to
    Bangladesh because of his involvement with the Bangladeshi Nationalist
    Party (BNP) both in Bangladesh and in the UK.  He claims that his
    brother-in-law held a senior position in the BNP and that he worked
    with his brother-in-law's security team.  He claims that in 2004 he was
    beaten and assaulted by Awami League supporters following his refusal
    to pay a bribe and that a case has been filed against him which is
    currently open.  He also claims that there was a media campaign against
    him in Bangladesh.

 4. The appellant claims that since coming to the UK he has been actively
    involved with the BNP.  He claims to have attended multiple
    demonstrations and been active in numerous activities.  He submitted
    letters of support from several members of the BNP including
    individuals who operate at a senior level. In addition he submitted
    numerous photographs showing him at demonstrations including one where
    he is next to an individual holding a sign saying "Go Back Killer
    Hasina".  He claims that this photograph was taken at a demonstration
    when Mr Hasina was visiting the UK.

 5. The respondent accepted that the appellant was a supporter of the BNP
    in Bangladesh and that he has been a supporter whilst in the UK.
    However, it was not accepted that he was attacked or had a case lodged
    against him because of his political opinion and it was not accepted
    his sur place activities would place him at risk on return to
    Bangladesh.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge did not accept that the appellant was attacked in 2004 or
    that proceedings were brought against him.  He found this aspect of the
    appellant's evidence to be contrived.

 7. The judge gave several reasons for rejecting the appellant's account.

 a) Firstly, the appellant's immigration history gave rise to a legitimate
    suspicion that the asylum claim was contrived, given that it was made
    when he was facing imminent removal. At paragraph 5(ii)(b) the judge
    stated that he rejected the appellant's explanation of why he failed to
    claim asylum earlier because if the appellant had been in touch with
    leading BNP political activists, as he claimed, it would have been
    plain to him that an early asylum claim was a reasonable course for him
    to pursue.

 b) Secondly, the judge found that the appellant was vague and incoherent
    in his explanation for the legal proceedings he claims are ensuing
    against him in Bangladesh.  The judge stated that: "One would
    reasonably expect in the circumstances that the appellant would be able
    to give a very clear and coherent account of the state of play in the
    prosecution proceedings against him."

 c) Thirdly, the judge did not accept that the authorities in Bangladesh
    would maintain an active adverse interest in the appellant for several
    years over allegations that amount to no more than a physical
    altercation between opposing political groups.  The judge stated:
    "There is absolutely nothing in this appellant's profile that would
    justify the sustained interest in him for close to a decade even taking
    into account his claim to have high profile links.  He held no high
    profile position in the BNP."

 d) Fourthly, the judge noted that the appellant adduced several statements
    from BNP members in the UK and in Bangladesh to support his claim but
    none of the statements mentions the appellant's account of the reasons
    why he was subject to persecution; that is, the active and outstanding
    warrant of arrest against him in Bangladesh.

 8. The judge found that even if the appellant's claim was taken at its
    highest it would be reasonable and viable for him to relocate within
    Bangladesh.  The judge stated that even on the appellant's own evidence
    he did not come to any serious harm whilst in Bangladesh between the
    incident in 2004 and leaving for the UK in 2008.

 9. The judge accepted that the appellant has been politically active for
    the BNP in the UK and that he attended demonstrations where photographs
    had been taken showing him beside leading members of the BNP.  Although
    the judge accepted that these photographs could be in the public domain
    he rejected the contention that they would place the appellant at risk.



10. The judge acknowledged that the Bangladeshi authorities in the UK
    actively monitor demonstrations but found that because there is nothing
    in the appellant's background that would lead to the authorities having
    an interest in him he would not be distinguishable from the hundreds of
    other demonstrators that participate in such demonstrations from time
    to time and consequently he would not be identified at the airport as
    someone of interest to the authorities.

The Grounds of Appeal

11. The first ground of appeal argues that the judge failed to have proper
    regard to the appellant's sur place activities.  The appellant adduced
    photographs including one of him at a recent protest against the
    Bangladeshi Prime Minister where he was photographed next to an
    individual holding a sign describing the Bangladeshi Prime Minister as
    a killer.  The grounds maintain that no reference was made in the
    decision to the specific content of the photograph or the way in which
    it and the other photographs would be perceived by the authorities.

12. In addition, the first ground submits that the finding that the
    authorities would not expend resources on identifying and prosecuting
    the appellant on return was perverse/irrational, given that the judge
    accepted that the authorities actively monitor demonstrations in the UK
    and that the photographs could well be in the public domain.

13. Mr Gaisford elaborated on the first ground of appeal as follows: he
    argued that the judge's factual findings about the appellant's sur
    place activities combined with his finding that the authorities
    actively monitor activities of BNP activists in the UK could lead to
    only one conclusion: that the appellant would be at risk on return. His
    argument was that having found that the appellant (a) is affiliated
    with prominent individuals in the BNP; (b) is active in the BNP in the
    UK; (c) had attended multiple demonstrations for the BNP; and (d) had
    been photographed with leading members of the BNP including in a
    photograph where he is next to an individual holding a sign describing
    the Prime Minister of Bangladesh as a killer; the only conclusion to
    draw is that the appellant would be at risk on return to Bangladesh and
    it was perverse or irrational to conclude otherwise.

14. The second ground of appeal concerns the adverse inference against the
    appellant arising from the delay in making an asylum application. The
    appellant claimed that the reason for the delay was that he was advised
    by a solicitor to not make an asylum claim.  The grounds argue that the
    judge erred by overlooking or ignoring this.  Alternatively, the second
    ground argues that even if the judge did consider the appellant's
    explanation about being advised to not make a claim by a solicitor the
    judge erred by holding the appellant responsible for this error when a
    party should not be held to account for his representative's procedural
    errors.

15. In addition the grounds contend that the judge committed a procedural
    irregularity because the appellant's evidence about the advice he took
    from a solicitor was not specifically challenged at the hearing or
    engaged with in the decision.

Consideration

Sur Place Activities

16. The fact that - as accepted by the judge - the Bangladeshi authorities
    actively monitor demonstrations in the UK does not mean that the
    activities of this particular appellant would be known to them. The
    relevant question for the judge was whether this appellant, with his
    particular profile, would be at risk on return to Bangladesh because
    his sur place activities would (applying the lower standard of proof)
    become known to the authorities.

17. The judge found that given the appellant's profile it was not
    reasonably likely he would be at risk on return. The profile of the
    appellant, as found by the judge, was that he had not been subject to
    persecution (or arrest) in Bangladesh because of his support for the
    BNP and that he had not held any significant - or indeed, any -
    official position in the BNP in Bangladesh. The judge's conclusion,
    which was open to him on the evidence, was that there was nothing in
    the appellant's history and conduct in Bangladesh that would draw him
    to the attention of the authorities.

18. Having reviewed afresh the objective evidence that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal, I am of the view that although it indicates that there
    may be monitoring and surveillance of BNP activities outside
    Bangladesh, it does not show (applying the lower standard of proof)
    that someone who has not had a senior or official role in the BNP and
    who has not been persecuted or arrested in Bangladesh for BNP
    activities would come to the attention of the authorities in Bangladesh
    merely for participating in demonstrations (and being photographed at
    such demonstrations next to provocative banners).

19. Whether a particular individual faces a risk on return to Bangladesh
    solely because of sur place activities in the UK requires a fact
    specific enquiry engaging with the question of whether the individual
    would become known to the authorities. This is the approach the judge
    followed and which resulted in his conclusion that "there is nothing to
    suggest why and how this appellant is distinguishable from the hundreds
    of other demonstrators that participate in such demonstrations from
    time to time." This was not an irrational conclusion. It may be that
    other judges would have drawn a different conclusion from the same
    evidence, but the question is whether this judge reached a conclusion
    which was open to him. I am satisfied that he did.

Delay in claiming asylum

20. The appellant's explanation for delaying his asylum application by
    eight years was that he was advised by a solicitor to not make an
    asylum claim as he would be arrested for entering the country
    illegally.

21. Mr Gaisford argued that the judge failed to consider this explanation
    for the delay. I disagree. The judge dealt with the explanation at
    paragraph 5(ii)(b) of the decision. Some confusion arises because the
    third word of paragraph 5(ii)(b) is "this" when, reading the decision
    as a whole, it is apparent that the judge meant to say "his". The point
    made by the judge is that the appellant's claim to have been misled by
    a solicitor as to the appropriate course of action is undermined by his
    claim to have been in touch with leading political activists who would
    have made plain to him that an asylum claim should be brought upon
    arrival in the UK.

22. Mr Gaisford's alternative argument was that the appellant should not be
    held responsible for mistaken procedural advice from his
    representative. This argument has no merit. If the appellant is
    contending that he was given incorrect advice by a solicitor, then
    there needs to be evidence that the allegation was put to the
    solicitors. See BT (Former solicitors' alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004]
    UKIAT 00311. However, there was no evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal to show that any attempt had been made to contact the former
    solicitor.

23. There was insufficient evidence before the First-tier tribunal to
    establish that a solicitor had advised the appellant to not make an
    asylum claim and I am satisfied that there is no discernible error of
    law in the judge's assessment of the considerable delay by the
    appellant in making the asylum application.


Decision


A. The appeal is dismissed.

B. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  10 December 2017     |

