

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05425/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On : 17 December 2020                        |On: 06 January 2021            |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOUT


                                   Between


                                     BF
                           (Anonymity Order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss, instructed by JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
the appellant as an asylum applicant is granted anonymity  throughout  these
proceedings. No  report  of  these  proceedings  (in  whatever  form)  shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellant. Failure to comply  with  this
order could lead to a contempt of court.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 12 August 1997. He  left  Iraq
   in April 2018 and arrived in the UK, clandestinely, on 2 November 2018.

2. The appellant claimed asylum on 6 November 2018.  He  claimed  to  be  an
   Iraqi Kurd from Tapasawz village in Tuz, outside the IKR  (Iraqi  Kurdish
   Region) and to be at risk on return to  Iraq  from  members  of  the  PUK
   (Patriotic Union of Kurdistan) as a result of witnessing  PUK  supporters
   shooting and killing his neighbour on 5 January 2018 and  reporting  them
   to the police.

3. The appellant's  claim  was  refused  on  23  May  2019.  The  respondent
   considered that the appellant's claim to be at  risk  from  the  PUK  was
   speculative and that the account  he  had  given  was  inconsistent.  The
   respondent considered that even if the appellant had a genuine subjective
   fear,  that  fear  was  not  objectively  well-founded  as  there  was  a
   sufficiency of protection available to  him.  The  respondent  considered
   that the appellant would be able to obtain a  replacement  CSID  document
   and could enter and reside in the IKR. It was not accepted that he was at
   any risk on return and it was not accepted that his removal to Iraq would
   breach his human rights.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His  appeal  was  heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla. Judge Aujla did not find the appellant's
   claim to be a credible one. He did not accept the appellant's account  of
   problems following the shooting of a neighbour by the  PUK  and  did  not
   accept that he would be at risk of persecution or ill-treatment on return
   to his locality. Neither did he accept the appellant's claim to have lost
   contact with his family  in  February  2019  and  he  concluded  that  he
   remained in contact with his family in Iraq. The  judge  considered  that
   the appellant would be able to obtain  a  duplicate  CSID  at  the  Iraqi
   Embassy in the UK with information and documentation from his family,  or
   alternatively he could apply for a CSID in Baghdad and travel back to the
   IKR with his family. He would not be at risk on return and his removal to
   Iraq would not breach his human rights. The judge  accordingly  dismissed
   the appeal on all grounds.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  by  the  appellant
   on three  grounds:  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in  his  country
   assessment by confusing the area from  which  the  appellant  originated;
   that the judge made unsustainable findings on credibility; and  that  the
   judge had disregarded evidence about the difficulties for  the  appellant
   in obtaining a CSID.

6. Following the grant of  permission  to  appeal  it  was  found  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Kebede, at a hearing on 12 February 2020, that  the  judge
   had made no errors in his adverse credibility findings, but that  he  had
   erred in law in his assessment of risk on return, as follows:

         "Findings on the error of law

         11. I am in agreement with Ms Isherwood that  the  judge's  adverse
         credibility findings were open to him on the evidence available.  I
         find no merit in Ms Jaquiss's submission  that  his  findings  were
         infected by his confusion between the IKR and the KRI. Ms Jaquiss's
         challenge to the judge's adverse finding on the appellant's lack of
         knowledge about his neighbour's political  background  was  on  the
         basis that that had never been put to him.  She  submitted  further
         that the judge was wrong to find that the appellant's  claim  about
         the political dimension to the incident was "wild and speculative",
         when  that  was  based  upon  information  he  received  after  the
         incident. However, it seems to me  that  the  judge  gave  detailed
         consideration to the matter and was perfectly entitled to  conclude
         that the appellant had failed to give any proper explanation as  to
         why he believed the incident was a political killing. The appellant
         plainly had plenty of opportunity at his interview to provide  such
         an explanation and he did not need to be asked specifically why  he
         was aware that the shooting was political. The judge properly found
         the appellant's response to the questions asked about the  incident
         to be vague, he gave  detailed  and  cogent  reasons  at  [31]  for
         considering the appellant's account of the incident to  be  lacking
         in credibility and he was perfectly entitled to  draw  the  adverse
         conclusions that he did in that regard.


         12. Likewise, I disagree with Ms Jaquiss's  submission  challenging
         the judge's findings about the appellant's contact with his family.
         She submitted that the judge had not listened  to  the  appellant's
         evidence as he did not say that he had  had  no  contact  with  his
         family since coming to the UK. However, the judge clearly had  full
         regard to the appellant's evidence which he considered in detail at
         [32]. He was fully aware of the appellant's evidence  that  he  had
         contact with his family at the time he came here and that his claim
         was to have lost contact in February 2019, but he  did  not  accept
         that the appellant would have been unaware of  any  of  his  family
         members' telephone numbers other than his  father's  and  therefore
         did not accept his claim to have lost all contact with  his  family
         after February 2019. That was a conclusion which was entirely  open
         to him on the evidence before him and  it  seems  to  me  that  the
         challenge in the grounds in that respect is simply a disagreement.


         13. It is also relevant to note that the judge gave further reasons
         for doubting the credibility of  the  appellant's  claim  at  [30],
         noting inconsistencies in the accounts given at different points in
         the proceedings about his movements subsequent to the incident of 5
         January 2018. Neither the  grounds  nor  Ms  Jaquiss's  submissions
         addressed or challenged that  finding  and  indeed  the  judge  was
         entitled to draw the  adverse  conclusions  that  he  did  in  that
         regard. Accordingly I find no merit in the challenge in the grounds
         to the judge's adverse credibility findings and I consider that  he
         was fully and properly entitled to conclude that the appellant  had
         fabricated his claim and that he would he would be at  no  risk  on
         return to Iraq on that basis.


         14. However, I do find  merit  in  the  challenge  to  the  judge's
         country assessment. Ms Isherwood did not make clear submissions  to
         undermine  the  challenge  in  that  respect.  It  seems  that,  in
         attempting to clarify the appellant's place of origin, in light  of
         the  errors  he  identified  in  the  refusal  decision   and   the
         appellant's own skeleton, the  judge  unfortunately  added  to  the
         confusion himself. It appears that he was confused about  the  IKR,
         KRI and KAR, considering them to be different regions, whereas they
         were  different  names  for  the  same  region.  In  so  doing,  he
         considered the appellant's ability to return to Iraq and obtain the
         necessary documentation on a flawed basis and his findings in  that
         respect  cannot  therefore  be  considered  entirely  reliable   or
         sustainable. It may well be that that was not a material  error  on
         the basis of the country guidance available at  the  time,  as  the
         judge's findings on return to the IKR could arguably  be  taken  as
         consistent with internal relocation to  that  region.  However,  in
         light of  the  more  recent  guidance  in  SMO  which,  albeit  not
         available at the time of the  judge's  decision,  was  nevertheless
         heard before his decision and was  thus  based  upon  evidence  and
         information existing at that time, it seems to me  that  the  error
         has to be considered as material.


         15. Accordingly, whilst I find no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
         adverse credibility findings, I set aside the decision in  relation
         to the assessment of risk on return. That decision must be  re-made
         in the light of the most recent country guidance in SMO.  The  case
         will therefore be  listed  for  a  resumed  hearing  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal for consideration  of  the  question  of  the  appellant's
         ability to obtain the necessary civil status identity documentation
         and to return to his home  area  or  to  relocate  to  the  IKR  or
         elsewhere in Iraq. The judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  are
         preserved."

7. The following directions were made:

         "Directions


         1. No later than 7 days before the date  of  the  resumed  hearing,
            both parties are to file with the Upper Tribunal, and  serve  on
            the other party:


          - a skeleton argument addressing  the  above  issues,  namely  the
            appellant's  ability  to  obtain  the  necessary  civil   status
            identity documentation and to return to  his  home  area  or  to
            relocate to the IKR or elsewhere in Iraq in light  of  the  most
            recent country guidance in SMO.


          - any further evidence upon which  they  intend  to  rely  at  the
            hearing

         2. It is assumed that the hearing will  proceed  on  the  basis  of
            submissions only and therefore no  interpreter  will  be  booked
            unless a specific request is made."

8. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,
   further directions were issued by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keith  for  the
   onward disposal of the appeal.

9. The matter then came before us for a resumed, face-to-face, hearing.

Evidence

10. The appellant attended the hearing  and  gave  oral  evidence  with  the
   benefit of an interpreter. The appellant and  the  interpreter  confirmed
   they understood one another. The appellant confirmed  the  truth  of  his
   witness statements of 18 March  2019  and  30  November  2020.  In  those
   witness statements he says that he is an ethnic Kurd from  outside  Iraqi
   Kurdistan, from the Tapa Sawz village, Tuz Khurmato district,  Salahadeen
   (or Salah al Din) province. His native language  is  Kurdish  Sorani.  He
   does not speak Arabic. He was not challenged  on  this  evidence  by  the
   Secretary of State. In answer to questions from the Secretary  of  State,
   the appellant said that he did not have a CSID or a copy of it in the UK.
   He said he had a CSID in Iraq, but he gave it to the agent who helped him
   to come to the UK and the  agent  did  not  give  it  back  to  him.  The
   appellant did not ask for it back as he did not remain  in  contact  with
   the agent. The appellant had not tried to obtain a CSID card since  being
   in the UK. He said that his family used to have a Family  Book  in  Iraq,
   but he did not recall the reference. He said that the last  time  he  saw
   his family was when he was in Iraq, that he did have his  father's  phone
   number when he left Iraq but the last time they  spoke  was  in  February
   2019 and since then his father's phone number had  not  worked.  He  said
   that he had contacted British Red Cross for assistance with locating  his
   family, but they had been unable to assist because of  the  pandemic.  He
   said he had no family or friends in UK.


Submissions

Ms Cunha for the  Secretary  of  State  invited  us  to  find  that  as  the
appellant had previously had a CSID and a Family  Book  reference  he  could
obtain a CSID while in the UK with assistance from  his  family,  with  whom
she invited us to find he was still in contact, or could  contact  once  the
British Red Cross was able to provide assistance. She said that the  Laissez
Passer to enable the appellant to travel to Baghdad  could  be  obtained  by
the Foreign Office taking into account details that he could provide and  he
would then be interviewed by the Iraqi authorities in the UK. She  submitted
that  alternatively  the  appellant  as  a  healthy  young  male   who   has
demonstrated great fortitude in coming to the UK, he could on return  simply
remain in Baghdad,  where  the  situation  for  Kurds  has  improved  as  is
apparent from SMO. Alternatively,  he  could  through  his  family  in  Iraq
obtain a CSID. She submitted that, as an Iraqi Kurd from the Iraqi  side  he
shared the characteristics of the Kurdish people in Baghdad.

In the light of the  preserved  adverse  credibility  findings,  Ms  Jaquiss
quite properly did not address us again on  the  appellant's  asylum  claim,
but argued that the appellant's humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
claims should succeed. Ms Jaquiss submitted that the appellant could not  be
returned to Iraq because, applying the country guidance in SMO, he  was  not
a person  who  could  obtain  the  necessary  CSID  document  and  he  would
accordingly be at risk of treatment in breach of Article 3 of  the  ECHR  on
return. She submitted,  first,  that  it  would  not  be  possible  for  the
Secretary of State to obtain a Laissez Passer for the appellant  in  the  UK
because according to  paragraphs  2.6.23-24  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
Country Policy  and  Information  Note:  Iraq:  Internal  relocation,  civil
documentation and returns (June 2020),  as  at  April  2020,  there  was  no
requirement for interview for a Failed Asylum Seeker, but  they  would  need
to hold one of a number of identity documents (including a  CSID),  none  of
which the appellant has, before they would issue a Laissez Passer.

She further submitted that even  if  a  Laissez  Passer  could  be  obtained
without a CSID, he could still not be returned  to  Iraq  because  he  would
need a CSID in order to survive there. He would not  be  able  to  obtain  a
replacement in Baghdad and therefore, in accordance with SMO, he would  need
to obtain a CSID from his local office in Tuz.  However,  he  could  not  do
that as he could not travel from Baghdad  without  a  CSID  and  his  family
could not obtain it for him 'by proxy' because the situation of conflict  in
the appellant's local area means it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  this
could be done (applying paragraph 14 of the headnote in SMO). Neither  could
he obtain a replacement CSID in the UK because he was not in  possession  of
any documents establishing his identity.  Finally,  she  submitted  that  he
could not in any  event  return  to  his  home  area  because  the  conflict
situation in the area would mean that returning the appellant to  that  area
would give rise to a  real  risk  of  a  breach  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
Qualification Directive or Article 3.


Discussion and Findings

11. Although Ms Jaquiss invites us to start with the question of  whether  a
   Laissez Passer could  be  obtained  for  the  appellant  from  the  Iraqi
   authorities in the UK, we do not consider that to be the proper  starting
   point. Whether the necessary documents can  be  obtained  to  enable  the
   appellant to be removed from the UK is a practical question that goes  to
   the issue of whether it will ultimately be possible for the Secretary  of
   State to remove the appellant  from  the  UK  if  his  current  claim  is
   unsuccessful and he does not make arrangements to return voluntarily;  it
   is not a matter that goes to the merits of his humanitarian protection or
   human rights claims: see HF (Iraq) and Others v Secretary  of  State  for
   the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1276 at paragraphs 99-101  per  Elias
   LJ with whom Fulford LJ and Maurice Kay LJ agreed and paragraph 9 of  the
   headnote in SMO). In any event, we note from paragraph 375  of  SMO  that
   there is an interview process whereby a Laissez Passer  may  be  obtained
   without documents.

12. Applying the country guidance in SMO, the issues for us  to  decide  are
   therefore:

        i. Whether it is reasonably likely that the appellant will be  able
           to obtain a CSID while in the UK or from Baghdad (if  returned),
           either himself or with the assistance of his family;
       ii. If he can obtain a CSID, whether the situation  of  conflict  in
           the appellant's home area is  such  that  conditions  on  return
           would be reasonably likely to  breach  Article  3  of  the  ECHR
           and/or Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive;
      iii. If so,  or  if  he  cannot  obtain  a  CSID,  whether  he  could
           reasonably be expected to relocate to (or remain) in Baghdad.

13. As to the first issue (whether the appellant can obtain  a  CSID  either
   in the UK or on return to Baghdad), the relevant  part  of  the  guidance
   from the headnote in SMO is as follows:


       C. CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION


       11. The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric  Iraqi  National
           Identity Card - the INID.  As a general matter, it is  necessary
           for an individual to have one of these two documents in order to
           live and travel within Iraq without  encountering  treatment  or
           conditions which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR.   Many  of  the
           checkpoints in the country are manned by Shia  militia  who  are
           not controlled  by  the  GOI  and  are  unlikely  to  permit  an
           individual without a CSID or an INID to  pass.   A  valid  Iraqi
           passport is not recognised as acceptable proof of  identity  for
           internal travel.


       12. A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the  absence  of  a
           CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is  not,  in
           any  event,  a   recognised   identity   document.    There   is
           insufficient evidence to show that returnees are issued  with  a
           'certification letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show  that  any
           such document would be recognised internally as acceptable proof
           of identity.


       13. Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID  within  Iraq,
           replacement  CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi   Consular
           facilities.  Whether an individual will  be  able  to  obtain  a
           replacement CSID whilst in  the  UK  depends  on  the  documents
           available and, critically, the availability of  the  volume  and
           page reference of the entry in the Family Book  in  Iraq,  which
           system continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity  process.
           Given the importance of that information,  most  Iraqi  citizens
           will recall it. That  information  may  also  be  obtained  from
           family members, although it is  necessary  to  consider  whether
           such relatives are on the father's or the mother's side  because
           the registration system is patrilineal.


       14. Once in Iraq, it remains the case that an individual is expected
           to  attend  their  local  CSA  office  in  order  to  obtain   a
           replacement document.   All  CSA  offices  have  now  re-opened,
           although the extent to which records have been destroyed by  the
           conflict  with  ISIL  is  unclear,  and  is   likely   to   vary
           significantly depending on  the  extent  and  intensity  of  the
           conflict in the area in question.


       15. An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is not likely  to
           be able to obtain a replacement document  there,  and  certainly
           not within a reasonable time.  Neither the Central  Archive  nor
           the  assistance  facilities  for  IDPs  are  likely  to   render
           documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee.


       16. The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity  document  by
           the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on  return  to  Iraq,
           has reduced due to the introduction  of  the  INID  system.   In
           order to obtain an INID, an individual must attend  their  local
           CSA office  in  person  to  enrol  their  biometrics,  including
           fingerprints and iris scans.  The  CSA  offices  in  which  INID
           terminals have been installed are unlikely - as a result of  the
           phased replacement of the CSID system - to issue a CSID, whether
           to an individual in person or to a proxy.   The reducing  number
           of CSA offices in which INID terminals have not  been  installed
           will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals  and  their  proxies
           upon production of the necessary information.

14. The question for us in the appellant's case is therefore whether  it  is
   reasonably likely (to the lower standard of proof) that he does not  have
   available to him the volume and page reference of the entry in the Family
   Book in Iraq so that it is reasonably likely that he will  on  return  be
   without a CSID and therefore at risk of treatment in breach of Article  3
   if he seeks to travel from Baghdad.

15. SMO holds that although most Iraqi citizens will recall the Family  Book
   reference, the information can also be obtained  from  relatives  on  the
   father's side. In this case, the appellant accepts that  his  family  did
   have such a page reference, but he claims not to be able to recall it. We
   are prepared to accept that the appellant genuinely  cannot  recall  this
   information as he was not challenged on this point by  the  Secretary  of
   State. However, in any event, we find that  the  appellant  could  obtain
   this information from his relatives. In this respect, the finding of  the
   First-Tier Tribunal that it was not credible that the appellant  had  not
   been in contact with his family since February 2019 was preserved by  the
   Upper Tribunal on appeal, and we have heard no evidence at  this  hearing
   that would cause us to  revisit  that  finding.  The  appellant  in  this
   hearing simply repeated the evidence he had given before  the  First-Tier
   Tribunal in this  respect.  It  follows  that  since  the  appellant  did
   previously have a CSID and a Family Book reference, and since it has been
   found as a matter of fact that he is in contact with his family, applying
   the guidance in SMO it is reasonably likely  that  he  will  be  able  to
   obtain a replacement CSID while in the UK.

16.  Alternatively, if we are wrong about the above, then we find  that  the
   appellant would be able to obtain a  CSID  with  the  assistance  of  his
   family once he had arrived in Baghdad. In this respect, the effect of the
   guidance in SMO is that the appellant would need his family to attend his
   local CSA office in order to obtain a replacement document. In SMO it was
   found that all CSA offices have re-opened, but whether a  member  of  his
   family would be able to obtain a replacement CSID would depend on whether
   records in that particular CSA office have been destroyed by the conflict
   with ISIL (paragraph 14), and on whether that particular local office has
   introduced the INID system (paragraph 16). On these points, the effect of
   SMO is that we are to assume that a CSID can still  be  obtained  from  a
   local office unless the individual appellant  establishes  on  the  lower
   standard that they cannot obtain a CSID by the use of  a  proxy,  whether
   from the UK or on arrival in Baghdad: see paragraph  389.  The  appellant
   has not adduced such evidence. The appellant has only introduced  general
   evidence about the level of conflict in the appellant's home area.  There
   is no evidence about what effect that has  had  on  the  availability  of
   replacement CSIDs in the appellant's home area. It follows that, applying
   SMO, and the established factual finding that the appellant is in contact
   with his family, we must find that the appellant will be able to obtain a
   replacement CSID by proxy from Baghdad. Or, at least, there is sufficient
   likelihood of that so that it is not reasonably likely that the appellant
   will be unable to obtain a CSID and thus be at risk on return.

17. We now turn to the second issue, whether the situation  of  conflict  in
   the appellant's home area is such that  conditions  on  return  would  be
   reasonably likely to breach Article 3 of the ECHR and/or Article 15(c) of
   the Qualification  Directive.  In  SMO  it  was  held  that  the  general
   intensity of the continuing conflict in Iraq was not such as to give rise
   to a real risk of breach of Article 15(c). However,  Ms  Jaquiss  submits
   that it was in SMO accepted as arguable that  an  ethnic  Kurd  from  Tuz
   Kurmato might face risk on return there, it being an area with particular
   ethno-sectarian conflict, and  that  the  Tribunal  must  apply  a  fact-
   sensitive,  sliding-scale  assessment  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
   personal characteristics and the conditions of the area in question.  She
   referred in this regard to paragraph 332 of SMO. Paragraph 332 does  not,
   however, say quite what Ms Jaquiss says it does, nor  does  it  have  the
   significance that she attaches to it.

18. First, paragraph 332 is in the  section  of  SMO  dealing  with  Article
   15(b) (inhuman or degrading treatment) of  the  Qualification  Directive,
   not Article 15(c) (threat to life through  indiscriminate  violence/armed
   conflict). By this point in the judgment, the Upper Tribunal had  already
   concluded (at paragraph 285) that even in the worst-affected  governorate
   in Iraq (Ninewa) the intensity of the violence in 2018 was not indicative
   of a general level of threat which engages Article 15(c)  and  that  "The
   evidence  clearly  shows  that  the  degree  of  indiscriminate  violence
   characterising the  current  armed  conflict  taking  place  in  Baghdad,
   Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah, Salah Al-Din [the appellant's region] and  Anbar
   is not at such a high level that substantial grounds have been shown  for
   believing that any civilian returned there would solely on account of his
   presence there face a real risk of a threat to his life or  person."  The
   Upper Tribunal then went on (at paragraph 291) to hold that, nonetheless,
   an individualised assessment must be made as required by Article  4(3)(c)
   of  the  Qualification  Directive  to  consider  whether  an   individual
   applicant might be able to show  that  he  is  specifically  affected  by
   reason of factors particular to his personal circumstances - the 'sliding
   scale' to which Ms Jaquiss refers.

19. The Upper  Tribunal  then  considered  a  range  of  potential  personal
   circumstances, before concluding that  the  following  matters  would  be
   relevant to  the  sliding-scale  assessment  (headnote,  paragraphs  4-5;
   reflecting paragraphs 313-314 of the judgment):

         4. Those with an actual or  perceived  association  with  ISIL  are
            likely to be at enhanced risk throughout Iraq.  In  those  areas
            in which ISIL retains an  active  presence,  those  who  have  a
            current personal association with local or  national  government
            or the security apparatus are likely to be at enhanced risk.


         5. The  impact  of  any  of  the  personal  characteristics  listed
            immediately  below  must  be  carefully  assessed  against   the
            situation in the area to  which  return  is  contemplated,  with
            particular reference to the extent of ongoing ISIL activity  and
            the behaviour of the security actors in control  of  that  area.
            Within the framework of such an  analysis,  the  other  personal
            characteristics   which   are   capable   of   being   relevant,
            individually and cumulatively, to  the  sliding  scale  analysis
            required by Article 15(c) are as follows:


          . Opposition to or  criticism  of  the  GOI,  the  KRG  or  local
            security actors;


          . Membership of a national, ethnic or religious  group  which  is
            either in the minority in the area in question, or  not  in  de
            facto control of that area;


          . LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to  Islamic  mores  and
            wealthy or Westernised individuals;


          . Humanitarian or medical staff and those associated with Western
            organisations or security forces;


          . Women and children without genuine family support; and


          . Individuals with disabilities.

20. Of the above characteristics, the only one potentially relevant  to  the
   appellant is that he is an ethnic Kurd, and Kurds are in  a  minority  in
   Iraq as a whole and in the  Salah  al  Din  governorate  from  which  the
   appellant comes (see paragraph 262 of SMO). However, it is apparent  from
   paragraph 300 of SMO that it does  not  follow  that  Kurds  will  be  at
   particular risk in that region. In that regard too, it  is  necessary  to
   carry out a contextual evaluation rather than a make any  presumption  as
   the Upper Tribunal explained in that paragraph (emphasis added):

    300. Members of religious and minority ethnic groups are considered  by
    the UNHCR  to  be  likely  to  be  in  need  of  international  refugee
    protection in  areas  where  ISIL  retains  a  presence.   As  we  have
    underlined throughout this decision, we emphasise our  appreciation  of
    UNHCR's unique position and expertise in such matters.  There  is  some
    danger in applying too broad a brush in trying to describe this cohort,
    however.  The first danger is in the use of the word 'minority' in  the
    context of Iraq.   As  we  have  endeavoured  to  explain,  the  ethno-
    religious demography of Iraq is varied by region.  Whilst  Sunni  Arabs
    are in the minority across the country as a whole, for  example,  there
    are areas in which they comprise the majority.  The same might also  be
    said in respect of the Kurds.  The second difficulty is  to  assume  or
    potentially to assume that an ethnic group is at a disadvantage because
    it is statistically in the minority in a particular area.  Whilst  such
    an assumption might have been proper in the past, the proliferation  of
    the PMUs has altered the balance of power in particular areas, often to
    the detriment of the majority.  It was a familiar theme in  Dr  Fatah's
    written and oral evidence, for example, that the Shia  militia  had  in
    certain areas renamed buildings and taken  down  Kurdish  symbols.  The
    third danger is in treating the presence or absence  of  ISIL  from  an
    area as a binary concept.  As we have explained at some  length  above,
    ISIL retains a presence in a number of areas but the size and influence
    of that presence, and ISIL's levels of  activity,  vary  significantly.
    Whenever it is submitted that an individual is at enhanced risk on this
    basis, therefore, it is  necessary  to  evaluate  the  submission  with
    particular care, with reference to  the  composition  of  the  area  in
    question, the local balance of power and the extent of ISIL activity in
    the area in question.  With respect to the UNHCR, we  consider  it  too
    simplistic to state that religious or ethnic minorities are  likely  to
    be at increased risk  in  areas  in  which  ISIL  retains  a  presence.
    Membership of an ethnic or religious minority may increase the risk  to
    an individual but a contextual evaluation rather than a presumption  is
    required.

21. In this case, therefore, what needs  to  be  evaluated  is  whether  the
   appellant is at enhanced risk in Salah al Din as a Kurd, having regard to
   the composition of the area in question, the local balance of  power  and
   the extent of ISIL activity in the area in question. We do  not  consider
   that any of the evidence that the appellant has adduced  on  this  appeal
   comes close to demonstrating that. Much  of  the  new  evidence  goes  to
   conditions generally in the region (and thus to  matters  in  respect  of
   which the country guidance in SMO is binding unless and until revised  in
   another country guidance case). Some of  it  concerns  the  city  of  Tuz
   Khurmatu and therefore is not relevant to the appellant who comes from  a
   village outside of the city. The only evidence that Ms Jaquiss points  to
   in relation to ethnic tensions and risks to Kurds specifically (paragraph
   19 of her skeleton argument) pre-dates  the  guidance  in  SMO  and  thus
   cannot assist in shedding light on any particular risk to Kurds in Salah-
   al-Din arising since that decision. In any event, it does not  go  beyond
   the risks to Kurds that were already considered and taken into account in
   SMO when the Upper Tribunal decided that there was no generalised risk of
   breach of Article 15(c) (we have in particular had regard in this respect
   to the Upper  Tribunal's  findings  in  relation  to  the  Salah  al  Din
   governorate at paragraphs 262-267).

22. Ms Jaquiss also points  (paragraph  18  of  her  skeleton  argument)  to
   evidence of economic conditions generally. This evidence is  relevant  to
   Article 15(b) of the  Qualification  Directive  and  not  Article  15(c).
   However, in relation to Article 15(b), paragraph 332 of SMO on  which  Ms
   Jaquiss seeks to rely in fact provides a complete and binding  answer  in
   this case. What paragraph 332 says is (emphasis added):

    332. It is imperative to recall that  the  minimum  level  of  severity
    required by Article 3 is relative and depends on all the  circumstances
    of the case, including the duration of the treatment, its physical  and
    mental effects and the sex, age and state of health of  the  individual
    concerned: Saadi v Italy (2009) 49 EHRR 30.  Although it is clear to us
    that a documented, healthy male would not, on return to a home area  in
    the formerly contested areas, encounter conditions in breach of Article
    3 ECHR, additional vulnerabilities including those considered under the
    'siding scale' of Article 15(c)  might conceivably combine to cross the
    N v UK threshold.  In considering any such submission, decision  makers
    will nevertheless wish to recall that that the combination  of  factors
    in Said, including mental health problems and a lack of family support,
    offset by clan support and remittances from the UK, were  held  by  the
    Court of Appeal to be so short of the N v UK threshold that remittal to
    the Upper Tribunal would serve no purpose: [32]-[33] refers.

23. Since the appellant would be a healthy male returning to his  home  area
   who is (or will be) documented, his return will not breach Article 3 ECHR
   or Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification  Directive.  His  only  potential
   'additional vulnerability' is that he is a Kurd, but there is no evidence
   that Kurds are any more at risk than any other group  from  the  kind  of
   economic problems relied on by the appellant.

24. In the light of our findings on the first two issues, we do not need  to
   consider the third issue, but for completeness  we  record  our  findings
   with regard to the possibility of the appellant relocating to Baghdad. Ms
   Jaquiss did not advance any argument to  counter  Ms  Cunha's  submission
   that the appellant could reasonably be expected to relocate  to  Baghdad.
   However, we find that if the appellant is documented, he could reasonably
   be expect to relocate to Baghdad, but if he is not documented (i.e. if we
   are wrong on the first issue), then relocation is not an option.

25. In this respect, SMO holds that the guidance in AA (Iraq)  (set  out  in
   Annex A to SMO) is still relevant. Paragraphs 10 and 11 of  the  guidance
   in AA (Iraq) provide:

10.  As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a
person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad City or (subject to
paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

11.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P to
relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however, likely to be
relevant:
(a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part C above);
(b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely to find
employment);
(c)  whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to accommodate
him;
(d)  whether P is a lone female (women face greater difficulties than men
in finding employment);
(e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or rent
accommodation;
(f)  whether P is from a minority community;
(g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there is some
evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are provided with the support
generally given to IDPs.

26. Paragraph 414 of SMO further explains that:


    In order  to  reside  in  Baghdad,  an  individual  from  the  Formerly
    Contested Areas will require security clearance and "two sponsors  from
    the neighbourhood in which they intend to reside as well as  a  support
    letter from the local mukhtar".  We  have  little  evidence  about  the
    operation of those requirements in practice and are compelled  to  draw
    our own inferences.  When considering the feasibility of an  individual
    complying with these  requirements,  we  think  that  the  position  in
    Baghdad is very likely  to  be  different  from  the  position  in  the
    Formerly Contested Areas or the  Disputed  Territories.   The  security
    situation in those areas is decidedly more tense than it is in Baghdad,
    in which security and freedom of movement is such that the  Green  Zone
    has opened to the public.  There is some evidence of IDP  camps  around
    Baghdad being closed  and  some  evidence  of  individuals  from  areas
    formerly controlled by ISIL being pressured to return  to  those  areas
    (the UNHCR letter of 25 April 2019 refers, for example).  But there  is
    nothing before us to suggest that a documented  individual  of  working
    age who is returned to the capital, potentially with a grant under  the
    Voluntary Returns Scheme, would be unable to secure two sponsors and  a
    support letter from the local mukhtar of the area in which they propose
    to reside.  Were there any such problem, we would have  expected  there
    to be more evidence of people in this category being refused  residence
    in Baghdad.  The UNHCR  in  particular  does  not  refer  to  any  such
    difficulties, and the evidence presented to us about Baghdad  does  not
    reflect the extensive concern over  secondary  displacement  which  has
    been voiced in respect of other areas.

27. That finding makes the likelihood of obtaining a sponsor  for  residence
   in Baghdad dependent on the individual being  'documented'.  Accordingly,
   if the appellant has or obtains a CSID (as we have found he is likely  to
   be able to), he would likely also be able to access accommodation.  As  a
   failed asylum seeker, he would likely also qualify for support with  food
   from the Public Distribution System (see paragraph 329 of SMO). While  he
   is likely to have difficulty finding employment given that  there  is  no
   evidence that he has family members or friends in Baghdad, does not speak
   Arabic, and is from a minority community, we find that it  would  not  be
   unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad  if  we  are  right
   about the likelihood of him being able to obtain a  CSID.  If  he  cannot
   obtain a CSID, however, we consider that it would be  unreasonably  harsh
   to expect him to relocate to Baghdad because, while he would likely still
   obtain assistance with food, SMO indicates that it is unlikely  he  would
   obtain a sponsor for accommodation and it would be very difficult for him
   to obtain employment given the aforementioned factors. In  the  preceding
   country guidance case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds) [2018] UKUT 212  it  was  held
   (paragraph 98) that an ethnic Kurd without a CSID and no  family  members
   in Baghdad could not reasonably be expected to relocate to Baghdad and it
   does not appear to us that  anything  in  SMO  means  that  position  has
   changed (albeit that SMO sets out a  slightly  different  multi-factorial
   list to consider).

28. It follows from our reasons  above  that  the  appellant's  humanitarian
   protection and human rights  claims  must  fail.  His  asylum  claim  was
   rejected by the First-Tier Tribunal on the basis of  adverse  credibility
   findings and has not been renewed on appeal.


DECISION

29. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error  of  law  and  the
   decision was set  aside.  We  re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
   appellant's appeal on all grounds.





Signed   H Stout
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Stout                         Dated: 21
December 2020

