
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/05516/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 January 2018                          |On 5 February 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     MDC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hussain, Raiyad Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born  on  14  February
    1975.  He made a claim for asylum, which was refused by  the  Secretary
    of State in a decision  of  18  May  2017.   He  appealed  against  the
    decision and his appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Froom in a decision promulgated on 4 July 2017 following a  hearing  on
    30 June 2017.  Judge Froom found the Appellant to be wholly lacking  in
    credibility and dismissed his claim to be at risk  on  account  of  his
    sexuality. He found that the Appellant was not homosexual as claimed.

2.   The Appellant  was  granted  permission  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal J Gibb on 11 September 2017.  The salient parts of  the  grant
    of permission read as follows:

         "3.  The grounds, accompanied by a copy of the appellant's 28  page
             patient record, complain that the judge  erred  in:  regarding
             the appellant's claim to be unwell at the time of  his  asylum
             interview and at the hearing  as  a  fabrication  designed  to
             delay removal.  The grounds claim that the Secretary of  State
             has  failed  to  respond  to  the  appellant's   ill   health,
             incorrectly certified him to be fit to attend  interview  when
             he was not, and the appellant has been denied  the  chance  to
             present his claim and prepare for his hearing.


         4.   The grounds are arguable,  and  justify  further  examination.
             The patient record is incomplete without  the  clinic  letters
             and test results from Hillingdon Hospital referred to but  not
             appended.


         5.   The determination is thorough  and  detailed,  but  there  are
             comments by the judge at [10] and [23] to the effect  that  he
             did not accept the appellant's claims to be unwell and drew an
             adverse inference as to credibility as a  result.   The  judge
             also referred to the appellant's failure to  prepare  for  the
             hearing and provide supporting evidence at [25], a point  that
             would have been impacted by a genuine claim of ill health."


3.   The matter came before me on 16 October 2017.   On  this  occasion  the
    Appellant was unrepresented  and  sought  an  adjournment  to  instruct
    solicitors and to obtain medical evidence.  I  granted  an  adjournment
    and the matter came before me on 8  January  2018.  The  Appellant  was
    represented  on  8  January  by  Mr  Hussain.   The   thrust   of   his
    representations was that the medical evidence now produced  established
    that the Appellant was unwell at  the  relevant  time  rendering  Judge
    Froom's findings unsafe.  Mr Melvin submitted that  the  Appellant  has
    been feigning illness and the  evidence  now  produced,  that  was  not
    before the judge, does not establish  that  he  has  a  genuine  health
    condition.

4.   The Appellant's asylum interview was scheduled  to  take  place  on  18
    February 2017.  However, this was cancelled he stated that he  was  not
    feeling well enough.  A  healthcare  referral  was  made  to  establish
    whether he was fit for interview and on  25  April  2017  there  was  a
    response from healthcare at the detention centre stating  that  he  was
    not suffering from any medical condition that would  warrant  detention
    unsuitable nor render him unfit for interview.   A  substantive  asylum
    interview was re-booked to take place on 8 May 2017.  However, this was
    cancelled because the Appellant again stated that he was too unwell  to
    attend.  The hearing before Judge Froom took place on 30 June 2017.

5.   The judge made findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  health  as
    follows:

         "10. By coincidence, on 26 June 2017, I had refused  the  appellant
             bail at a  separate  hearing.   The  appellant  attended  that
             hearing through a video link.  On that occasion the  appellant
             had been represented by counsel.  I refused bail.  It is right
             to record that, among my reasons for finding there was a  high
             risk that the appellant  would  abscond  and  not  attend  his
             asylum hearing were the fact the appellant had  a  history  of
             failing to attend his asylum interview and he had not provided
             a shred of evidence to show  he  had  any  significant  health
             condition.  In fact, Healthcare had confirmed he was fit to be
             interviewed.   I  inferred  the  appellant  was   deliberately
             obstructing  the  process.   I  also  gave   weight   to   the
             appellant's attempt to persuade me that he had  not  tried  to
             escape  from  immigration  officers  during  the   enforcement
             operation in February 2017 notwithstanding the contents  of  a
             report I was shown to the contrary.   I  did  not  regard  the
             appellant's account of having jumped over a fence  because  he
             believed there might  be  a  fire  in  the  restaurant  to  be
             credible.  I concluded the appellant was prepared  to  mislead
             when it suited his purposes.


         11.  In the light of this, I considered whether, in view of my duty
             of judicial impartiality, it was appropriate for  me  to  hear
             the asylum appeal as well.  I consulted the Guide to  Judicial
             Conduct, dated March 2013, at  paragraph  3.11.   This  states
             that a previous finding by a judge against a party,  including
             findings on credibility, will  rarely  provide  a  ground  for
             disqualification.  I  carefully  considered  my  position  and
             concluded it was appropriate for me to  continue  and  that  I
             could give the appellant a fair  hearing.   The  determinative
             issue in his appeal was likely to be whether  or  not  he  was
             gay.  This was not a matter canvassed at the bail  application
             and in no  sense  had  the  matter  been  prejudged  the  bail
             hearing.  In any event, the reasons I gave for  refusing  bail
             were based on my assessment of the risk of  absconding  and  I
             could approach the matter of the appellant's asylum and  human
             rights claims with an open mind  notwithstanding  the  reasons
             given for refusing bail.


         23.  I considered the appellant's explanations  for  not  attending
             his interviews.  He claimed on both occasions to be  suffering
             from acute stomach pains.  However, Healthcare confirmed after
             the first aborted interview that he was not suffering from any
             health condition.  The appellant's evidence to me  was  vague.
             He said he had pain in his stomach and thought he may have  an
             ulcer.  He said he was taking paracetamol for  it.   That  was
             what he had been given.  He took another 'red tablet'  but  he
             did not know what it  was.   I  do  not  accept  he  would  be
             prescribed paracetamol if he was suffering  from  a  suspected
             ulcer as it is well-known paracetamol irritates  the  stomach.
             The appellant was plainly able to  engage  at  both  his  bail
             hearing and the asylum appeal hearing.  He was able to  answer
             questions.  I do not accept he was too unwell  to  attend  his
             interview and I draw an adverse inference from this behaviour.


         24.  I gave the appellant  ample  opportunity  to  provide  a  full
             account at  the  hearing  but  his  evidence  was  vague.   He
             mentioned having some relationships with men in the UK but  he
             did not volunteer any  additional  information.   He  did  not
             appear to have thought  about  obtaining  supporting  evidence
             from these men.  He said none  of  his  friends  knew  he  was
             bisexual but his cousin and her husband knew.  Asked  why  she
             had not attended to support his appeal,  he  said  he  thought
             they were on holiday.  He accepted his  cousin's  husband  had
             attended as the proposed surety at his  bail  hearing  earlier
             this week.  He did not know where they had  gone  on  holiday.
             He did not ask for an adjournment so that they  could  attend.
             Even allowing for a degree of reticence and  embarrassment  in
             discussing publicly such personal matters, the  appellant  was
             plainly unable to give the kind of detailed evidence regarding
             his sexual experiences which could reasonably be expected of a
             person  claiming  to  fear  persecution  on  account  of   his
             bisexuality."



6.   I have before me evidence that was not before Judge Froom.  I have  the
    Appellant's patient records covering his time in detention  between  27
    March 2017 and 30 July 2017.  In addition, I have  correspondence  from
    medical professionals and X-ray reports.  I have done my best to  build
    a picture of  the  Appellant's  health  condition  from  the  piecemeal
    evidence before me.  I am not  a  medical  professional.  There  is  no
    comprehensive  medical  report.  The  evidence  establishes  that   the
    Appellant has since 27 March 2017 complained of ill health. On 17  July
    2017 he was referred to radiology and an X-ray was taken of his  chest.
    The report pertaining to that reads as follows:

         "Impression - right upper  lobe  consolidation  with  volume  loss.
         Findings  would  be  consistent  with   infection   including   TB.
         Malignancy is less likely but  is  within  the  differential  given
         volume loss.  Clinical correlation is advised.


         Onward hospital referral to the TB clinic if clinically appropriate
         or respiratory should be  considered  for  further  assessment  and
         management."


7.   As a result of the X-ray he was put into isolation whilst in  detention
    pending the results of further tests because it was suspected  that  he
    had TB.  He was referred to the TB unit.  The Appellant was seen by his
    GP on 22 July 2017, who thought that it was likely  that  he  would  be
    tested positive for TB. On 2 August 2017 there  was  an  entry  in  the
    patient notes which indicates that the Appellant  was  tested  negative
    for TB.  However, he remained in isolation until he had  been  seen  at
    the chest clinic and further tests were undertaken.

8.   There is a clinic letter of  21  November  2017  prepared  by  Dr  Emma
    McGuire of Barts Health NHS Trust (Department for Infectious  Diseases)
    following a review of the Appellant on  21  November,  which  indicates
    that the Appellant has started TB therapy.  The following is stated:

         "I have reviewed the investigations done to date and discussed  the
         findings with MDC today.  I've explained that the MRI scan  of  his
         head was normal, and the scan of his spine has  shown  degenerative
         changes at multiple levels without compression of the nerves.   The
         bronchoscopy results are so  far  negative  on  TB  culture.   I've
         explained that the liver scans have shown fatty liver  changes  and
         simple cysts which were reviewed at the  HPB  MDT.   We  have  been
         advised that  these  appear  benign  and  do  not  warrant  further
         investigations from an HPB perspective.


         We discussed today the need to continue to investigate for  TB  and
         for other potential underlying causes  of  his  persistent  fevers,
         sweats, weight loss and pains.  I've explained that a diary of  his
         symptoms and fever would be extremely useful  and  that  he  should
         register with a GP and see an optometrist.  I've discussed his case
         with Dr Lambourne today and we have agreed with
         MDC to arrange a CT PET  scan  and  to  send  further  blood  tests
         detailed below in order to exclude other less common infections and
         to assess for any evidence of underlying malignancy."

9.   Under the heading "Radiology" the  following  is  stated:  "Appearances
    likely to represent old TB.  There is no evidence of  active  disease."
    Under the heading "Plan/Recommendations" the following is stated:


         "As MDC continues to be unwell and under investigation for possible
         disseminated TB or other inflammatory condition  which  is  causing
         significant pain we strongly recommend that he no [sic] be made  to
         wait in queues for detention centre 'check-ins'  and  would  advise
         reducing the number of check-ins which he is required  to  make  in
         person if possible."

    The clinical outcome form  indicates  that  there  will  be  continuing
    active monitoring of the Appellant's health condition.

10.  The medical evidence that has now  been  presented  to  me  (both  that
    which pre-dates the hearing  and  that  which  post-dates  the  hearing
    before Judge Froom) does not undermine  Judge  Froom's  conclusion.  He
    would not have reached a different conclusion had it been  before  him.
    It does not  establish  unfairness.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had TB at the material time or any other  properly  diagnosed
    condition.  The evidence establishes that he complained of symptoms and
    told medical practitioners he felt unwell and underwent tests. There is
    evidence that he has had TB, but not in the recent past.  There  is  no
    evidence of any further tests/diagnoses after November 2017.  There  is
    no evidence that the Appellant was too unwell to  properly  participate
    in the proceedings on 30 June 2017 or attend  two  pre-arranged  asylum
    interviews in April and May 2017.  The  Appellant  complained  that  he
    thought he had a stomach ulcer at the hearing  before  the  FtT.  Judge
    Froom was entitled to attach weight to the evidence from Healthcare and
    the circumstances  of  the  bail  hearing  and  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant was deliberately obstructing the process.  The  evidence  now
    relied on does not undermine the conclusions reached by  him.  Had  the
    patient notes and other material before me been before Judge  Froom  he
    would not have reached a different conclusion. They  do  not  establish
    that the Appellant had a genuine health problem capable  of  preventing
    him from engaging with the proceedings and prepare his case.

11.  The judge properly attached  weight  to  the  delay  by  the  Appellant
    making an asylum claim. In his view this significantly  undermined  his
    credibility. The Appellant made a human rights application in 2009.  He
    did not mention his sexuality or any other reason for fearing return to
    Bangladesh at that time (despite the  fact  that  his  evidence  before
    Judge Froom was that he had by that time had a  long-term  relationship
    with another man). The judge took into account the Appellant's evidence
    that he realised it was dangerous to be gay  in  Bangladesh  about  six
    months ago. The judge rejected this and was entitled to. The  Appellant
    had lived in Bangladesh until he was 24.  The judge concluded that  the
    Appellant's failure to claim asylum until after  he  was  detained  and
    facing removal indicated that he did  so  in  order  to  frustrate  his
    removal and that his claim was not credible.

12.  There is no evidence post 21 November 2017  which  would  suggest  that
    the  further  investigations  recommended  by  Dr  McGuire  have   been
    undertaken and if so the results of those.   I  note  from  the  clinic
    letter that the next clinic date recorded  is  12  December  2017.  The
    Appellant did not produce evidence at the hearing before me relating to
    this. He is no longer in detention.

13.  For all of the above reasons I conclude that Judge  Froom  had  he  had
    the evidence before him that I have been shown by the  Appellant  would
    not have reached  a  different  conclusion.   There  is  no  procedural
    unfairness and the decision of Judge Froom is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 28 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
