
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05359/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 28th March 2019                 |On 26 April 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                               MR KHURRAM GUL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
                    Brown, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
       Tribunal Sean Fox dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
       grounds.

    2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  As a Shia Muslim he claims
       to fear persecution on the grounds of religion in his home area of
       Gilgit-Baltistan.  He also claims that he is in a relationship with a
       British citizen and that he suffers from certain medical conditions.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted on several grounds, relating chiefly
       to the structure of the decision. It was arguable that the judge
       erred by beginning his consideration with section 8 of the Asylum and
       Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 and by considering
       the proportionality of removal before considering the protection
       claim.  It was also arguable that the judge erred by not making
       findings of fact on the question of the appellant's faith and by not
       properly considering Article 8.



Submissions

    4. Before me Mr Winter acknowledged that to consider proportionality
       before assessing the claim for protection, although unusual, was not
       material to the outcome of the appeal.  I agree with Mr Winter on
       this point and this ground, the first stated in the application for
       permission to appeal, requires no further attention.

    5. The second ground was the contention that the judge erred by
       considering section 8 of the 2004 Act before looking at the evidence
       as a whole.  In this regard Mr Winter relied on SM (Section 8:
       Judge's process) [2005] UKAIT 00116.  By starting his assessment of
       credibility, at paragraph 16 of the decision, with consideration of
       section 8 the judge did not follow SM.

    6. Turning to the third ground of the application, Mr Winter submitted
       that the judge erred by not making a specific finding on whether the
       appellant is a Shia Muslim.  In addition the judge did not have
       regard to documentary evidence showing that the appellant is Shia.
       This included letters from the Shia Islamic Centre.  The judge,
       however, made a finding based on the appellant not having gone to the
       police when he was assaulted.  This finding was contrary to country
       information on the lack of a sufficiency of protection.  The issue
       was material to the question of internal relocation.  Although the
       judge referred at paragraph 39 to the case of AW [2011] UKUT 31 on
       sufficiency of protection in Pakistan, this was different because it
       concerned a claim made on political grounds.

    7. Mr Winter continued by referring to paragraph 41 of the decision,
       where the judge commented on the evidence of other witnesses, who
       were the appellant's partner and a friend of his.  The judge stated
       that where the evidence of the witnesses related to the appellant's
       experiences in Pakistan it was based on what the appellant had told
       them.  Mr Winter submitted that even if this was correct it was wrong
       of the judge to discount this evidence as hearsay.  There were no
       discrepancies or inconsistencies in what the witnesses were told.

    8. The fourth ground related to the Article 8 assessment and, in
       particular, the position of the appellant's partner.  In the
       application it was stated that in finding that the appellant's
       partner might accompany the appellant to Pakistan and continue to
       receive medical treatment there the judge did not have proper regard
       to the medical evidence, particularly in relation to the degree of
       medical supervision and support she requires.  Mr Winter submitted
       that at paragraph 53 of the decision the judge applied a threshold
       for considering Article 8 outwith the Immigration Rules.  This was
       based on old case law.  In terms of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 there was
       no threshold.  Mr Winter nevertheless acknowledged that this error
       was not material because the judge proceeded in any event to consider
       Article 8 outwith the Rules.  Mr Winter further submitted that the
       errors made by the judge in relation to the protection claim were
       relevant to Article 8.  For instance, if there was no sufficiency of
       protection for the appellant in Pakistan then this would be an
       insurmountable obstacle to the couple carrying on their relationship
       there.  There needed to be a finding on whether the appellant was a
       Shia Muslim.  The medical treatment required by the appellant's
       partner was also a key issue.  There was an issue as to the medical
       support which would be available for her.

    9. For the respondent Mr Govan described the structure of the decision
       as slightly unusual.  He submitted that if there was a holistic
       assessment of the facts then the order issues were considered
       mattered less.  The reference to section 8 near the start of the
       decision did not mean it was the starting point or governing factor.
       The appellant was in the UK for 13 years before claiming asylum and
       it was natural for the judge to see this as a relevant factor.  There
       was nothing to show section 8 was the starting point; it was weighed
       up with other factors adverse to the appellant.  There was no error
       of law in the judge's findings on credibility.

   10. Mr Govan referred to the third ground of the application regarding
       the lack of a finding on the appellant's faith.  According to the
       oral evidence the appellant rarely attended a mosque.  The respondent
       did not accept there was no sufficiency of protection for Shia
       Muslims, or that there could be no internal relocation.  Even giving
       the appellant the benefit of the doubt and accepting that he was
       Shia, there was no real risk of persecution or serious harm.  This
       was in effect the finding made by the judge at paragraph 24 of the
       decision.  At paragraph 38 the judge noted the appellant's evidence
       that he was safe one mile from his home in Pakistan.  It did not
       matter either way whether the appellant was Shia or Sunni and it did
       not matter that the judge had not made a finding on this.

   11. Mr Govan continued by pointing out that the appellant had not sought
       help for his alleged experiences.  Seeking help was the basis for any
       finding of a lack of sufficiency of protection.  Anyway, the
       appellant could relocate internally.  These were the important
       findings made by the judge and there was no error of law, as
       contended in the third ground of the application.

   12. Mr Govan then turned to the appellant's relationship with a British
       citizen.  The appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules in
       respect of this as the couple had not been living together for two
       years.  The judge considered the relationship outwith the Rules.  The
       judge was aware of the history of the relationship.  The judge was
       not satisfied that medical treatment would not be available in
       Pakistan.  The judge took into account the statutory requirements of
       section 117B.   Little weight was to be given to a relationship
       commenced when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully.  The judge
       considered whether the appellant could make a visa application from
       abroad.  All the relevant considerations were assessed.

   13. In response Mr Winter submitted that the judge had failed to consider
       key passages in the country information to which he was referred.
       The issue of internal relocation was not relevant as there would be
       problems throughout Pakistan.  The question of whether there was a
       sufficiency of protection for this appellant was not addressed by the
       judge.  This was relevant also to the issues of the proportionality
       of returning to Pakistan to apply for entry clearance and of
       relocation by the appellant and his partner.  The judge failed to
       have proper regard to the country information, which was a matter
       arising from the third ground of the application.  The judge also
       failed to have regard to documentary evidence relating to the
       appellant.  If the documentary evidence had been considered in the
       round the judge might not have made adverse findings.  The decision
       should be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Discussion

   14. Mr Winter was of course correct to point out that consideration of
       whether there is a sufficiency of protection must be linked to the
       circumstances of the particular appellant.  A finding simply to the
       effect that Shia Muslims have a sufficiency of protection in general
       in Pakistan is not enough.  In this decision though the Judge of the
       First-tier Tribunal did consider the circumstances of the appellant
       in considering whether there was a sufficiency of protection.  The
       judge took into account that the appellant had never been to the
       police to complain of having been attacked.  Mr Winter submitted that
       the appellant had good reason not to trust the police to provide
       protection in matters of religion.  The judge noted, however, that
       the appellant had not sought medical treatment, even though he
       claimed he had been shot on one occasion and had his arm broken on
       another.  When he was aged 21 he move a mile from his home, where he
       remained for 8 years without being attacked.  The appellant appeared
       to have played cricket on a regular basis without being attacked.

   15. At paragraph 47 the judge noted problems in the police in Pakistan.
       He further noted in the succeeding paragraph that the appellant
       claimed to fear no one apart from the people who attacked him.  At
       paragraph 23 the judge considered the appellant's evidence that he
       could not move to other border areas of Pakistan because of the
       presence of the Taliban in those areas.  While the judge did not go
       through the country information in detail, the burden was on the
       appellant to show that as a Shia Muslim he would not have sufficient
       protection in Pakistan.  At paragraph 23 the judge observed that as
       much as 20% of the population of Pakistan is Shia.  It was a
       considerable burden indeed for the appellant to show that as a Shia
       Muslim he would not have a sufficiency of protection in Pakistan.

   16. As Mr Govan pointed out, the test to be applied in deciding whether
       the appellant requires international protection is whether there is a
       real risk to him of persecution or serious harm.  As the judge
       observed at paragraph 48, serious crimes may occur notwithstanding
       measures taken by the state.  The appellant would not succeed without
       showing a real risk.  It may be inferred that notwithstanding he did
       not set out a detailed analysis of the country information and key
       passages the judge was not satisfied there was a real risk.  This was
       a finding the judge was entitled to make.

   17. This brings me a related point made by Mr Winter, namely that the
       judge did not make adequate findings on the appellant's particular
       circumstances.  So far as the appellant's religion is concerned,
       although the judge was not satisfied the appellant is a Shia, at
       paragraph 47 the judge stated that he would consider sufficiency of
       protection taking the appellant's claim at its highest and assuming
       he was a Shia.  Mr Winter submitted that the judge did not have
       regard to documentary evidence in support of the appellant's faith.
       Even if the judge neglected this, however, it would not have altered
       the judge's finding that the appellant was not at risk even assuming
       he was a Shia Muslim.

   18. Mr Winter submitted that the issue of protection was relevant to the
       assessment of proportionality, in relation to the question of whether
       the appellant and his partner could be expected to relocate to
       Pakistan.  I accept that if the judge had found there was an issue
       with the sufficiency of protection, or if the judge had erred in
       considering this issue, then there might be a consequence for the
       issue of proportionality.  However, for the reasons I have given
       above, I am not satisfied the judge erred in considering the
       sufficiency of protection.

   19. It was contended that the judge's credibility findings were flawed.
       The judge's mistaken approach to section 8 of the 2004 Act was said
       to be an important factor in this regard.  As Mr Govan pointed out,
       however, the order in which the judge set out various factors
       affecting credibility was less important than the question of whether
       the judge had had proper regard to the evidence as a whole.

   20. The judge referred to section 8 and, in particular, the delay in
       claiming asylum, at paragraph 16 of the decision.  Thereafter, at
       paragraphs 19-44 the judge assessed the appellant's evidence in
       detail and gave reasons for not accepting as credible the appellant's
       account of his alleged problems and difficulties in Pakistan.  As Mr
       Govan submitted, there was nothing to indicate that this assessment
       was tainted by the earlier refence to section 8.  I see no reason to
       suppose that if paragraph 16 had been inserted after paragraph 44 it
       would have made any difference to the judge's findings.  This was not
       an error of the type identified in SM.

   21. It is pointed out in the application for permission to appeal that
       the judge assumed that the appellant claimed asylum because he was
       seeking medical treatment.  This suggestion is made in paragraph 16
       of the decision.  According to the application for permission to
       appeal there was no evidential basis for such a suggestion.  While
       this may be so, it is not disputed that the appellant was in the UK
       for over 12 years before claiming asylum.  If there was a reason the
       appellant did not claim asylum earlier this might have been relevant
       under section 8 but it is difficult to see any adverse significance
       in the judge suggesting a reason why the appellant claimed asylum
       when he did, even if the judge was speculating about this.  This
       particular challenge to the judge's decision is of no assistance to
       the appellant.

   22. In assessing proportionality, the judge had proper regard to section
       117B and the fact that the appellant's relationship began when the
       appellant was in the UK unlawfully.  While the judge did not cite up-
       to-date authorities on Article 8, he was well aware that the
       appellant would have to show circumstances which were compelling and
       exceptional, although as the judge pointed out at paragraph 53 there
       is no legal test of exceptionality.  It is contended that the judge
       did not have proper regard to the medical needs of the appellant's
       partner.  The judge refers to these at paragraph 57 but does not list
       them in detail.  It should not be inferred from the lack of a
       detailed list that the judge was not aware of them.  The judge
       comments that there was no evidence that treatment would not be
       available in Pakistan.  In the circumstances the judge was not
       required to state anything more in this regard.

   23. The parties accepted that the structure of this decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal is unusual.  It may be that when the judge referred at
       paragraph 14 to section 117B and at paragraph 16 to section 8 his
       intention was to provide some sort of summary of his conclusions with
       detailed reasoning to follow.  If this was the judge's intention, it
       should have been stated more clearly.  I have not been persuaded,
       however, that this variation on the usual structure of a decision
       discloses any underlying error of law.



Conclusions

   24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

   25. The decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.



Anonymity

The Judge of the First-tier tribunal did not make a direction for
anonymity.  I have not been asked to make such a direction and I see no
reason of substance for doing so.


M E Deans   23rd April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

