
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/05279/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2019                  |On 06 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     B P
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms J Todd, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of El Salvador, who arrived in the  UK  with
    his wife and two sons.  On  9  October  2017,  he  sought  asylum.   He
    claimed to have been persecuted by and to be at risk  from  the  MS  13
    gang, who saw him, due to his place of origin, as  a  member  of  their
    main rivals, the B 18 gang.

 2. The respondent refused the claim by letter dated 5  April  2018:-  [20-
    22], no Refugee Convention category; [23-25], nationality accepted; [26-
    44], material facts and future risk not accepted; [45-55],  sufficiency
    of state protection; [56-64], internal relocation available.

 3. FtT  Judge  Hands  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 July 2018.  She  did  not  accept  his  claims  about
    events which provoked his departure from El Salvador,  other  than  one
    incident of mugging, and found that he had not established that he  was
    a specific target of gang  violence,  [14-21];  no  Refugee  Convention
    category, [22-23]; expert report based on truth of appellant's account,
    and  did  not  support  risk  on  return,  inability  to  relocate,  or
    imputation of political opinion, [24-27];  relocation  available,  [28-
    30]; claim fabricated, [30].

 4. Although permission was granted by the UT, Ms Todd confirmed  that  the
    grounds are as stated in the application made on 7 August 2018  to  the
    FtT, headed as:-

    (1)    failure to have due regard to the opinion of an expert;

    (2)    failure to engage with the appellant's evidence; and

    (3)    error in applying the Refugee Convention.

 5. Ms Todd submitted firstly on ground (3).  She  argued  that  the  judge
    misunderstood the UNHCR guidelines and the submissions  on  the  appeal
    potentially falling within the Refugee Convention.  Resisting a  gang's
    authority, even by as simple an act as initially refusing to hand  over
    a wallet, might  be  enough  for  an  inference  of  imputed  political
    opinion.   As the judge accepted that incident at [21], she should have
    found that risk was established in terms of the UNHCR guidelines.

 6. Turning to ground (1), Ms Todd said that at [26] the  judge  misapplied
    the expert report.  Even if there had been a slight decline, the murder
    rate remained  the  highest  in  the  world,  and  rather  than  taking
    effective control, the evidence was that the police  colluded  in  gang
    activities.    The   finding   of   sufficiency   of   protection   was
    unsustainable.

 7. On ground (2), Ms Todd  contended  that  the  judge  misunderstood  the
    evidence in several respects, all of which contributed to  the  adverse
    credibility finding.  She accepted that these might separately be minor
    but said that cumulatively they were material, by analogy with  SB (Sri
    Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 160.

 8. Finally, Ms Todd sought a remit to the FtT.

 9. Having heard the submissions also for the  respondent,  I  reserved  my
    decision.

10. On ground (2), [8-13], the fact that the appellant was not asked if  he
    checked with the police is neither here nor there.   His  evidence  was
    that he heard no more about his complaint, and he did  not  suggest  he
    had followed up the matter.  The ground is insistence, re-argument  and
    selective disagreement on minor points, rather than a challenge to  the
    reasoning in the decision as a whole.

11. There being no error in the FtT's findings on the  facts,  grounds  (1)
    and (3) could not result in setting aside.

12. There is an overlapping point from ground (1) and (2).  A gang  related
    claim from El Salvador might fall into a Refugee  Convention  category,
    but not on the findings here.  Initial reluctance to hand over a wallet
    is not an adequate basis on which to find either a theoretical category
    or an actual risk.

13. The expert report is thoroughly considered in the decision.   The  only
    specific criticism of the FtT's handling of it  went  to  [26]  on  the
    decline in the murder rate.  It remained horrifyingly high.  The  judge
    may have not had the strongest of reasons for finding protection to  be
    adequate.  However, that was not an issue on which the case turned.

14. The general background of gang violence may  have  been  part,  even  a
    large part, of the appellant's motive for  seeking  to  move  with  his
    family to a country offering better prospects.  However, he  failed  to
    establish  contentions  which  would  qualify  him  for   international
    protection  and  the  FtT's  crucial  conclusions,  at  [20-21  &  30],
    withstand all the challenges made.

15. The grounds do not show that the making of  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    involved the making of any error on a point of law, such that it  ought
    to be set aside.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  It is not clear why the principle
    of open justice should be departed from in this case, but as the matter
    was not addressed in the UT, anonymity has been preserved herein.

      [pic]

      4 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




