
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05105/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2019                   |On 29 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                           HER HONOUR JUDGE STACEY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

                                     A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maDE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by A & A
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. We make this
order because the appellant claims to be a refugee and so is entitled to
privacy.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago against a decision
of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of the
Secretary of State refusing to recognise him as a refugee or giving him
leave to remain on a protection basis or on Article 8 grounds.

3. We are entirely satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal has erred
materially.

4. Our first concern is that the findings of fact are unsustainable.  The
appellant was found to have been untruthful but one of the reasons for
finding him untruthful is based on a straightforward misreading of the
evidence of the interview record.  The appellant was disbelieved for saying
he had come to see his girlfriend but he had never made such a claim.  The
finding was an error that clearly affected the other findings.

5. It is also a matter of concern to us that, in the judge's reasoning, he
describes the appellant as having been in the United Kingdom for "some
time" and having been in the United Kingdom during the period of transition
in Trinidad and Tobago, where the law has changed so that matters relating
to gay sex are no longer criminal offences.  This too is just wrong.  The
evidence is that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom for a much
shorter period of time and was in Trinidad and Tobago when the changes took
place.  This again has clearly misinformed the judge's conclusions.

6. We are also unhappy that the judge has failed to make a clear finding on
the appellant's evidence that he has been ill-treated in Trinidad and
Tobago as a result of being gay and has made reports to the police but was
brushed aside and not provided with any support.  The judge has made a
partial finding in this regard where we read at paragraph 21 of the
Decision and Reasons that he has been previously attacked in Trinidad as a
result of his homosexuality but not "as frequently as indicated by him".
That is a tantalising finding that is, for our purposes, useless.  We do
not know if it is accepted that the appellant has been attacked in the
recent past or he has been attacked on many occasions or whether it was an
isolated incident. There needed to be clear findings on this evidence or,
just possibly, an explanation why clear findings are not possible.

7. We are also concerned at the overall structure of the First-tier
Tribunal's decision because the judge has decided that, because of the
change in law, the attitude in the country has changed to the point where
at least this appellant would not be at risk.  This finding does not sit
easily with clear evidence produced by the Respondent that the change in
the law is controversial, that there has been social objection to the
change and a certain amount of unrest. Additionally gay people have
complained that they had been further ill-treated as a result of the
change.  It may be that this evidence is unreliable, untypical, or related
to a particular short period of time but it is the evidence that was before
the Tribunal and it does not appear to have been considered properly or at
all.

8. We are very far from saying that gay people will be persecuted in
Trinidad and Tobago.  It is obvious from a very careful reading of the
evidence that there is some sort of gay scene in the country and some
people are happy to go there and express their sexuality but it does not
follow that everyone is and it certainly does not follow from that that
this appellant might be somebody who can return.  The decision is just not
satisfactory.

9. We are grateful to both representatives, Ms McCarthy and Mr Bramble, who
essentially agreed that the decision would not do.

10. We do have to say something about an application to adjourn.  The
appellant relied on that as the first ground of appeal and we do understand
from Ms McCarthy that the appellant's representatives had, in their phrase,
"flagged up" at an early time they were looking for expert evidence and
subsequent events have shown that such evidence would have been highly
desirable.  We content ourselves with saying the following.  It would have
been very much better if the application for an adjournment had been made
at an earlier opportunity rather than the morning of the hearing. Once a
case is listed people can be expected to have made consequential
arrangements and adjourning inconveniences them and other people and causes
delays to other cases.  However, we acknowledge that the possibility of an
adjournment was at least indicated at an earlier opportunity and we do not
make any more of the point than we have said.

11. In the circumstances, we find the First-tier Tribunal erred.

12. The First-tier Tribunal, unlike the Secretary of State, accepted that
the appellant is gay.  Ms McCarthy said that we should preserve that
finding of fact. The submission was made very slightly teasingly, because
it is clearly in the appellant's interests that accede to the submission,
but she is right; it is not only convenient to the appellant but it is also
justified because none of the reasons for disbelieving him impact on the
finding on that point, for which there was considerable evidence and
support. When the case is heard again it goes from the starting point that
the appellant is gay.

Notice of Decision

13. We find the First-tier Tribunal erred in law for the reasons we have
given.  We set aside this decision.  We direct that the case be heard again
in the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 November 2019               |



