

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/05854/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|on 30 January 2018                    |            on 01 February 2018      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                           AMANUEL TEWOLDE BERHAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bradley, of Petr G Farrell, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This decision refers to the appellant as the SSHD and to the respondent
    as the claimant.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 4 October 2017.

 3. The SSHD's grounds of appeal are stated  in  her  application  dated  1
    November 2017.

      The judge allows the appeal  "under  the  1951  Convention"  [in  his]
      summary of decision. This is in conflict with his reasoned  conclusion
      at paragraph 38. No reason is given for allowing the appeal on  asylum
      grounds; in fact, reasons are given for dismissing the appeal on  that
      basis.

      The judge further allows the appeal under articles 2 and 3 of the 1950
      Convention  and  also  under  the  immigration  rules  -  humanitarian
      protection ... inadequate reasons  are  given  for  these  conclusions
      given the negative findings in respect of asylum.

      A key issue in the SSHD's  refusal  was  the  claimant's  nationality.
      Paragraphs 19 - 27 of the refusal letter are taken  up  with  a  fully
      reasoned challenge to the claimant's claim to be Eritrean.  The  judge
      never resolves this issue. He finds at paragraph 20 that "not too much
      store can be placed on this attempt at  discharging  the  onus  placed
      upon the  claimant  by  YL  (Eritrea)  CG  [2003]  UKAIT  00016".   He
      nevertheless finds at paragraph 30 that the claimant "has demonstrated
      he is likely to be an Eritrean"  without  any  reasoning  and  without
      engaging with the challenge set out in the refusal letter.

 4. The two questions raised by the grounds and submissions are whether the
    judge inadvertently allowed the appeal, when his findings dictated  the
    opposite; and whether he gave legally adequate reasons for  finding  in
    favour of the claimant on the question of nationality.

 5. On the first question,  there  is  no  denying  that  the  decision  is
    muddled; but I am persuaded by Mr  Bradley's  submissions  that  it  is
    possible on close reading to see what the judge meant.

 6. Clarity is not aided by dealing with the two following matters  in  the
    same paragraph, over and again, at 30 - 32; but the judge does conclude
    that the claim to be a Pentecostal Christian is false, and the claim to
    be Eritrean is true.  He is satisfied that the claimant is Eritrean, is
    liable to conscription, and left the country illegally, and  so  is  at
    risk  of  persecution.   The  judge's   positive   conclusions   within
    paragraphs 30 - 32 are consistent with his "summary of decisions".

 7. Paragraph 38 does not contain  any  reasons,  but  states  conclusions,
    which are erroneously phrased in the negative.

 8. On the second question, Mrs O'Brien made these points:

      i) The judge disbelieved the core claim to  be  a  Pentecostalist  for
         good reasons, and did not explain why that did not carry  into  the
         rest of the case.

     ii) The claimant's general credibility was poor.

    iii) The challenge on nationality  was  strongly  made  in  the  refusal
         decision and, contrary to what the judge said,  was  maintained  in
         the FtT.

     iv) The judge rightly found at paragraph 20 that the claimant's efforts
         to show lack of Ethiopian  nationality  through  a  letter  to  the
         Embassy carried little weight.

      v) An explanation for the nationality finding was entirely lacking.

 9. The points made in response for the claimant were:

      i) Reasons were given, if briefly, at paragraphs 30 - 32 and 36.

     ii) The judge noted the absence of challenge from the respondent by way
         of cross-examination or submissions at paragraphs 17,  18,  19  and
         20.

    iii) Further reasons were to be found in those paragraphs: 18,  claimant
         illiterate and impoverished,  likely  not  to  be  permitted  legal
         egress from Eritrea; 19, claimant's age and health such  as  to  be
         eligible for conscription; 20, claimant made  reasonable  enquiries
         about nationality, given not much but, by implication, some store.

     iv) Those reasons were given by reference to the  evidence  before  the
         judge, which  included  the  claimant's  statement  and  background
         evidence to support his claim.

      v) The claimant's statement  included  his  response  to  the  refusal
         decision on various matters, including the languages he speaks.

     vi) The background evidence  supported  his  account  of  his  language
         abilities, showing that Amharic was widely spoken in his area,  and
         explaining his slight knowledge of Tigrinya.

    vii) The decision was to be read as a whole and in context  of  evidence
         to which the judge did not have to refer in detail but which he was
         entitled to accept.

   viii) The respondent was seeking "reasons for reasons".

10. In answer to the second question, the decision is  a  legally  adequate
    explanation to the SSHD of why the judge came down on the side he did.

11. The judge had the advantage of hearing the claimant give his  evidence,
    from which he formed the view that while he  was  purporting  to  be  a
    Pentecostalist in a misguided  effort  to  improve  his  case,  he  was
    nevertheless reliable about his nationality.

12. Any misunderstanding by the judge of  the  extent  to  which  the  SSHD
    maintained the dispute on nationality is not reflected in  the  grounds
    of appeal to the UT.   The  decision  must  be  taken  as  an  accurate
    description of how that issue unfolded at the hearing.

13. While it is difficult to read into paragraphs 30 - 32  much  more  than
    statements of conclusions, rather than reasons,  the  submissions  that
    the decision is to be read as a whole and in context are  well-founded.
    As well as having  the  advantage  of  assessing  the  claimant's  oral
    evidence directly and seeing it go largely unchallenged, the judge  had
    supporting evidence which he is to  be  presumed  to  have  taken  into
    account and which he was entitled to accept.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]
            31 January 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
