
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA050522016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 May 2017                        |On 22 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    M R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Lagunju of Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fowell promulgated on 12 December  2016  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his
    asylum claim.

 2. The applicant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  and  claims  that  he  was
    subjected to ill-treatment in detention on  account  of  his  political
    activities and that if he returns to Bangladesh he  will  face  further
    persecution on that basis and thus that removing him would be in breach
    of the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention,
    Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. In this case the proceedings had previously been adjourned in order for
    a medical report to be obtained from the Medical Foundation.  It was on
    that basis that it had been adjourned from 11  August  until  Monday  5
    December  2016.   Before  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  had  been
    informed by the Medical Foundation that they would be able  to  produce
    the report by 3 December 2016 and thus it would be  available  for  the
    hearing.

 4. On 24 November  2016  the  Medical  Foundation,  without  any  apparent
    reason, wrote to the appellant's solicitors stating that they would not
    now be able to produce it and the  revised  target  date  would  be  16
    January 2017.  The appellant's solicitors quite rightly  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal Service on 24  November  2016  explaining  the  situation  and
    asking for an  adjournment  which  was  refused  on  the  papers.   The
    application  was  renewed  before  Judge   Fowell   who   refused   the
    application.  I note that  despite  the  assurance  that  it  would  be
    available on 16 January 2017 the report does not appear  to  have  been
    made available until a further two months after this date.   The  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  substantively,  concluding  that  although  the
    appellant had suffered some injuries in detention he was not  satisfied
    that the appellant would now be at risk on return nor was he satisfied,
    if there were any risk it would not be possible for  the  appellant  to
    relocate within Bangladesh where he would not be at risk.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal  on  two  principal  grounds.
    First that the judge had erred in failing to adjourn  the  hearing  and
    that he had failed properly to apply the correct test  as  set  out  in
    Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418.    The   second
    principal ground which is set out in grounds 2 to 3 is that in  essence
    the judge failed to make proper findings of fact and having  made  some
    findings of fact failed properly to apply the law to the circumstances,
    in particular failing properly to address the issues of sufficiency  of
    protection  and/or  internal  relocation.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson on  16  February  2017.
    The Secretary of State has also responded by way of a  letter  pursuant
    to Rule 24.

 6. Ms Lagunju submitted that the judge's approach to  the  medical  report
    was incorrect in that the improper test had been applied and that there
    had been a procedural unfairness leading  to  an  error  of  law.   She
    submitted also that the judge's findings of fact were inconsistent  and
    were insufficient in particular with regards to the lack of specificity
    as to how the appellant had or had even accepted  this  had  been  ill-
    treated, whether this was in detention and also had failed properly  to
    address whether the appellant had been involved with  politics  and  in
    what way.  She submitted further that the judge had in failing to  make
    proper findings of fact rendered unlawful the findings with respect  as
    to whether there was a risk on return and also in addressing the issues
    of sufficiency of protection and also whether internal relocation would
    be viable.

 7. Mr Wilding accepted that the test as set out by the judge at  paragraph
    10 was perhaps incorrect but that in this case there was no  procedural
    unfairness given the quite clear inadequacies of the medical report  to
    which he drew my attention in some detail.  He submitted also  that  in
    any event the judge had reached  adequate  findings  of  fact  and  had
    reached a decision which was sustainable and adequately reasoned.

 8. I am satisfied that the judge has at [10] failed properly  to  set  out
    the test applicable as to deciding whether a matter should be adjourned
    or not.  Further the judge appears not to have taken into  account  the
    correct factors in assessing whether this was required by  fairness  or
    not and appears simply to have considered only the  fact  that  nothing
    had changed since the application made on 20 November was a reason  for
    granting an adjournment.  There is no indication that the  proper  test
    set out in the Rules was applied.

 9. The question then arises  as  to  whether  that  error  is  capable  of
    affecting  the  outcome.   I  conclude  and  not  without  considerable
    hesitation that the error was material.   The  judge  did  accept  that
    injuries had occurred. As Ms Lagunju submitted, there is some confusion
    as to what he had actually found.   There  is  of  course  an  inherent
    difficulty in concluding that once there has been  a  procedural  error
    the error being that the applicant has not had a fair hearing that  the
    result would inevitably have been the same and I do not  conclude  that
    that was so.

10. The actions of the Medical Foundation raise concern.  They clearly told
    the appellant and his solicitors  that  a  report  would  be  available
    having seen the appellant on three separate occasions  in  August  2016
    yet with no explanation and apparently in the full  knowledge  that  an
    adjournment had been obtained to get this report, that they  would  not
    be able to provide it.  Having then said that it would be available  by
    16 January 2017 it does not appear to have been produced until 23 March
    2017 despite having been signed on 1 February.  No one is  assisted  by
    these kind of unexplained delays least of all the person about whom the
    report is concerned.  Nonetheless, the error is material.

11. In the circumstances  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as the error was a procedural one and it is necessary for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision
    on all issues.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside. I  remit  the  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues; none of  the  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.

 2. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-Tier Tribunal

Signed                                  Date 15 May 2017

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
