
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05110/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at On Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st February 2019                          |                              |
|                                              |On 18th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     l l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by Katani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,
the disclosure or publication of any matter that might lead members of the
public to identity the appellant or her child is prohibited. Any failure to
comply may result in contempt proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fox.  For reasons given in his decision dated  7  September  2017,  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  under  the  Refugee  and  Human
    Rights  Conventions  and  under  the  Immigration  Rules  against   the
    Secretary of State's decision refusing her protection claim on  16  May
    2017.

 2. The appellant is a national of Morocco where she was born on 2  January
    1990.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 27  November  2014  by  air
    from Morocco with a visa as  a  visitor.   She  claimed  asylum  on  16
    December 2016.  The appellant's protection claim was based on her claim
    to  have  converted  to  Christianity  and  the  difficulty  she  would
    encounter in Morocco as the consequence as well as being  as  a  single
    parent with a child born in the United Kingdom in 2016 out of  wedlock.



 3. The appellant gave evidence through an interpreter before Judge Fox who
    was not satisfied that the  appellant's  conversion  was  genuine  and,
    furthermore, he did not accept that her second marriage to her  husband
    in  the  United  Kingdom  had  broken  down.   He  also   doubted   the
    truthfulness of the appellant's account regarding the paternity of  her
    child which she claims to have been the result  of  an  encounter  with
    someone with whom she no longer  has  contact.   The  judge  considered
    therefore that the  appellant  could  be  returned  safely  to  Morocco
    without a risk of harm.  Taking account of the  appellant's  health  he
    considered nevertheless that her removal would  not  be  in  breach  of
    Article 8 and, in terms, concluded that the best interests of the child
    were to accompany her.

 4. The grounds of challenge are that the  conduct  of  the  judge  at  the
    hearing resulted in the appellant not having had a  fair  hearing  with
    reliance placed on Alubankudi (Appearance of bias)  [2015]  UKUT  00542
    (IAC) and Elayi (Fair hearing - appearance) [2016] UKUT 00508 (IAC).  A
    specific allegation of bias is not made in  the  grounds.   As  to  the
    judge's actual conduct the grounds assert the following:

      1) The judge stated on arrival, "There is a child here, sort that out"
         and left the hearing room.




      2) At the resumed hearing when it was explained that the appellant was
         a single mother and had no one to  look  after  her  daughter,  the
         judge then enquired about the lack of  essential  passages  in  the
         documents   that   had   been   provided   by    the    appellant's
         representatives.  By way of response the representative  Mr  Katani
         explained how the bundle was made up and that he would orally refer
         to it in his submissions.


      3) The judge sought an apology and using a sarcastic and hostile  tone
         observed "There is no essential passages and  no  attempt  to  make
         arrangements (for children), so  we  better  start  then".   As  Mr
         Katani left the hearing room to collect the appellant the following
         exchange took place:


             Judge:  "No apology then?"




             Mr Katani:  "I apologise, Sir."




             Judge:  "No, I had to ask for the apology.  You are a disgrace
             and it's totally unprofessional and I  am  minded  to  make  a
             complaint to your professional body."




      4) In the course of submissions,  the  judge  questioned  Mr  Katani's
         professionalism again, which he noted as a disgrace and  reiterated
         that he would be minded to make a  complaint  to  his  professional
         body.  Mr Katani was prohibited as a  consequence  from  continuing
         his submissions and felt that he could no longer refer to an expert
         report.  But for the  judge's  intervention,  he  would  have  made
         further  submissions  that  the  appellant's  child  would  not  be
         entitled to Moroccan nationality.




      5) The standard directions were for both parties and the judge did not
         ask the Presenting Officer about a lack of essential passages.  The
         Presenting Officer was permitted to refer to  the  respondent's  as
         well as the appellant's bundle in "an unlimited  and  uninterrupted
         capacity".  Mr Katani was only allowed to refer to it six times.


      6) The appellant too felt the perceived unfairness and became  visibly
         upset after the hearing.  She was upset by what the judge had  said
         to Mr Katani and felt that the appeal was going to be refused as  a
         result.   She  considered  that  the  judge  had  listened  to  the
         Presenting Officer's submissions in their entirety but not the same
         for Mr Katani.


    The grounds also observed that a complaint  had  been  made  about  the
    judge's conduct.

 5. This appeal was adjourned on 9 August 2018 for the judge to comment  on
    the grounds of challenge and as well  as  a  witness  statement  by  Mr
    Katani dated 3 August 2018, a statutory declaration  by  the  appellant
    dated 6 July 2018 and the Presenting Officer's  Record  of  Proceedings
    dated 1 September 2017.  On 16 August 2018  the  judge  was  sent  this
    material together with his Record of Proceedings  and  a  copy  of  his
    decision.

 6. The statutory declaration  by  the  appellant  refers  to  the  judge's
    statement at the outset of the hearing with regard to her child and  on
    proceeding she felt that the judge was not happy due to  his  demeanour
    and facial expressions.  The judge had acted in a very  hostile  manner
    towards Mr Katani when questioning him about the case.  When it came to
    legal submissions, the judge listened to the  respondent's  submissions
    in full but did not extend the same opportunity to  Mr  Katani.   These
    matters upset her and she believed that her appeal would be refused.

 7. The witness statement by Mr Katani explains  that  on  arrival  at  the
    hearing centre he was informed by the clerk that the judge had enquired
    about a lack of essential passages and wanted to  know  why  they  were
    omitted.  He explained to the clerk that there were three items in  his
    bundle, being the witness statement, translated documents and an expert
    report.  He would explain to the judge why the  bundle  contained  [no]
    essential passages in person.  The statement refers to  events  at  the
    outset of the hearing and the explanation offered by Mr Katani when the
    hearing was reconvened why the appellant did not have anyone who  could
    look after her child.  Mr Katani explains that when  challenged  as  to
    the absence of essential passages, he would be relying on  three  items
    and would refer to them orally in submissions.  He was reminded of  the
    directions and responded by saying that the material was not general in
    nature and he would direct the judge  to  the  specific  paragraphs  he
    wished to place reliance on.  The statement also refers to  the  aspect
    of the grounds indicating the tone used by the  judge  when  announcing
    that the hearing had better start and continues:

         "As I then walked towards the door to bring the  appellant  inside,
         the IJ remarked 'No apology, then?'.  I said  'I  apologise,  Sir'.
         IJ Fox then said 'No.  I had to ask for the  apology.   You  are  a
         disgrace and that's totally unprofessional; and I am minded to make
         a complaint to your professional body.' "

 8. The statement explains that Mr Katani stood in silence  and  the  judge
    observed that such silence "said it all".  Mr Katani then  fetched  the
    appellant and the hearing proceeded.  The statement confirms there were
    no further issues until he sought to refer to  the  expert  report.  Mr
    Katani explains:

         "IJ Fox stopped me whilst in submissions and told  me  that  I  had
         referred to the report six times now bearing in  mind  what  I  had
         discussed at the beginning, referring to it only once or twice.  IJ
         Fox in front of the appellant, question  [sic]  my  professionalism
         (again) and that it was a disgrace what I had done  and  reiterated
         that  he  was  minded  to  make  a  complaint  against  me  to   my
         professional body.  IJ Fox again noticed my silence  and  that  "it
         said it all".

         I felt unable to  complete  my  submissions  as  a  result  of  the
         intervention and  referred  only  to  some  general  points  before
         closing my submissions."

 9. Mr Katani acknowledges that he had not provided the essential  passages
    but genuinely believed that the items were not objective in nature  and
    did not require him to provide such.  He believed that  the  judge  had
    not provided a fair hearing and refers  also  to  the  hostility  being
    noticed by the appellant.


THE JUDGE'S RESPONSE

10. The judge has provided a detailed response which was set out in further
    directions sent to the parties on 22 October 2018.  Specifically as  to
    the events on the day, the judge explains, in summary:

      1) His memory of the case is quite clear.




      2) Mr  Katani's  recollection  of  events  is  selective  and  clearly
         pointed.


      3) Noting the absence of a schedule of essential  passages,  he  asked
         his clerk to confirm with Mr Katani if one would be made  available
         prior to going down to the hearing room.  She  did  not  receive  a
         reply so far as he was aware but the judge also  confirms  that  he
         was told he did not have one.


      4) Mr Katani did not take any opportunity to  provide  an  explanation
         until asked which demonstrated a lack of professional courtesy.


      5) The clerk was not advised there was a  young  child  in  the  court
         room.  On entering, the judge observed the child was crying  loudly
         and was clearly disruptive.  Having bid the  parties  good  morning
         the judge noted that because of the noise it would be impossible to
         proceed and that "... we would have to sort this out.  Even with my
         hearing aid I would have found  it  impossible  to  hear  what  any
         witness may have said, with that level of distraction".


      6) Mr Katani was afforded time.  The judge asked the clerk  to  advise
         him when the court would be ready again for hearing and he did  not
         say that he did not want the child in the hearing room.


      7) On return Mr Katani advised the judge that he


             "was not making any arrangements  for  the  noisy  child.   Mr
             Katani confirmed that he had not discussed  this  matter  with
             his client and had no intention of doing so prior to the day's
             hearing.  The child continued  to  be  noisy  and  disruptive.
             This was not the child's fault.  The child was clearly unhappy
             with being present in the court room  and/or  for  some  other
             reason.   Mr   Katani   clearly   demonstrated   an   air   of
             unhelpfulness and reluctance to be cooperative.  His tone  was
             less than pleasant."


11. The judge records that he asked the appellant if she could do her  best
    to settle the child.  She was offered time but did not  need  it.   The
    judge then followed his standard procedure with an introduction he uses
    with all appellants designed to make them feel at ease.  He denies that
    he demonstrated any hostility, dissatisfaction or other  emotion.   The
    judge experienced problems with his vocal chords due  to  surgery  some
    one and a half years previously  and  his  recent  health  difficulties
    impacted on his ability to project his voice.  It was  often  the  case
    that he needed to repeat himself because even those in close  proximity
    may not hear all he had to say.

12. On being asked about the schedule  of  essential  passages,  Mr  Katani
    explained he only  intended  to  refer  to  a  few  paragraphs  and  he
    considered that such a schedule was not required.  The judge  continues
    in his response:

         "This was the first indication I had from him even though I had out
         of courtesy  asked  the  clerk  to  mention  it  to  him  prior  to
         commencing the hearing.  The courtesy was not reciprocated.  He had
         not communicated this to me until asked.  I enquired of him, should
         he not have done so  without  having  to  be  asked  for  it.   The
         Directions were issued.  He did  not  reply.   I  asked  for  reply
         again.  He refused to reply and got up and walked out of the  court
         room.  At that stage I asked if he intended  to  apologise  at  the
         very least.  He did not reply. He did not apologise.  At that stage
         I indicated to him that I was minded to make  a  complaint  to  his
         professional body for his attitude.  Again, I remained  quiet  calm
         and collected and if anything, felt  humiliated  and  hurt  by  his
         grossly impertinent and unprofessional attitude."

13. The judge explains that Mr Katani referred to many more than just three
    or four paragraphs; and during submissions it  became  clear  that  the
    references went into double figures.  The judge asked  if  he  had  not
    considered that such a schedule of  essential  passages  was  necessary
    given the volume of references.  When pressed, Mr Katani indicated that
    he had only two or three references  to  make  which  he  had  "grossly
    exceeded".

14. The judge states that he did not issue any remarks that could be in any
    be considered insulting.  He contends that the behaviour of  Mr  Katani
    demonstrates that it was he who was in the wrong.

15. The respondent did not refer to anything other than the  facts  of  the
    case and made no reference to any documents other  than  the  interview
    record.  The respondent had no requirement to rely  on  a  schedule  of
    essential  passages  and  the  judge's  recollection  of  the  standard
    directions were that a schedule is  a  requirement  for  the  appellant
    alone.  Mr Katani was  not  restricted  in  any  way  to  complete  his
    submissions; the judge had encouraged him to do so despite the lack  of
    a schedule.

16. At the end of the hearing  the  judge  explains  that  he  thanked  the
    appellant for giving her evidence.  She had managed to keep  the  child
    under control for the majority of the time and the  judge  complimented
    her on her care, conduct and management of the child.  She smiled.

WAS THE JUDGE UNFAIR?

17. At the hearing Mr Winter produced a response to the judge's note by  Mr
    Katani which is unsigned and undated.  It does not  contain  his  name.
    It sets out a response in the first person  to  Judge  Fox's  response.
    Essentially the document notes the inconsistency between  the  parties'
    recollection of events and refers  to  contradictions  in  the  judge's
    response with reference to the enquiry prior to the  hearing  over  the
    availability of essential passages and that  the  asserted  refusal  to
    reply to questions being asked was  false.   An  explanation  had  been
    given for the omission of essential passages.

18. The response also refers to the standard  directions  having  been  for
    both parties to provide essential passages and  that  according  to  Mr
    Katani's notes as well as the respondent's  notes  reference  had  been
    made by the Presenting  Officer  to  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    annexed report.  It is alleged that Judge Fox did not give proper  care
    and attention to the case and reliance  was  placed  on  an  unreported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal Sareh K v SSHD (PA/03488/2017).

19.  Mr  Winter  confirmed  that  he  had  discussed  with  Mr  Katani  the
    appropriateness of his attendance at the hearing but appears that  this
    was not possible owing to a commitment to appear in Manchester.   After
    submissions I reserved my decision.

20. The only document in  the  inventory  of  productions  provided  on  29
    January 2019 is a copy of  the  Tribunal  decision  in  PA  (Protection
    claim: respondent's enquiry; bias) Bangladesh [2018]  UKUT  337  (IAC).
    The headnote includes the following in respect of allegations of bias:

         "2.  Allegations of judicial bias

             (1)  An allegation of bias against a judge is a serious matter
                  and the appellate court or tribunal will expect all proper
                  steps to be taken by the person making it, in the light of
                  a response from the judge.

             (2)  The views of an appellant who cannot  speak  English  and
                  who has had no prior experience of an appeal  hearing  are
                  unlikely to be of  assistance,  insofar  as  they  concern
                  verbal exchanges between the judge and representatives  at
                  the hearing of the appeal.  In particular, the  fact  that
                  the judge had more questions for the  appellant's  counsel
                  than  for  the  respondent's  presenting  officer  has  no
                  bearing on  whether  the  judge  was  biased  against  the
                  appellant.

             (3)  It is wholly inappropriate for an official interpreter to
                  have his or her private conversations  with  an  appellant
                  put forward as evidence.


             (4)  As a  general  matter,  if  Counsel  concludes  during  a
                  hearing that a  judge  is  behaving  in  an  inappropriate
                  manner, Counsel has a duty to raise this with the judge.


             (5)  Although each  case  will  turn  on  its  own  facts,  an
                  appellate court or tribunal may have regard  to  the  fact
                  that a complaint of this kind was not made at the  hearing
                  or, at least, before receipt of the judge's decision.

             (6)  Allegations relating to what occurred at a hearing  would
                  be resolved far more easily if hearings in the  First-tier
                  Tribunal were officially recorded."

21. An earlier inventory of productions provided  in  anticipation  of  the
    hearing on 9 August included copies  of  the  Tribunal's  decisions  in
    Alubankudi (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 00542 (IAC) and Elayi (Fair
    hearing - Appearance) [2016] UKUT 00508 (IAC).  These decisions provide
    a helpful review of the law where there is an allegation  of  bias  and
    the test in Porter McGill [2001] UKHL 67 at 103:

         "The  question  is  whether  the   fair-minded   observer,   having
         considered the facts, would conclude there was a  real  possibility
         that the Tribunal was biased."

22. Mr Winter submitted that some paragraphs of Judge Fox's decision  might
    indicate an approach that was perceived to be biased on the basis  that
    there was no  reference  to  what  Mr  Katani  had  said  happened.  He
    contended that the credibility findings by  the  judge  may  have  been
    influenced by what happened at the  hearing  but  he  acknowledged  the
    judge had given  reasons  for  his  findings.  He  described  what  had
    occurred as a falling out and speculated that the  fault  might  be  on
    both sides. Mr Mathews described  the  different  approaches  taken  by
    judges in situations where there is a noisy child and contended that in
    this case, having regard to  what  was  said,  a  fair-minded  informed
    observer could not form  the  view  that  the  judge  was  biased.  The
    challenge fell well short of the of the test that was  required  to  be
    met.

23. I have noted that the grounds of challenge do not assert that the judge
    was biased.  Implicit however in the detail of the  allegation  is  the
    suggestion that the judge did not approach the case in  an  open-minded
    way because of the distraction caused by the appellant's child and  the
    failure by Mr Katani  to  comply  with  directions  and  this  was  the
    language of the submissions that I heard. It  is  problematic  that  Mr
    Katani did not attend the hearing and I do not consider his reason  for
    doing so a satisfactory one.  No details have been provided why  he  in
    particular needed to attend in Manchester and the timing of Mr Winter's
    conversations  with  him  show  that  there  was  sufficient  time  for
    alternative representation to be arranged.  No adjournment was  sought.
    In the light of the disagreement between him and Judge Fox  as  to  the
    events at the hearing it was clearly  appropriate  that  he  attend  in
    order  to  be  ready  to  answer  any  questions   for   clarification,
    particularly so in the  light  of  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  his
    unsigned and undated response. I should therefore be slow to uphold any
    aspect of Mr Katani's  account  in  these  circumstances.  The  further
    observation I made is that I can give little weight  to  the  statutory
    declaration by the appellant herself. As was evidenced before  me,  she
    does not have any ready comprehension of  English.   Whilst  she  would
    have been aware of the judge's arrival and departure from  the  hearing
    room at the outset of the day, she cannot be of any real assistance  as
    to what was said at any point during the hearing.

24. It is common ground that the appellant was  with  her  child  when  the
    hearing was to commence.  Despite  my  reservations  over  Mr  Katani's
    response, it is significant that he  does  not  challenge  the  judge's
    explanation of the child being disruptive at the outset of the hearing.
     In my judgment it was properly open to the judge to  rise  to  see  if
    arrangements could be made.  Even if the judge  did  so  in  an  abrupt
    manner no possible unfairness arises from that.  Mr Katani  would  have
    been aware from the outset of the potential  difficulty.  There  is  no
    indication that he had explored earlier whether arrangements  could  be
    made for the child to be cared for whilst  the  appellant  was  in  the
    hearing room.  Had he done so and learned of this impossibility, at the
    very least, he should have addressed the judge at the outset to explain
    the position.

25. Turning to the matter of the absence of essential passages,  Mr  Katani
    is correct in observing that the directions required  both  parties  to
    provide a paginated and indexed bundle of all documents to be relied on
    at the hearing with a schedule identifying the essential passages.   No
    documents in addition to the standard Home Office bundle were relied on
    by the respondent.  In my view it was properly open  to  the  judge  to
    enquire of the appellant  why  there  was  an  absence  of  a  schedule
    relating to the bundle of some 60  pages.   Again,  it  appears  common
    ground that the judge made  enquiries  through  his  clerk  about  this
    aspect prior to commencement of the hearing  and  it  would  have  been
    appropriate for Mr Katani to explain his position and offer an apology,
    if necessary, at the outset of the hearing  which  might  have  defused
    matters.

26. It appears that on return  of  the  judge  to  the  hearing  room,  the
    appellant remained outside and did not witness the  exchange  regarding
    the absence of a carer for her child and the exchange over the  absence
    of the essential reading schedule.  It is not clear why she  felt  able
    to address these matters in her declaration.  The judge  addresses  the
    point in paragraph 6 of his decision and I accept his account  that  he
    needed to press Mr Katani for an apology rather than the latter  taking
    the initiative.

27. Judge Fox appears to be exercised by this aspect and perhaps  a  better
    course might have been for the hearing to be stood down for  Mr  Katani
    to prepare the schedule.  It was also open to Mr Katani to offer to  do
    so.  Even so, I consider the judge was entitled to express concern over
    the matter in the absence of Mr Katani addressing the non-compliance at
    the outset.  As accepted by Mr Katani, the hearing then proceeded.

28. To my mind the judge was  entitled  to  remind  Mr  Katani  during  his
    submissions of the indication at the outset that the  references  would
    be few.  It was unnecessary for him to refer  again  to  non-compliance
    since that had been fully addressed at the outset of the hearing.  I do
    not consider however  that  this  was  indicative  of  unfairness.   Mr
    Govan's  note  records  short  further  submissions  made  after   that
    intervention and to my mind there is no evidential support  other  than
    Mr Katani's assertion  for  the  case  that  the  judge's  intervention
    effectively stopped him making the further submissions he wished.

29. The judge's manuscript note indicates that it was fairly  lengthy.   Mr
    Govan, the Presenting Officer typed a note in which  he  records  under
    the heading "Prelims":

         "Rep asked why no essential passages index.  IJ took exception to a
         child being in  the  court  and  left  the  bench.   On  return  he
         chastised the rep but agreed to continue."

    Mr Govan's note records what may well be  verbatim  the  questions  and
    answers given and the submissions in detail.  His own submissions  take
    up a page.  Mr Katani's submissions are recorded  over  a  page  and  a
    half.  Towards the end of those submissions Mr Govan records:

         "IJ:  You have now referred to six passages and told  me  that  you
         would only be referring to a  couple.   You  have  not  provided  a
         schedule of essential passages and I am not happy about  situation.
         Directed to do something and ignored it.   Where  leave  me?   Your
         silence says enough."

30. In the course of his submissions, Mr Matthews took me to  the  relevant
    passage from  Dr  Joffe's  report  where  he  considers  the  issue  of
    nationality as follows:

         "Originally, under  the  1958  Nationality  code,  nationality  was
         conferred by filiation from the father, although, as a result of an
         amendment in 2007, it can now  also  be  conferred  by  the  mother
         (Article 6 of the law).

31. A further passage refers to nationality being defined as being separate
    from citizenship.  Failure to register a child for  his  or  her  civil
    status involves the loss of benefits of citizenship.   It  is  possible
    for an unregistered person to self-register but the procedure  is  long
    and cumbersome.  Almost certainly, this would require the services of a
    Moroccan lawyer.  Even if I were persuaded that Mr Katani was precluded
    from making a submission on this point, I am not satisfied that had  he
    done so it would have materially affected the outcome.

32. By way of conclusion therefore any acrimony that developed between  the
    judge and Mr Katani did not spill over into unfairness  and  fell  well
    short of any possible suggestion of bias.  I do not consider  that  any
    fair minded observer aware of all the facts would conclude  that  there
    was a real possibility that the judge was biased.

33. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed

                Date 14 February 2019
UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson






















