
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/05323/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 May 2019                         |On 25 June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     aAH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Heybrook of Counsel instructed by Caveat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, A Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this matter the Appellant was granted permission to appeal by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett.  At paragraph 2 the  learned  Judge  made
    the following observations which encapsulate the issue before me:-

         "The Appellant is a minor now  aged  16  who  did  not  attend  the
         hearing and was not represented.  He says the Judge failed to treat
         him as a  child  and  did  not  apply  the  Presidential  Guidance.
         However, the Judge specifically refers to his age and that he is an
         unaccompanied asylum-seeking child  in  reaching  his  conclusions.
         However, it is arguable that the Judge erred in concluding that  it
         was not possible that his family was  targeted  as  the  background
         evidence referred considerable human rights abuses by Al-Sadr.   It
         is arguable that the judge should  have  adjourned  the  appeal  or
         given the Appellant's representative, who had failed to diarise the
         hearing, further time to try to contact the Appellant who  may  not
         have been aware of the hearing."


2.   In submissions before me today  Miss  Heybrook  said  that  the  matter
    essentially focuses on whether there was unfairness in the way in which
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Herbert  had  treated  the  Appellant.   She
    referred to paragraphs 5 and 24 of the judge's decision.  At  paragraph
    5 the judge had noted the following:-

     "Neither the receptionist nor the solicitor who was contacted  appeared
         to have any direct knowledge of the case and a request to have  the
         firm to call  back  with  some  explanation  proved  fruitless.   I
         therefore proceeded  to  hear  the  case  in  the  absence  of  the
         Appellant  and  the  representative.   It  may  well  be  that  the
         Appellant has some reasonable explanation why neither  he  nor  his
         representative were in appearance.  That may be the subject of some
         further application or appeal."

3.   Miss Heybrook  also  referred  to  paragraph  24  of  the  FtT  Judge's
    decision which says as follows:-

     "Whilst dictating this decision, the Appellant's  solicitor  phoned  my
         clerk stating that the legal adviser who prepared this file  is  on
         maternity leave and the solicitor on duty has only  currently  seen
         the notice.  There was an apology made over the phone as it was not
         put in  the  diary  and  apparently,  they  had  not  notified  the
         Appellant  of  the  hearing  and  they  missed   the   notification
         themselves.  There  is  nothing  in  writing  to  that  effect  and
         therefore I decided to proceed with the hearing as the  conduct  of
         this case by the solicitor is clearly unacceptable.  I have no  way
         of knowing if that information is genuine or not."

4.   Miss Heybrook also said that there had been no real  hearing  that  had
    taken place and the overriding objective had required that there be  an
    adjournment and a new hearing when a child was involved.  She said  the
    other grounds of appeal related to whether or  not  the  Appellant  was
    treated appropriately within the  Presidential  Guidance  when  dealing
    with assessing the evidence of a child.

5.   Mr Tufan in brief but appropriate  submissions  said  that  there  were
    shortcomings from the representatives.  He said it was a matter for me,
    but ultimately when considering  issues  in  respect  of  fairness  and
    noting that there was a child that these factors will have to be  taken
    into account.

6.   As I indicated during the submissions it is  my  judgment  that  it  is
    appropriate for this matter to be remitted for  a  rehearing  and  that
    none of the current findings can stand.   That  remitted  hearing  will
    take place at the First-tier Tribunal.  It is appropriate for me to say
    that the solicitors acting on behalf of this child really  should  have
    done more.  There should have  been  a  witness  statement  or  further
    documents from them dealing with what went wrong  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing at the First-tier Tribunal, why they had failed to  attend  and
    why they had failed to inform the Appellant of the hearing date.  I was
    also concerned that the solicitors refer to the  overriding  objective,
    but the overriding objective applies both ways. Much time was taken  up
    by the First-tier Tribunal whereby the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    made significant enquiries on three occasions through his clerk to seek
    to understand why there was a failure of attendance on  13th  March  at
    Taylor House. It is not the Tribunal's  task  to  chase  attendance  at
    hearings. The system would grind to a halt if  Judges  had  to  put  in
    calls to solicitors to ask if they will attend a hearing.  Additionally
    this case has come into the list at the Upper Tribunal when  there  are
    many other cases which await hearing dates.

7.   Therefore, although I make the  decision  that  I  do  that  this  case
    should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  lessons  have  to  be
    learned in terms of attendance at  hearings  by  Appellants  and  their
    representatives.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
    and is set aside.
The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   A Mahmood                               Date: 28 5 19


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
