
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA059042016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2017                           |On 2 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [F S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Worthington, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, [FS], who is aged over 18 years, claims to be a  citizen
    of Iran.  He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  A  Khan)
    against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  25  May  2016  to
    refuse to grant him asylum and to remove him from the  United  Kingdom.
    The First-tier Tribunal (in a decision promulgated on 10 November 2016)
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  falls  to  be  set
    aside.  I have reached that decision for  the  following  reasons.   At
    [30], Judge Khan wrote:

         "In his evidence, the appellant said that his father paid  him  100
         Rihals which was equivalent to 10 Tumans.   Why  would  his  father
         give the appellant reward for his work in Rihals and not in  Tumans
         which is an Iranian  currency?   I  do  not  find  the  appellant's
         evidence credible or consistent.  I do not accept  the  appellant's
         evidence that he is  a  national  of  Iran  and  that  he  will  be
         persecuted for assisting his father in his  smuggling  business  in
         his return to Iran."

 3. Both parties accept that the judge's analysis is  factually  incorrect.
    As the grounds of appeal indicate, although the Tuman is no  longer  an
    official unit of Iranian currency, Iranians commonly express amounts of
    money and, in particular, prices of goods in Tumans.  I understand that
    1 Tuman is equal to 10 Rihals.  Judge Khan  appears  to  have  believed
    that a Rihal was not a unit of Iranian currency whereas a Tuman (a term
    for a multiple of Rihals)  was  a  unit.   I  accept  Mr  Worthington's
    submission that that the judge's misapprehension has led  him  directly
    to find that the appellant is not an Iranian national as he  claims  to
    be.  It is a finding which cannot stand.

 4. In essence, the Rule 24 reply of the Secretary of  State  asserts  that
    the judge made sufficient other negative findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's credibility for the factual error at [30] to be ignored.  I
    do not agree.  At [28], the paragraph where  the  judge  described  the
    appellant has having been "extremely vague and evasive" in  giving  his
    evidence, the judge has arguably  misunderstood  the  written  evidence
    before him.  The judge found that there was  a  "serious  contradiction
    and inconsistency" between the appellant's accounts as to  how  he  had
    found that his  father  had  been  arrested.   On  the  one  hand,  the
    appellant appears to have said that his father's cousin  had  contacted
    the appellant's mother who told him of the arrest and,  in  a  separate
    account, a villager by the name of Mohammed had informed the appellant.
     The contradiction would seem to be not as stark as Judge Khan  appears
    to have considered.  The answers which the appellant gave in his asylum
    interview at [27], [97] and [102] indicate that, from an early stage of
    his claim for asylum, the appellant  had  indicated  that  a  neighbour
    called Mohammed had been involved in  notifying  him  of  his  father's
    arrest.  I  do  not  say  that  the  appellant  has  necessarily  given
    consistent evidence  but  the  "serious  inconsistency"  [my  emphasis]
    identified by the judge is, on this analysis, not justified. There will
    need to be a new fact-finding exercise as all the findings of  fact  of
    Judge Khan shall be set aside.  In  consequence,  the  new  hearing  is
    better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to which this case  is  now
    returned.





Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 10 November 2016
    is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal  to  re-make  the
    decision.

No anonymity direction is made.




Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane                           12 April 2017

