
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05460/2017


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th February 2018                 |On 22nd February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jaquiss counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having  considered  all  of  the  circumstances  I  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC  promulgated  on  the  20th  July  2017
    whereby the judge dismissed his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse his protection claim on  the  grounds  of  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 4. By leave granted on 12 December 2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam
    granted permission to appeal. In granting permission  the  judge  noted
    the following:-

         "By any account the appellant was  a  child  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing before the judge on although this was noted by  the  judge,
         it is arguable that the judge did not consider the extent to  which
         is age impacted on his evidence. The appellant did  not  give  oral
         evidence in this was arguably a factor the judge took into  account
         when assessing credibility (see paragraph 40 (v)). It  is  arguable
         that unfairness followed (see AM [2017] EWCA Civ 1123."

 5. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in  the  first  instance
    whether or not there was an error of law in the decision by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

 6. The grounds of appeal deal with a number of issues where it is  alleged
    the judge has erred in law.

 7. The appellant had  been  interviewed  about  specific  aspects  of  his
    appeal. It had been accepted that the appellant had travelled through a
    number of intermediate countries including Italy  and  France.  In  the
    refusal letter page E 15, final paragraph on the  page,  it  was  noted
    that the appellant had given a reason for not claiming asylum in  Italy
    and France. I would note that, if one examines the basis of that in the
    interview, the appellant immediately prior  to  that  was  asked  about
    Hungary, Italy and France [Q & A 115 & 116 of the interview]  and  gave
    an explanation that was supposedly covering all  3  countries.  In  the
    letter of refusal it appears to have been limited to Italy  and  France
    but the conclusion was to the effect that the failure to claim prior to
    arriving in the United Kingdom did not adversely affect the appellant's
    credibility. In part fact that the appellant was a minor  at  the  time
    that he was travelling was  material  in  the  respondent  making  that
    concession.

 8. In dealing with the failure of the appellant to claim asylum, the judge
    initially in paragraph 31 limits  himself  to  what  was  said  in  the
    appellant's statement and concludes that the  appellant  has  given  no
    explanation or reason for  not  claiming  asylum  in  any  intermediate
    country. Whilst that would be correct with regard to what was  said  in
    his statement the appellant had given an explanation in  interview  and
    the respondent had  accepted  that  explanation.  The  judge  continues
    considering that aspect and in paragraph 33 notes the answer  given  to
    question 116 of the interview but specifically states:-

         "... but I reject that as a reason  for  his  failure  to  make  an
         asylum claim in other countries through which he passed"

 9. In dealing with the issue in that  manner  the  judge  does  not  limit
    himself specifically to the countries he subsequently identified but to
    any country. There was nothing to indicate that the  judge  had  raised
    the issue of that concession with the representative for the appellant.
    The judge has concluded at paragraph 35  that  the  appellant  had  not
    given an adequate reason for  not  claiming  asylum  in  the  countries
    through which he passed prior to coming to the UK and found  that  that
    significantly bears against the credibility of the  appellant.  Clearly
    the issue of the appellant being a child was highly  material  in  that
    regard.

10. In that respect I draw attention to  the  cases  of  ST  (Child  asylum
    seekers) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 292 (IAC),  R  (on  the  application  of
    Ganidalgi) v SSHD [2001] 1WLR 479 and SSHD  v  Balasingham  Maheshwaran
    [2002] EWCA Civ 173. The general principle  is  that  unless  something
    arises during the hearing to bring the concession into question and the
    judge  specifically  brings  such  issue  to  the  attention   of   the
    representatives, concessions should be accepted. That is especially  so
    where as in ST an appellant is a minor. The appellant  in  the  present
    proceedings was a minor. The approach of the judge to the issue of  the
    concession made by the respondent and the adverse  credibility  finding
    made cannot stand in light of the case law identified.

11.   At the time of the hearing the appellant was a minor. That clearly is
    a highly material fact and the judge should have  considered  carefully
    how to approach the evidence of the appellant, who had to be considered
    a vulnerable witness by reason of his age and that such may impact upon
    the account he gave both in his statement and in interview. The age  of
    the appellant is also material in assessing his account of  the  events
    that occurred to him in Afghanistan.  Having  considered  the  decision
    with care there is no reference in the context of the approach  to  the
    evidence of the appellant being a minor and a vulnerable witness in his
    being interviewed and giving his statement nor reference to giving  due
    allowance for that fact in assessing the evidence. Again  I  find  that
    the approach of the judge discloses an error of law.

12. I would further note that  there  are  other  issues  relating  to  the
    background evidence. The appellant  had  produced  a  photograph  of  a
    tattoo, which he alleged  had  been  carried  out  by  the  Taliban  to
    identify him  as  a  candidate  to  be  a  suicide  bomber.  There  was
    background evidence  that  at  least  one  Taliban  commander  tattooed
    children for such purpose. The judge finds that  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that the tattoo that the appellant has is of a  type  used  by
    the Taliban for such purposes. There was no evidence that it  was  not.
    There was no evidence as to what types of tattoos the Taliban commander
    used. The background evidence did provide some  support  that  children
    were tattooed. As such  the  background  evidence  could  provide  some
    support to the appellant's account and should have been  considered  as
    such. There is no reference to the background evidence by the judge.

13. In the circumstances for the reasons set out there are material  errors
    of law  in  the  decision.  I  considered  how  the  appeal  should  be
    determined. In the circumstances the findings of fact made by the judge
    cannot stand. The appropriate course is  to  remit  the  appeal  for  a
    hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal. The findings of fact  cannot
    stand in light of the matters set out.

    Notice of Decision

14. I allow the appeal of the appellant and remitted the case for  a  fresh
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. I make an anonymity direction.



Signed

Date 18th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                             Date 18th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



