
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05097/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 August 2017                        |On 20 September 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     r r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Fitzsimons instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Respondent  (RR).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. For convenience, although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I
    will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose date of birth has  been
    assessed as 1 January 1999.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  11
    October 2015, aged 16 years.  On 16 November 2015, he  claimed  asylum.
    The basis of his claim was that his father had been a commander in  the
    Taliban who had  been  killed  by  German  soldiers  (as  part  of  the
    international force in Afghanistan) when the family  home  was  raided.
    The appellant, thereafter, was sought by the Taliban to recruit him.

 4. On 4 May 2016, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.  However, as an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking child he was granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain until 31 June 2016.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  K  Real
    allowed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  First, she  accepted
    the appellant's account that his father had been  a  Taliban  commander
    and had been killed by international forces in Afghanistan and that the
    Taliban had sought to recruit the appellant.  The judge found that  the
    appellant would, therefore, be at risk of persecution in his home area.
     Secondly, the judge found that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to internally relocate to Kabul.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on essentially three grounds.  First, the judge had  erred  in
    law in reaching her positive finding  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    account.  Secondly, the judge had failed to  provide  adequate  reasons
    for concluding that the appellant had lost contact with his  family  in
    Afghanistan, in particular his uncle who had arranged for him to  leave
    Afghanistan and had sent a copy of a "night letter" to the appellant in
    the UK.  Thirdly, in concluding that it would be "unduly harsh" for the
    appellant to relocate to Kabul, the  judge  had  failed  to  apply  the
    country guidance case of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT
    00163 (IAC) which recognises that, in general, internal  relocation  to
    Kabul is not unreasonable.

 7. On 17 January 2017, the First-tier Tribunal granted  the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal on grounds 2 and 3 but refused permission on
    ground 1.

 8. On 24 May 2017, the appellant filed a rule 24 reply seeking  to  uphold
    the judge's decision.

Discussion

 9. On behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Richards  accepted  that
    permission had only been granted only in grounds 2 and 3 and these were
    the only grounds upon which he could rely.

10. As regards ground 2, he did  not  seek  to  press  that  ground  as  he
    conceded that the judge had given reasons at para 35  of  her  decision
    for reaching her finding that the appellant had lost contact  with  his
    uncle and it had not been possible to trace his family through the  Red
    Cross.

11. Mr Richards was, in my judgment, correct not to  press  ground  2.   In
    para 35, the judge made a clear finding that  the  appellant  had  lost
    contact with his uncle.  That was his evidence and the judge found (and
    that finding is no longer challenged) that he was a  credible  witness.
    In addition, efforts to trace his family through the Red Cross had been
    unsuccessful.  Ground 2 is not made out.

12. Instead, Mr Richards focused upon ground  3  and  he  relied  upon  the
    country guidance decision in AK and  passages  from  that  decision  at
    paras [224], [225], [212] and [253] where the Upper Tribunal had  noted
    the assistance packages available to returnees to Afghanistan and  that
    "single young males" returning without family support could  do  so  in
    safety and without undue hardship.

13. The difficulty with ground 3 and its reliance upon  AK,  is  that  that
    country guidance is subject to the earlier country guidance decision in
    AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  0016  (IAC).   The
    Upper Tribunal in  AK  explicitly  preserved  that  decision  as  being
    "unaffected" by its decision in AK (see head note B(i)).

14. Ms Fitzsimons submitted that  AA  was  the  relevant  country  guidance
    decision as it concerned the return  of  unaccompanied  children.   She
    submitted that the appellant was 17 at the date of the judge's decision
    - and therefore a child - and he would be returning  unaccompanied  and
    the judge's finding was that he had lost  touch  with  his  family  who
    could not be traced.  He would, therefore, be an unaccompanied child in
    Kabul.  On the basis of AA, Ms Fitzsimons submitted that the judge  was
    entitled for the reasons she gave in para 28 to find that, despite  the
    availability of return packages, it would be unduly harsh to expect him
    to live in Kabul as a  returning  unaccompanied  child  with  PTSD,  no
    family support, no qualifications, an inability to read or  write  Dari
    or Pashtu and who was vulnerable.

15.  I  accept  Ms  Fitzsimons  submission.   In  AA,   the   position   of
    unaccompanied children without support on return recognises that  there
    may be risks of serious harm and child protection  issues.   The  judge
    referred to AK and AA at para 38 in reaching her finding that it  would
    be unduly harsh for the appellant to live in Kabul as follows:

         "I have considered both AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
         UKUT  00163(IAC)  and  the  more  child  specific  guidance  in  AA
         (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) and  I
         find that as a young man with no family support, and post traumatic
         stress disorder, no qualifications and  an  inability  to  read  or
         write Dari or Pashtu, he would be extremely  vulnerable  on  return
         and face very significant difficulties.  He is not yet an adult and
         even upon reaching adulthood the difficulties  he  faces  will  not
         suddenly evaporate.  I find that any return  package  would  do  no
         more than mitigate the  initial  situation,  because  I  find  that
         without connections or skills the Appellant would face  significant
         difficulties in establishing and then sustaining himself.   I  find
         that  relocation  would  be  unduly   harsh   in   his   individual
         circumstances."

16. AK was concerned with an adult returning to Kabul.   AA  was  concerned
    with an unaccompanied child.  Although the appellant was 17 at the date
    of the hearing, he remained a child.  The guidance in AK had no binding
    application  to  him.   It  was  for  the  judge  to  assess  all   the
    circumstances on return in considering whether it would be unreasonable
    or unduly harsh for him to live in Kabul.  The judge took into  account
    that he would have no family support  (a  finding  entirely  consistent
    with para 35 of the judge's decision), that he suffered from  PTSD  and
    that he had no qualifications or ability to read or write the  relevant
    languages.  She took into account the availability of  return  packages
    but that would do "no more than mitigate the initial  situation".   The
    judge was, in my judgment, entitled to find that the  appellant,  as  a
    child in these circumstances, would face significant  difficulties  and
    was extremely  vulnerable.   I  am  wholly  un-persuaded  that  it  was
    irrational for the judge to find that it would, in those circumstances,
    be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect  the  appellant  to  live  in
    Kabul.

17. For these reasons, therefore, I reject ground 3 also.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    on asylum grounds did not involve the making of an error of law.   That
    decision, therefore, stands.

19. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.




                                 Signed

                                                                  [pic]

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  18 September 2017




