
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05573/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 April 2019                     |On 26th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     TVt
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, instructed by Peter G Farrell
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, where he was born in 1983.   His
    protection claim was refused by the Secretary  of  State  on  17  April
    2018.  He appealed unsuccessfully to First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly
    who summarised the appellant's claim at paragraph [1] of his  decision,
    as follows:

         "1.  The appellant is a national of Vietnam born  in  August  1983.
             He made a claim for protection in December 2017.  His  account
             is that in Vietnam he along with 7 others held a 10 year lease
             of land from the government which they farmed.  However, after
             5 years the Vietnamese  authorities  took  possession  of  the
             land.  The farmers had protested in October 2014 and  a  fight
             broke out.  The appellant became  fearful  that  he  would  be
             arrested as someone was injured.   Consequently,  in  February
             2015 he left his home country and travel [sic]  to  the  Czech
             Republic.  He then travelled on to Germany  and  then  France,
             arriving ultimately in the United Kingdom in June 2015."

 2. The Secretary of State had observed in his decision that the  appellant
    had not wished to claim asylum but only wanted  to  claim  humanitarian
    protection.  In  a  confusing  decision  letter,  in  which  there  was
    frequent reference to "free text" the respondent concluded that it  was
    not accepted the appellant had a genuine subjective fear on  return  to
    Vietnam.  Matters were rectified in  a  further  decision  and  reasons
    letter of the same date.

 3. After observing that he could  not  see  how  the  appellant  could  be
    considered to be a member of a particular social group and  that  there
    was nothing to  suggest  that  the  appellant  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking, the judge concluded:

         "14. Ultimately, I find this to be a very weak claim.  I agree with
             the respondent that there have been inconsistencies in respect
             of the underlying claim.  Some of the points made on behalf of
             the respondent are not particularly meritorious.   An  example
             is the suggestion that if  he  was  too  weak  to  work  on  a
             building site, he would be too weak to farm.   I  also  accept
             the appellant  may  not  appreciate  the  distinction  between
             ownership and leasehold in relation  to  the  original  family
             farm.  His account about the subsequent lease of the  land  is
             very general.  I accept he may be mistaken about the  size  of
             the land.  There is no requirement  to  produce  corroborative
             evidence but that is not the says claim [sic] could  not  have
             been strengthened by the production  of  something  about  the
             claimed land acquisition.

         15.  The appellant remained in Vietnam on his account  for  several
             months after the incident.  There is a possibility he  was  in
             hiding.  However, his subsequent delay  in  claiming  detracts
             considerably from his credibility.   I  find  his  explanation
             that he wanted to get to an English-speaking  country  carries
             little weight.

         16.  Ultimately, even on the low standard of proof I  find  he  has
             not established his claim.

         17.  Regarding his article 8 rights, there has been a  considerable
             lack of proofs.  There is a birth certificate  naming  him  as
             the father of a child.  I have been provided with no  evidence
             about his partner and her circumstances.  In particular, there
             is an absence of evidence to suggest she  is  a  mother  of  a
             British child.  I was told  her  application  to  remain  been
             [sic] unsuccessful and she is  appealing.   As  things  stand,
             both could return to Vietnam and continue  their  family  life
             together.  Their child is only a baby and I can see no  reason
             why the child could not accompany them.  There is  nothing  to
             suggest the child has any right to be here.  The child's  best
             interest are to be with his parents.

         18.  The appellant has only been here a short time  and  will  have
             little by way of private life.  I can see no reason why  [sic]
             could not reintegrate into life in his  home  country  in  the
             short time he has been away as well as a fact his parents  are
             there.  His partner is from the same country.

         19.  I can see no  other  basis  whereby  the  appellant  would  be
             entitled to remain.  I consider the  public  interest  factors
             set out in section 117B  &  nothing  which  would  assist  the
             appellant.  Consequently, I find myself in agreement with  the
             respondent's decision."

 4. The grounds of challenge re-state the appellant's claim and argue  that
    it was unclear from the judge's decision whether the  central  core  of
    the claim had been accepted or not.  Concrete  findings  of  fact  were
    lacking in respect  of  the  refugee  claim  as  well  as  whether  the
    appellant's  partner  was  the  mother  of  a  British  child  or  not.
    Permission was granted by Judge Osborne.  He observed:

         "3.  In a concise decision, it is arguable that the judge failed to
             make specific and/or adequately clear findings on the core  of
             the Appellant's appeal to the extent that the  Appellant  does
             not know why his appeal was dismissed.

         4.   This arguably material error of law  having  been  identified,
             all the issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 1.  Although  initially  arguing  that  the  judge  had   erred   in   his
    consideration of the protection grounds, on reflection,  Mr  Caskie  no
    longer relied on that ground of challenge.  He was correct  to  do  so.
    The judge set out in his decision all relevant factors relied on by the
    appellant and explained clearly at [16] of his decision  that  even  on
    the low standard of proof he found the appellant  had  not  established
    his claim.  This was clear enough indication  that  the  facts  of  the
    claim had not been accepted or that the appellant would be at risk.

 2. Nevertheless, Mr Caskie maintained the argument that the judge erred in
    relation to his decision on Article 8 grounds.  The material before him
    including the record of interview of the appellant indicated there  was
    evidence showing that the appellant's  partner  was  the  mother  of  a
    British and therefore a qualifying child and furthermore an  indication
    that she had been granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  which  was
    pending.  Mr Govan accepted these points and agreed that the judge  had
    erred. I do have some sympathy for the judge since the  second  of  the
    two  refusal  decisions  indicated   that   the   appellant   who   was
    unrepresented at the time had been unclear  on  his  partner's  status.
    The Secretary of State knew well or at least would have  been  able  to
    readily establish that she had discretionary leave to remain  based  on
    the British citizen child and that there was an application pending  at
    the time of the hearing culminating in a grant of further leave  on  21
    November 2018.

 3. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  insofar
    as it relates to  the  Article  8  grounds.   Mr  Govan  indicated  the
    Secretary of  State  was  to  reconsider  the  matter  and  accordingly
    withdrew the Article 8 decision under challenge.  Sitting as a Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal, and applying  Rule  17  of  its  rules,  I  am
    satisfied that the effect of the Secretary of State's decision is  that
    the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal is  withdrawn.   The  appellant's
    application for further leave to remain is pending and awaits a further
    decision.

 4. As accepted by Mr Caskie, the appellant's appeal in the Upper  Tribunal
    must therefore be dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
                                                 Date 19 April 2019.
UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



