
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/05462/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision and Reasons          |
|On  6 June 2017                        |Promulgated                         |
|                                       |On 19 June 2017                     |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between


                                MD RABIN MIA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant


 1. The appellant is a Bangladesh national born on 14th July 1988.  He  was
    granted a Tier 4 (General) Student visa on 8th March 2011  and  arrived
    in the United  Kingdom  in  March  2011.   His  sponsor's  licence  was
    cancelled, he made no further application and his leave expired on 20th
    December 2012.  He was encountered on 9th January 2016 working  at  the
    Blue Ginger restaurant.  He gave a false name and  date  of  birth  and
    said he had leave to remain until December 2016  as  he  was  studying.
    Checks revealed his true identity and immigration history.  He asserted
    that he had submitted a further application but in  fact  he  had  not.
    He then claimed asylum on 14th  January  2014  advancing  that  he  was
    involved in BNP student politics, was afraid of the ruling Awami  party
    and that the authorities had come looking for him  in  2012,  2013  and
    2015.   The Secretary of State rejected his claim in  part  because  of
    the delay in claiming asylum.

 2. The appellant appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray dismissed
    his appeal. The appellant made an application for permission to appeal.
     It is correct to state that the appellant's application for permission
    to appeal confirmed that the tribunal had dismissed his appeal  against
    refusal of his asylum claim and on the day of the hearing he could  not
    appear before the court because of physical injury and that was why  he
    could not show all his evidence to the tribunal.

 3. The appellant was granted permission to appeal against the decision  of
    the First Tier Tribunal Judge L Murray in the following terms

     "the judge made an arguable error of law but for which the outcome  of
    the appeal might have been different.  By proceeding with  the  hearing
    in the absence of  the  appellant  the  judge  effectively  denied  the
    appellant an opportunity to present evidence or  argue  his  case.  The
    issue raised in the application permission was  one  of  fairness.  The
    judge presumed - the evidential foundation for his presumption was  not
    stated - that the appellant would be able to forward medical  documents
    so as to confirm the injuries  which  he  had  sustained  stop  if  the
    appellant was in hospital having suffered fractures to his legs and  to
    his backbone it is arguable that he would not have been able to forward
    medical documents.  It was in any case a matter for conjecture  whether
    medical documents confirming the nature and extent of his injuries were
    in existence although the judge presumed, without evidence,  that  such
    documents were in existence.  The judge arguably failed to have  regard
    to the duty of fairness and had he done so it is arguable that he would
    have granted the appellant's most recent request  for  an  adjournment.
    The application for permission is granted".

Conclusions

 4. At the hearing before me the appellant failed to attend.   I note  that
    there was notification to him from the Upper Tribunal of the date, time
    and venue of the hearing to  the  address  that  he  had  used  in  his
    application  for  permission  to  appeal.  I  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had been indeed notified of  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Therefore in the appeal  before  me  the  appellant  did  not
    attend, had not send in medical documentation in  connection  with  his
    application for permission to appeal  and  did  not  send  any  medical
    documentation in to  the  Upper  tribunal  either  in  support  of  his
    previous assertions of fractured legs and a backbone or  in  connection
    with his absence from this  hearing.   I  considered  that  the  matter
    should, in fairness, proceed.

 5. Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant had  not  submitted  any  medical
    evidence with his grounds for permission to appeal and he had confirmed
    his address as being the one used by the Tribunal, on 19 December 2016.
    The clerk for the Upper Tribunal  confirmed  that  there  had  been  no
    communication from the appellant in relation to the hearing before me.

 6. An inspection of the file reveals the following.

 7. The appellant in a 'reply notice' received on 20 October  2016  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal indicated that he wished to obtain copies  of  case
    papers that had been filed against him in Bangladesh and charge sheets.
    A prehearing review was listed for 3 November 2016  and  the  appellant
    was advised that the appeal would proceed  to  a  full  hearing  on  17
    November 2016. On 1 November 2016 the appellant advised that he had not
    been able to gather all of the documents and would not be able to  send
    his documents on time and he requested  that  his  prehearing  date  be
    postponed. His application for an adjournment of the prehearing  review
    was refused and he was notified that he should submitted  documents  in
    line with standard directions and  no later than five working  days  of
    the full hearing.  He clearly did not do that.

 8. Nonetheless on 4 November  2016  the  Tribunal  sent  the  appellant  a
    direction that he should submit his  further  documentation  no  letter
    than the five working days before the full hearing. On 4 November  2016
    the appellant was sent  notice  of  the  hearing  date  that  being  17
    November 2016.

 9. On 16 November a letter (purported to be  in  the  handwriting  of  the
    friend of the appellant but in the same handwriting  as  other  letters
    sent by the appellant) was received by the tribunal  stating  that  the
    appellant had been involved in a car  accident  and  he  was  seriously
    injured. That was one day prior to the hearing.  The tribunal  sent  by
    special  delivery  a  letter  dated  16  November  2016  refusing   the
    adjournment noting that the  appellant  was  in  breach  of  directions
    having failed to lodge his bundle of evidence, the appellant  had  been
    refused  an  adjournment  previously  and  the  application   was   not
    accompanied by medical evidence even though the appellant was  said  to
    be in hospital and an inpatient so that obtaining the same would appear
    to be straightforward.

10. On the day of the hearing, that  is  17  November  2016  at  11.03  the
    tribunal received a fax from the appellant stating that he could not be
    present because he had an accident 'the day before yesterday' and 'both
    his legs got fractured and his backbone as  well'.  He  asked  for  his
    hearing to be postponed and  that  he  be  allocated  a  new  date.  He
    asserted that this letter was sent from his hospital bed.

11. At  paragraphs 10 and 11 of the first Tier Tribunal decision the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  recorded as follows

    "the appellant did not attend the hearing. The tribunal had received  a
    letter from the appellant on 16 November 2016 purportedly written by  a
    friend in which it was claimed that the appellant was involved in a car
    accident on the date of writing (the letter  is  undated).  The  letter
    states that the appellant is seriously injured and his  legs  had  been
    fractured and backbone as  well.  An  adjournment  was  requested.  The
    application was refused by the tribunal as the appellant was in  breach
    of directions having failed to lodge his bundle of evidence".

12. As can be seen from the inspection of the file in fact the  adjournment
    had been made for numerous reasons not least  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to provide any medical evidence.

13. The judge proceeded

      "he had been refused an adjournment previously and the application was
    not accompanied by medical evidence. He was said to be an inpatient  so
    the obtaining of the same should have  been  straightforward.  Further,
    the application was said not to be written by the appellant but was  in
    the same hand  as  a  previous  application  to  adjourn  made  by  the
    appellant in person stop the refusal of  an  adjournment  was  sent  by
    special delivery on 16 November 2016"

14. The first-tier Tribunal judge  refusing  the  adjournment,  had  merely
    noted the previous history on the file and  at  paragraph  11  recorded
    further as follows

15. Although the relevant test is simply fairness and the judge referred to
    the 'overriding objective' and that in itself encompasses consideration
    of fairness.  The Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 confirms at Rule 2 (1)

    'The overriding objective of these Rules is to enable the  Tribunal  to
    deal with cases fairly and justly'.

16. It is evident that the judge was at pains to  consider  the  background
    and history  of  the  previous  adjournment  requests  which  had  been
    refused. I find that the judge did implicitly,  in  effect,  apply  the
    test of fairness.  The judge was  cognisant  that  a  friend  had  been
    assisting the appellant and had written had written into  the  tribunal
    and was aware of his claimed predicament. The appellant had  had  ample
    opportunity to put forward his documentation. The  decision  letter  of
    the Secretary of State refusing his asylum claim was dated 12 May 2016.
    The appellant had had ample  time  to  submit  evidence  and  time  and
    opportunity to  submit  medical  evidence.   As  the  judge  noted  the
    appellant claimed to be in hospital, he had access to  a  fax  machine,
    and as he was being clearly assisted by a friend there was no reason as
    to why he could not submit medical documentation.

17. The judge assessed the evidence holistically on the papers  before  him
    and gave a myriad of reasons for refusing the appeal. The appellant has
    now had over six months to produce medical evidence and has  failed  to
    do so. He was clearly aware at the date of the hearing before the first-
    tier  Tribunal  and  that  he   was   expected   to   produce   medical
    documentation, not least because of the formal refusal by the  tribunal
    of his adjournment both prior to the date of the  hearing  and  on  the
    date of the hearing in connection with the lack of medical evidence.

18. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to take the approach he did
    and to proceed with the hearing for the reasons  he  gave  and  in  the
    interests of the overriding objective. Fairness must also  be  accorded
    to the opposing party and the tribunal must consider the  interests  of
    justice. Nothing in this determination  contravenes  the  principal  in
    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  and  there  is
    no error of law in the decision of Judge Murray.  That  decision  shall
    stand.


Signed                 Helen Rimington                    Date    16th  June
     2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



