
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05806/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th November 2018                         |On 27th November 2018         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                mr Mehmet [D]
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Panagiotopoulou
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 15th September 1993 is a citizen of Turkey.   The
    Appellant was represented by  Miss  Panagiotopoulou  of  Counsel.   The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Howells a Senior Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2.  The  Appellant  had  claimed  asylum  on  12th  December  2017.   That
    application had been refused by the Respondent on 16th April 2018.  The
    Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Rowlands sitting at Hatton Cross on 6th June
    2018.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.
    Application for permission to appeal was  made  on  23rd  August  2018.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 7th September 2018.  Permission was granted in respect of paragraphs
    3, 5, 4, 6 and 7 of the Grounds of Appeal.

 3. Directions were issued for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  firstly  consider
    whether an error of law had been made by the First-tier Tribunal or not
    and the matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. Miss Panagiotopoulou did not deal with  grounds  covering  the  alleged
    error in respect of consideration of medical evidence as that  had  not
    been granted.  It was submitted the judge had failed to give reasons or
    findings in relation to the Appellant's past treatment  and  detention.
    It was also said the judge had made a finding at paragraph 35 that  the
    Appellant was an ordinary member of the HDP and was satisfied therefore
    that that would not raise a risk on return.  It was said that there was
    ample country evidence including  Home  Office  material  showing  that
    ordinary  members  or  supporters  could  potentially  be  at  risk  of
    detention.  Reference was made to a number of those matters within  the
    bundle.  It was submitted the judge had failed to have regard to  those
    country matters.  It was further said the judge had ignored  or  failed
    to  make  a  finding  on  whether  the  authorities  had  retained  the
    Appellant's passport and therefore would know his identity.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Howells accepted that the country material including the Home Office
    guidance indicated that ordinary members of the HDP could come  to  the
    attention of the authorities, for example  if  they  were  involved  in
    demonstrations.  It was said that the findings  at  paragraph  33  were
    sufficient to show  that  the  judge  had  made  adequate  findings  on
    credibility that the Appellant had not been detained in  the  past  and
    therefore had not come to the attention of the authorities.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    and the evidence.  I now provide that decision.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge has set out the background, evidence and submissions made  at
    the hearing in some length over 34  paragraphs.   However  the  judge's
    consideration and analysis of the evidence was contained briefly within
    three paragraphs only.  At paragraph 35 the judge said "I  am  prepared
    to accept that he has provided  documentary  evidence  to  support  his
    claim to be an ordinary member and no more.  I am  not  satisfied  that
    this, in itself, would raise a risk to him of detention,  ill-treatment
    or torture on return".  At  paragraph  36  he  stated  "the  Respondent
    relies on the country information suggesting that low level people like
    him are not of adverse interest".  He did not accept  as  credible  the
    Appellant had been arrested or detained on three occasions as  claimed.
    This was because he said there was no evidence to support the claim and
    he found the Appellant did not pursue  a  visit  visa  application  nor
    leave Turkey speedily following those incidents.

 8. The judge in his brief examination  of  the  evidence  and  submissions
    appears to have concluded that ordinary members of the HDP would not be
    at risk.  The country  material  including  the  Home  Office  guidance
    however does show, as accepted by Mr Howells, that ordinary members can
    be at risk if they are known to the authorities, for example by  taking
    part in demonstrations.  The Appellant's case was that he  accepted  he
    was  only  an  ordinary  member.   However  he  had  claimed  to   have
    distributed leaflets  and  attended  meetings  at  election  time.   He
    further claimed to have been arrested at a demonstration and thereafter
    had been arrested twice at his home following police raids.  Those were
    the core claims in dispute as noted in the refusal letter.

 9. Whilst the country material did not demonstrate a presumption that  all
    ordinary members of the HDP were at risk, it did show that an  ordinary
    member could be  at  risk  of  adverse  attention  dependent  upon  his
    activities and whether by such he had come to the adverse attention  of
    the authorities.  It was necessary therefore for the judge to  consider
    those activities claimed by the Appellant that had drawn him  adversely
    to the attention  of  the  authorities.   The  judge  did  not  provide
    adequate reasons why he dismissed the Appellant's  claimed  arrest  and
    detention, essentially relying on  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to
    pursue a visa application in a timely fashion or leave  Turkey  sooner.
    The speed or tardiness of the Appellant's timetable were  matters  that
    postdated his claimed arrest and detention.  It was incumbent upon  the
    judge to have considered the  credibility  or  otherwise  of  the  core
    issues raised by the Appellant in order to conclude whether or  not  he
    had been arrested or detained and  the  impact  therefore  on  risk  on
    return.  Tardiness in pursuing a visa application or leaving Turkey may
    well have been factors to consider but considered in isolation did  not
    provide an adequate assessment of the Appellant's claim.  It may be  in
    part the judge was of the belief that there was no risk to an  ordinary
    member of the HDP on return generally.

10. The lack of adequate assessment and reasoning in respect of those  core
    issues in this case did lead to a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

11. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    and I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I direct that
    the matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
    hearing, not to be heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Rowlands.



    No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




                                 DIRECTIONS

 1) This case  should  be  listed  at  Newport  hearing  centre  given  the
    Appellant's home address.

 2) Any request for the services of an interpreter  must  be  made  to  the
    Tribunal in writing  at  the  latest  seven  days  in  advance  of  the
    scheduled hearing date.


 3) The parties should produce an indexed and paginated bundle of documents
    including all the material that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    together with any supplementary material and serve such bundle  on  the
    Tribunal and the other party at  least  ten  working  days  before  the
    scheduled hearing date.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
