
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05355/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 December 2019                   |On 17 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     n S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dolan, Counsel instructed by Shawstone
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His date of birth is 1 October
    1990.  His appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State of  24
    May 2019 to refuse to grant him asylum was dismissed by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal M A Khan in a decision promulgated on  3  September
    2019 following a hearing on 15 August 2019.  The Appellant was  granted
    permission to appeal by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bristow on  22
    October 2019. The matter came before me to determine whether Judge Khan
    had made an error of law.

 2. The judge heard the Appellant give oral evidence.  His  case  was  that
    his family in Pakistan had disowned him because he married  a  Romanian
    woman here in the UK.  As a result of this he had  been  threatened  by
    his maternal uncle. The Appellant's mother  was  also  attacked.    The
    Appellant claims to be at risk from his uncle, his uncle's sons and his
    own brother should he return to Pakistan.

 3. There was before the judge  a  psychiatric  report  prepared  by  Dr  K
    Balasubramaniam.  Dr Balasubramaniam examined the Appellant on 23  July
    2019.  He concluded that the Appellant was suffering from a  depressive
    episode as  evidenced  by  persistent  low  mood,  poor  concentration,
    disturbed sleep, feelings of hopelessness, helplessness  and  transient
    suicidal thoughts.  He concluded that the causation of  his  depressive
    episode was his family  having  disowned  him,  having  received  death
    threats from his uncle and brother, his relationship with  his  partner
    having ended and  difficulties  relating  to  his  asylum  claim.   The
    Appellant was being treated with anti-depressant  medication.   He  had
    attended counselling sessions.  The expert's evidence was  that  it  is
    known that people suffering from depression  have  memory  difficulties
    and poor concentration which affects their recollection of events.  The
    expert concluded  that  he  was  suffering  from  a  severe  degree  of
    depression and that removal would have a negative impact on his  mental
    state because he has an intense fear  of  returning  to  Pakistan.  The
    Appellant, according to the expert, was not showing signs  of  suicidal
    ideation when he was examined, however he has self-harmed in  the  past
    (on two occasions) and the risk of suicide will be increased if  he  is
    forced to leave the UK.  As far as I am aware, there was  no  challenge
    by the Respondent to the medical evidence.

 4. The Appellant was interviewed about his asylum claim  (B,  Respondent's
    bundle). The following is an extract from the interview.

         "86. Q.  Why can't you return to PAK and obtain protection from the
         police?

             A.   No, they are not going to do anything  because  there  is
                  murder and killing very easily.  They are not going to  do
                  anything so.

         87.  Q.  How do you know that?

              A.  Because I just know that my is country and watch the  news
                  as well.

         88.  Q.  Could you not move to another city far away  from  Gujrat,
                  such as Hyderabad or Karachi?

              A.  No, Karachi and Hyderabad all  that  side  they  are  very
                  dangerous.  Every single day politicians  are  killed  and
                  there are bomb and this and that, you know.

         89.  Q.  What about cities such as Multan or Islamabad?

              A.  Islamabad is located very near to my city and  in  all  of
                  Pakistan they can find me very easy.

         90.  Q.  Can you explain how your family would have  the  knowledge
                  and means to find you if you moved to another city?

              A.  You can say somebody can tell them very easily.

         91.  Q.  How would somebody tell them?

              A.  My friend or something like that.

         92.  Q.  You could return and not tell them that you

              A.  One day they will know everything.

         93.  Q.  How will they?

              A.  I dont have much I idea, but maybe social media and that.

         94.  Q.  You can restrict who views your social media?

              A.  My friends here are from the same city  so  I  cant  force
                  them to not tell them like that.

         95.  Q.  Do you friends in the UK have contact with your family  in
                  PAK?

              A.  No.

         96.  Q.  So how would you friends in the UK inform your family?

              A.  Sometimes they go for holidays.

         97.  Q.  Do your family political connections?

              A.  Yes.

         98.  Q.  Who has political connections?

              A.  My brother.

         99.  Q.  What political connections does your brother have?

              A.  I don't know much that but I know he has.

         100. Q.  How do you know he has

              A.  A couple of MNA and MP's are  in  same  city  near  to  my
                  house.  Now they are in government as  government  changed
                  last year.  They are my brother friends.

         101. Q.  Do you know their names and position?

              A.  I know the name is Chowdhury Pervaiz.   He  is  member  of
                  parliament.

         102. Q.  Can you explain what  influence  your  brother  with  this
                  individual?

              A.  Because they are in government and they have  a  very  big
                  approach so they can do anything, they are basically  very
                  dangerous and gangster type peoples.

         ...

         108. Q.  Your said your brother's friend is in government,  do  you
                  know what positions he has?

              A.  No, I saw in the news he is in parliament.  He is  speaker
                  of parliament.

         109. Q.  Is that at local or national level?

              A.  National level.

         110. Q.  How does your brother have friendship with him?

              A.  I don't know much but you know once I lived  in  Pakistan,
                  like 10 years before so I know him that time.

         ...

         113. Q.  How would  your  family  be  alerted  to  you  arrival  in
                  Pakistan?

              A.  I told you,  maybe  my  friend  is  going  to  tell  them.
                  Something like that."

 5. The judge did not accept that the Appellant was credible.  He took into
    account the inconsistencies raised by the Secretary  of  State  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal  Letter.   He  said  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided an explanation for these  and  instead  he  had  made  further
    inconsistent statements throughout his oral evidence.  The  judge  said
    as follows:

         "42. In his written statement  dated  04/12/2017,  at  paragraph  5
             (sic).  The appellant states that when he called his mother in
             April 2016 and informed her  that  he  was  planning  marrying
             Andrea (the Romanian lady), his mother told him  that  he  was
             already  engaged  to  marry  her   brother's   daughter   (the
             appellant's maternal uncle's daughter); however, in  his  oral
             evidence he was adamant that the arrangements were for him  to
             be married to his paternal (his father's  brother's  daughter)
             and not his maternal uncle's daughter.   I  do  not  find  the
             appellant's evidence credible or consistent.

         43.  In his December 2017 statement at paragraph  at  paragraph  14
             (sic), he states that his mother told him that  her  brother's
             four sons are 'thirsty' for his blood; they will kill  him  on
             his return to Pakistan.  This is totally inconsistent with his
             oral evidence at the hearing.

         44.  At paragraph 15 of the same statement,  the  appellant  states
             that relations with his mother were gradually improving.   (It
             must  be  remembered  that  he  signed   this   statement   on
             04/12/2017).  However in his oral evidence, he stated that  he
             last spoke to his mother  in  January  2017  and  has  had  no
             contact with her thereafter.  I find that the  appellant  must
             have been in contact with his mother after  January  2017  for
             him to know that his relations were  improving  with  her.   I
             find that the appellant's  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  is
             wholly inconsistent with his previous statement.

         45.  The appellant in reply to question 25 in his interview  stated
             that he could not remember when he last contacted  his  family
             in Pakistan but in his statement  and  oral  evidence  he  was
             clear that he last contacted his mother in January 2017.   The
             appellant did not explain how he came to know that it  was  in
             January 2017 that he spoke to his mother.   I  find  that  the
             appellant makes up his evidence about certain times and events
             to fit in with his claimed events.

         46.  In his evidence before me at the hearing, the appellant stated
             that he did not speak to his uncle at  all  but  in  reply  to
             question 61 in the interview and his statement, he states that
             his uncle rung him the morning after  he  had  spoken  to  his
             mother and that his uncle had threatened him, saying  that  he
             had bought shame on  his  family  by  refusing  to  marry  his
             daughter.  I find  that  the  appellant  simply  made  up  his
             evidence in interview and in his statement  and  this  is  the
             reason he could not remember that he had  been  threatened  by
             his uncle morning after he had spoken to his mother in  April.
             I find that the appellant has made up all of his  evidence  in
             order to support his asylum claim.

         47.  The appellant in reply to question 64 in his interview  stated
             that he did not reconcile with his family because he  did  not
             have their telephone numbers.  He said  that  he  occasionally
             speaks to his friend in Pakistan and he did not aske (sic) his
             friend to speak to his family because he knows that his family
             would  not  listen  to  his  friend.   I  do  not  accept  the
             appellant's evidence as genuine or sincere.  I find  that  the
             appellant did not really want to settle issues with his family
             and reconcile with them, he would ask his friend to  at  least
             obtain his families telephone numbers to re-establish  contact
             with them (sic).  The fact that he made no effort  whatsoever,
             I find that the appellant is neither genuine nor sincere about
             settling issues with his family because  this  would  not  his
             (sic) true purpose of staying in the UK.

         48.  The appellant in reply to question 77 in the interview  stated
             that his uncle lived in the same city as his  mother  and  was
             aware that he was responsible for the attack  on  his  mother;
             clearly the appellant is here talking about his maternal uncle
             and not paternal uncle who he claims to be living in the  same
             household as his brother.  Once again, I find that because the
             appellant has made up his evidence that he could remember what
             he has previously stated in his asylum interview.

         49.  In his asylum interview, he said that he  could  not  live  in
             cities like Karachi and Hyderabad because these are  dangerous
             places; bombs are going off in these places.  However, in  his
             evidence before me he said that if he returned to another part
             of Pakistan such as Karachi he his (sic)  brother's  political
             masters would find him.

         50.  On the evidence before me, I find that the  appellant  is  not
             credible or consistent as to the events described by  him  and
             that his evidence about his fear on his return to Pakistan  is
             not genuine or credible.  I find that the appellant has simply
             made up and fabricated his evidence in order  to  support  his
             asylum claim.  There is nothing genuine or truthful about  his
             fear on his return to Pakistan."

 6. The judge went on to consider risk on return and he said as follows  at
    paragraphs 53 and 54:

         "53. On the lower standard of proof, I find that the appellant will
             not be of interest to his family and that he has protection of
             the law enforcement authorities in Pakistan.  I find  that  he
             also has an option of internal flight; he could return to  and
             live in another part  of  Pakistan,  which  is  a  very  large
             country with over 180 million people.

         54.  The appellant suffers from anxiety and depression, and he  has
             provided a Psychiatric report by Dr  Krishina  Balasubramaniam
             dated  24/07/2019.   The  appellant  provided  most   of   the
             information to assist the Psychiatrist in the  preparation  of
             the report.   The  report  states  that  the  appellant  would
             benefit from further counselling session.  However,  a  letter
             from a letter  (sic)  from  Hounslow  IAPT  dated  11/06/2019,
             states  that  the  appellant  has  been  discharged  from  his
             counselling  sessions.   The  two  letters  GPs  (sic)   dated
             06/08/2019 and 14/08/2019 state  that  the  appellant  suffers
             from anxiety and depression but he said in evidence that if it
             were not for his fear of persecution he could access treatment
             for his anxiety and depression in Pakistan."

 7. I heard oral submissions  from  both  representatives  at  the  hearing
    before me. Mr Clarke resiled from the Rule  24  response.  He  conceded
    that the judge made errors of law as asserted in grounds 1 and 2 of the
    grounds of appeal.  It was conceded that the judge had erred in failing
    to take into  account  the  Appellant's  vulnerability  and  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note 2 of 2010.  The judge did not properly  take
    into account  the  expert  evidence,  namely  that  the  Appellant  was
    suffering from depression and memory loss and that he was treated  with
    anti-depressant.  However, Mr Clarke said  that  the  errors  were  not
    material because the judge went on to consider relocation at  paragraph
    53, concluding that  the  Appellant  could  live  in  another  part  of
    Pakistan which is a very large country with over 180 million people. He
    said that the findings about  relocation  was  not  challenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal and the assessment at paragraph 53  of  the  decision
    was made on hypothetical basis that the Appellant is at risk on  return
    to his home area.

 8. Mr Dolan addressed me in relation to materiality.  He disagreed with Mr
    Clarke.   In  submissions  Mr  Dolan  submitted  that  the  credibility
    assessment of the judge is flawed.  It cannot be  said  with  certainty
    that the judge considered relocation on the hypothetical basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim having been accepted. There is no certainty that  had
    the judge properly considered the  Appellant's  vulnerability  and  the
    medical evidence, he would have reached the same conclusions in respect
    of relocation.

 9. Mr Dolan argued that the errors go to  the  heart  of  the  credibility
    findings and the basis of the judge's decision in respect of relocation
    is not clear.  It is not clear that the assessment  of  relocation  was
    based on the Appellant being at risk in his home area.   There  are  no
    findings made about the  Appellant's  family's  ability  to  reach  him
    should he relocate to another part  of  Pakistan.  The  judge  did  not
    engage with the evidence on this issue.

10. He referred me to the Appellant's witness statement of  18  July  2019,
    specifically at paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 where the  Appellant's  evidence
    is as follows:

         "8.  My paternal uncle is now against my mother and brother because
             of me and  my  refusal  to  marry  my  paternal  uncles  (sic)
             daughter.  My uncle has  connection  with  politicians.   They
             belong to the PMLQ party.  He has threatened that if  I  don't
             marry his daughter he will kill me, I am against this marriage
             and will not marry against my will.

         9.   I fear my uncle  and  my  brother.   Mt  (sic)  brother  is  a
             supporter of the PMLQ party.  He is very dangerous and  has  a
             lot of friends in the party.  He has been part of  this  party
             since 2002.  I believe their threats to be real and believe if
             I am returned he and my uncle will kill me.   I  fear  that  I
             will be not get protection as this party is in power.  I  also
             enclose photos of m  (sic)  brother  which  show  that  he  is
             dangerous, he is holding a gun and his demeanor  shows that he
             is a dangerous person.  He has always been  like  this  and  I
             believe he will kill me.

         10.  I also submit  that  I  am  suffering  from  very  bad  memory
             problems.  I sometimes don't even  remember  what  I  ate  the
             previous night or did the day before.   I  am  also  suffering
             from depression, due to my fear of being killed.  I am  scared
             all the time and in my mind I believe I will be killed if I am
             returned.  I have been for counselling and was discharged last
             month.  I on anti depressant (sic) and taking sleeping tablets
             given to me by the GP."

Error of law

11. I note that  there  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  a  skeleton
    argument on behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  in  relation  to  internal
    relocation the following was submitted:

         "It is submitted that if it is accepted that  the  Appellant  is  a
         member of particular social group, and at  risk  on  return  it  is
         submitted that the Appellant cannot  inter  relocate  in  Pakistan.
         The Appellant fears his family who have links with the  PMLQ  party
         and fears he will be located no matter where he goes."

12. Further,  in  the  skeleton  argument  under  the  heading  "Actors  of
    Persecution" the following is stated:

         "...It is submitted that the actors of persecution in this case are
         the non state (sic) agents his family, and also the  state  as  his
         family has links with  politicians  who  are  state  sponsored  and
         operate without impunity and the state is  in  collusion  with  and
         cannot provide the Appellant with any effective control."

13. The credibility findings about the Appellant's evidence  generally  and
    specifically relating to risk on return are flawed because as  accepted
    by the Respondent, the judge did not take into account the  Appellant's
    vulnerability and the medical evidence.  I cannot be certain that  when
    assessing whether the Appellant could safely relocate, the judge did so
    on the basis that the Appellant  would be at risk on return to his home
    area.  The decision is not sustainable.  The judge did not engage  with
    the  Appellant's  evidence  why  he  could  not  safely  relocate.  The
    observation in the final sentence of paragraph 54  does  not  establish
    that he engaged  with  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his  family's
    connections and their potential  reach,  rather  it  suggests  that  he
    considered relocation on the basis that  the  Appellant's  account  had
    been rejected.

Notice of Decision

14. The errors made by  the  judge  are  such  that  the  decision  is  not
    sustainable. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal.  The appeal should be heard de novo  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I remit the matter to be reheard in the First-
    tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 10 December  2019


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


