
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05774/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2018                   |On 26 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                    [S M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Adam, Counsel, instructed by Lupins Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Staunton Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on [ ] 1971.   He
    appeals against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R.
    Sullivan promulgated on 13 September 2017 following a hearing that took
    place at Harmondsworth on 18 August 2017.

 2. There is one principal argument that  is  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and that arises from the refusal of the Tribunal  to  adjourn
    the hearing in order to obtain the expert report of  a  country  expert
    following a decision that had been made on 6 July 2017 to  adjourn  the
    hearing in order to facilitate the provision of that  expert's  report.
    It seems to me that once a decision was made on 6 July 2017 that it was
    of use to the Tribunal for there to be expert evidence  then  that  was
    the route by which the Tribunal itself had set.  It was the  trajectory
    to which all the parties were aiming and consequently, when the  report
    was not ready on 18 August 2017 the issue before the judge was whether,
    having set out upon the original course of action to obtain  an  expert
    report, that it was right at that stage to abandon it altogether.

 3. The application for an adjournment on 18 August had been prefigured  by
    an application that had been earlier made by which time  it  was  clear
    that the expert report was not going to be available on 11 August 2017,
    an earlier deadline.  Accordingly the Tribunal was  in  the  difficulty
    that there was an acknowledged need for an expert report.  Without  any
    fault on the part of the appellant, the report was not ready,  although
    it appears that the report was very much on the point of  being  ready.
    It was said that it would have been ready on 18 August, the day of  the
    hearing, but it did not actually arrive on that date.

 4. I do not think anything can be judged by the date of the report that we
    have now seen, that is, a report dated December.  The  reason  for  the
    further  delay  was  that,  once  the  appeal  failed,  the  solicitors
    naturally told the expert that he should no longer continue  his  work.
    Accordingly, it was only when permission to appeal  was  granted,  that
    renewed efforts were made to instruct and obtain the report.

 5. The issue of whether an adjournment  should  be  granted  in  order  to
    obtain an expert report is determined on the basis  of  fairness.   The
    authority for that is the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT  418,  a  decision  of  Mr  Justice
    McCloskey.  He said:

         "The test to  be  applied  is  that  of  fairness:  was  there  any
         deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair  hearing?   Any
         temptation to review the conduct and  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  through  the  lens  of  reasonableness  must  be   firmly
         resisted, in order to avoid a misdirection in law."

 6. In reaching that conclusion the judge relied upon the decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 where at paragraph 13 the court said:

         "First, when considering whether the  Immigration  Judge  ought  to
         have granted an adjournment, the test was not  irrationality.   The
         test was not whether his decision was properly open to him  or  was
         Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse.  The test and  sole  test  was
         whether it was unfair."

 7. In a case such as this, where a judge will  have  prepared  a  hearing,
    where he will have made a provisional view as to the way  the  case  is
    going to be conducted, it is deeply frustrating to  be  told  that  the
    expert has not prepared a report but, given that the trajectory,  as  I
    have called it in these proceedings, was along the lines that a  report
    was to be prepared and was being prepared, it seems to me that fairness
    required that report to be provided.

 8. It may be that a better course of action when reports are  directed  is
    that the solicitors obtaining the report are  directed  in  terms  that
    they must not enter into a contract for the preparation of  the  report
    unless they impose a contractual obligation  upon  the  writer  of  the
    report to meet a set deadline and that,  unless  the  report  maker  is
    prepared to give that undertaking, the instructions  will  not  follow.
    If a direction is made to that effect then it seems to me  that  it  is
    likely to be entirely fair for the judge, on finding that the report is
    not available on the due date, to say that it is fair to  proceed  but,
    even then, it would be open to the expert to say why he was not able to
    perform his contractual obligation.   He  may  have  been  admitted  to
    hospital.  He may have been required to attend a hearing  which  lasted
    many days.  He may have had other commitments which  came  surprisingly
    and which he could not avoid.  So the door is not entirely shut but  it
    does seem to me that it would make it very much more difficult  for  an
    expert merely not to produce the goods at the due date.

 9. There has been an explanation that was provided but I am  by  no  means
    certain that the explanation was as good as it might have been.

10. However, there is also a factor to which I am minded to attach  greater
    weight.  We now have  the  report.   That  report  will  not  go  away.
    Someone has to give consideration to  it  at  some  stage.   If  it  is
    treated as a paragraph 353 fresh claim then the Secretary of State  has
    to give a notional consideration, a theoretical consideration, of  what
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge would do with that report were he  applying
    anxious scrutiny when looking at it.  Furthermore, if the Secretary  of
    State refuses to treat it as a paragraph 353 fresh claim,  once  again,
    the Upper Tribunal on proceedings for a judicial review, would have  to
    go through the same hypothetical consideration of this report  and  see
    its likely effect.

11. I have to say that, having found  there  is  an  error  of  law,  I  am
    heartened by the fact that it will be  unnecessary  to  consider  as  a
    hypothetical exercise what a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  might  do  in
    relation to this report.  If the matter goes forward to be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal it will not be a hypothetical consideration  of
    the report but it will be an actual consideration of the report.  I  am
    bound to say I consider that very much more satisfactory.

12. I say nothing about the  findings  that  are  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Those will obviously have to be  reconsidered  by  the
    judge who hears the  appeal  afresh.   All  I  will  say  is  that  the
    groundwork as to issues that have been raised have  already  been  laid
    out and it will be for the parties to consider whether those have  been
    adequately responded to.

13. Once again, the First-tier Tribunal determination, whilst it is  not  a
    starting point, may have matters which are sensible and which  may  not
    have to be argued over again.  It may also have matters which the judge
    on the second occasion will consider do not assist him, in  which  case
    it is entirely appropriate that he rejects that method of thinking.  It
    will, however, require a wholesale re-making of  the  decision  on  the
    basis of making fresh findings  of  fact,  assisted  hopefully  by  the
    report that has been prepared.

14. The appellant is at liberty to adduce expert evidence of his choice  at
    the re-making of the decision but such expert  evidence  must,  out  of
    fairness, be provided at least seven days before the resumed hearing.

15. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and direct that the
    decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal  is
    remitted for that to take place.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                5 March 2018
