
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number PA/05109/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 27th November 2018
          On 12th December 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                 KARZAN [W]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis of a blood feud in the IKR.
   His application having been refused by the Secretary of State for the
   reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 6th of May 2016 the Appellant
   appealed. The appeal was first heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox in
   February 2017 and dismissed but that decision was set aside. The appeal
   was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and heard by First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Alis at Manchester on the 26th of April 2018 and dismissed for the
   reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 3rd of May 2018.

2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal in grounds of the 8th of May
   asserting that the Judge had not dealt adequately with the evidence of
   the supporting witness and the information in support of the blood feud.
   Initially refused permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the
   basis that it was arguable that the Judge had erred at paragraph 66 of
   the decision and that there had been supporting evidence, oral and
   written and there was no evidence the witness had been cross-examined.

3. At the hearing the Appellant was represented by counsel who had been
   instructed through Public Access. In the course of the hearing I referred
   to the cross-examination of the Appellant's supporting witness which is
   set out in the Judge's Record of Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal
   file, it is clear from the Record of Proceedings that the witness's
   motivation had been questioned. It was confirmed by Mr Diwnycz that the
   Tribunal's Record of Proceedings of the witness's cross-examination
   matched the record held by the Home Office.

4. Ms Wilkins submitted that the challenge was in respect of paragraph 66
   and that the Judge had not given adequate reasons for rejecting the
   evidence when there was a detailed witness statement, the witness knew
   the Appellant needed help and that put his motivation in a different
   light. There was no consideration of his interaction with the Appellant's
   family and there was an unusual level of detail.

5. For the Home Office Mr Diwnycz apologise for the lack of a rule 24
   reply. There is no policy to forcibly remove to the IKR, such removals
   are to Baghdad, AAH is the main case. It is the Secretary of State's case
   that ethnic Kurds can relocate to the IKR. The Judge had not required
   corroboration but observing that supporting evidence could have been
   produced, TK (Burundi). Credibility was a matter for the Judge, there
   could be something in the Appellant's submissions if the matter had
   arisen afterwards.

6. Decisions are not intended to be, and do not need to be, comprehensive
   recitation of the facts and documentation. The parties know what their
   case is about, the evidence presented and relied on and the arguments
   being raised. The decision should show that the Judge was aware of the
   case and should give sufficient reasons to show that the fundamental
   issues had been considered and why the particular decision had been
   reached. As evidence is to be considered in the round there is no
   specified order in which evidence is to be addressed in a decision.

7. In this decision the Judge set out the law at paragraphs 5 to 14
   followed by a summary of the evidence available, the preliminary issue
   raised and the Appellant's case with the evidence given at the hearing.
   The evidence of Mr Maged was summarised at paragraph 42 which started
   with his having adopted his witness statement before being questioned.

8. The Appellant's identity and his having worked for the Peshmerga as a
   medic was accepted and the Judge found also that the Appellant had a CSID
   card available to him. The reasons for rejecting the claimed blood feud
   are set out at paragraphs 61 to 66. In paragraph 63 the Judge gave as one
   reason for rejecting there being a blood feud the fact that there had
   been no incidents in the preceding 3 years contrasting the Appellant's
   evidence of a similar feud leading to the deaths of 8 people. This was
   developed in paragraph 64 with the suggestion of threats against the
   Appellant's father being contrasted with nothing actually being done.

9. Paragraph 66 dealt with the evidence of the witness and that has to be
   read in the context of the preceding findings. There was no supporting
   evidence such as photographs and the Judge could have observed that
   nothing had been provided in writing by the Appellant's family. The
   evidence of the claimed conversation with the Appellant's father had
   effectively been rejected by the Judge in the preceding paragraphs with
   the findings of the continued absence of any evidence that the family had
   actually suffered in any physical way.

10. The criticisms of paragraph 66 work if taken out of context. Perhaps
   the Judge could have said more about the evidence but given the other
   observations about the evidence and this aspect of the claim made the
   reasons given are sufficient. It is clear from the summary of the
   evidence that the Judge was aware of the contents of the witness
   statement and had effectively considered what was claimed about the
   continued fear and had made findings on that issue. The decision has to
   be read fairly and as a whole and in the circumstances the findings made
   were open to the Judge for the reasons given.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed: [pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 7 December 2018

