


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/05298/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 July 2019                           | On 10 September 2019             |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                LINH DUY BACH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T D Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision  of  FtT  Judge  Montgomery,
    promulgated on 5  September  2018,  on  the  grounds  set  out  in  his
    application filed on 9 October 2018.

 2. The grounds are substantially based  on  propositions  that  the  judge
    overlooked parts of the  evidence,  failed  to  consider  other  parts,
    including amendments proposed by the appellant to his interview record,
    or  gave  insufficient   weight   thereto,   and   wrongly   identified
    inconsistencies.  Those points are made intricately and at length.   We
    were much assisted in following them by  Mr  Ruddy's  provision  of  an
    orderly set of extracts from the evidence.

 3. Ground 1 challenges paragraph 17 of the decision.  The judge noted that
    the appellant said from  the  outset  that  he  was  in  a  fight  with
    government troops at a  demonstration,  but  found  inconsistencies  of
    detail.  At interview Q/A 46 he said that he broke an  officer's  nose,
    later amended to arm, which  she  found  (generously,  perhaps)  to  be
    explicable.  However, more importantly, at screening interview  he  did
    not mention that he assaulted a police officer or  was  wanted  by  the
    police, "a significant omission".

 4. Mr Ruddy took us to the screening interview at 4.1, "There was a  fight
    at the demonstration between my group and the government", and  to  the
    appellant's amendments to his interview, where he  maintained  that  he
    misunderstood  the  question  whether  he  had  ever  been  accused  or
    convicted of an offence.

 5. A judge does not have to accept every explanation or amendment  offered
    by an appellant, and does  not  have  to  mention  every  specific  and
    successive assertion made. The judge was right in  observing  that  the
    assault, and being wanted by the police,  were  not  mentioned  at  the
    screening interview.  We see no error in treating that as significant.

 6. Ground 2 is based  on  the  appellant  having  understood  Q47  of  his
    interview to be not, "When was the demonstration?" but, "When  was  the
    incident which gave rise to the demonstration?".

 7. We are not persuaded that the judge did not give  enough  consideration
    to the appellant's amendment, or that her decision  "does  not  reflect
    accurate consideration of the evidence in the round".  The  explanation
    was not overlooked.  It was found unlikely.  It  was  well  within  the
    judge's scope to reject this rather tortuous attempt to explain away  a
    plain question and answer within the flow of  the  interview,  and  she
    gave sensible reasons.

 8. Ground 3 challenges paragraph 19.  The ground is based on the appellant
    not having meant at interview that 2 persons were arrested on  27  June
    2013, but that on that date their families, who previously thought they
    were missing, discovered they had been arrested.  We note than  in  his
    statement he accepted that he might have created confusion.  The  judge
    says at paragraph 19 simply that the fact remains  that  he  has  given
    "inconsistent accounts of what happened in each  retelling"  and  "very
    different accounts of what happened when".  There is no error in  those
    observations.

 9. The judge did go on in her  decision,  in  the  round,  to  take  those
    inconsistencies against the appellant, but we  see  no  error  in  that
    either.

10.  Ground  4  complains  that  the  Judge  accepted   that   there   were
    demonstrations on dates specified by the appellant, yet found  that  he
    had  "not  given  a  clear  account  consistent  with  that   objective
    evidence".  The  ground  fails  to  read  the  Judge's  observation  in
    context.  She did not mean  that  his  account  was  inconsistent  with
    demonstrations having taken place on those dates.  She  meant  that  it
    was inconsistent in other ways, and was not significantly  improved  by
    proof that were demonstrations when he said there were.

11. It is unnecessary to explore grounds 5, 6 and 7 in detail, as they  are
    all in similar vein.

12. Ground 8 takes the same line, but directed against the finding in terms
    of section 8 of the 2004 Act.

13. Ground 10 goes to the weight  (or  lack  of  weight)  which  the  judge
    attributed to letters from priests to support the appellant's  evidence
    that he is a Roman Catholic.

14. Grounds 11 and 12 sum up, and add nothing.

15. Ground 13, which Mr Ruddy rightly did not press,  is  directed  against
    the claim under article 8 of the ECHR.  There was nothing in  the  case
    by which there might have been another outcome under article 8.

16. The presentation for the appellant in the FtT and in the  UT  has  been
    painstaking.  Everything which might have been said on his  behalf  has
    been said.  However, the judge  was  not  bound  to  accept  his  final
    version of the claim.  She noted his amendments in considerable detail,
    and found it regrettable that he had not had the  opportunity  also  to
    offer (to the respondent) proposed amendments to the transcript of  the
    supplementary interview.  She was fully aware  of  the  evolving  case.
    She came to factual conclusions which were open to her, and she gave  a
    legally sufficient explanation.

17. The grounds insist on the appellant's case as he finally developed  it,
    but they do no more.  They do not show that the judge's  resolution  of
    that case involved the making of any error on a point of law.

18. The appeal to the UT is dismissed.  The decision of the FtT stands.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      9 September 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




