
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05331/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4th July 2019                     |On 19th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor), Fountain Solicitors
(Walsall)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James, promulgated in Birmingham on 25th June 2018,  following  a
    hearing on 24th May 2018.  In the determination,  the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sudan, and was born  on  5th  May
    1997.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent on 16th April
    2018 rejecting his claim for asylum  and  for  humanitarian  protection
    pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a non-Arab  Darfuri.
    He faces real persecutory risk if returned to Sudan.  He  had  breached
    the terms of his release from detention.  The Respondent  had  accepted
    that the Appellant was a Sudanese national.  The  Respondent  Secretary
    of State did not accept that the Appellant was also  a  member  of  the
    Hausa tribe (see paragraph 3).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed early on in  the  determination  that  "the  parties
    agreed that the Appellant was a non-Arab Darfuri" (paragraph 10), given
    that this was the case, the judge went on to state that there were  two
    broad factual matters for determination by the Tribunal.  The first  of
    these was whether the Appellant was a member of the Hausa  tribe.   The
    second was whether he was detained by  the  authorities  following  his
    attendance at a demonstration and was released on conditions, which  he
    had  then  breached  (paragraph  25).   The  judge  observed  that  the
    Appellant had a witness who had confirmed  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    member of the Hausa tribe and that they had communicated in Sudan using
    Hausa.  They had last met in Sudan at a wedding within the tribe.  Both
    the Appellant and the witness provided consistent evidence in  relation
    to this event.  The judge was accordingly satisfied that the  Appellant
    was a member of the Hausa tribe  as  he  had  claimed  (paragraph  28).
    However, the judge then went on to consider the relevant  decisions  in
    this area.  Consideration was given to AA (Sudan)  [2009]  UKAIT  00056
    and to MM (Darfuris) [2015] UKUT 00010.  The judge also had  regard  to
    IM and AI (Sudan) [2016] UKUT 00188 (see paragraphs  18  to  19).   The
    judge then concluded that the Appellant had not been  credible  in  his
    narrative about being detained by the Sudanese authorities.  That being
    so, the Appellant could not satisfy the criteria as set out in  IM  and
    AI that in order for a person to be at risk on return  to  Sudan  there
    must evidence known to the Sudanese authorities  which  implicates  the
    Claimant in activity which they are likely to perceive as  a  potential
    threat to the regime.  The judge concluded that the Appellant was not a
    person who  engages  in  political  activity  or  who  has  significant
    influence (paragraph 37).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge had erred in law, given
    that it had been accepted that the Appellant  was  a  non-Arab  Darfuri
    member (paragraph 25) and given that it was accepted that  he  belonged
    to the Hausa tribe (paragraph 28).  This was because the  judge  failed
    to apply  the  country  guidance  case  of  AA  (Non-Arab  -  Darfur  -
    relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056, where it was held that all non-
    Arab Darfuris are at real risk of persecution on return to  Darfur  and
    cannot reasonably be expected to  relocate  elsewhere  to  Sudan.   The
    judge failed to apply the country guidance case  in  MM  (Darfuris)  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00010, where it was held that those who are ethnic non-Arab
    Darfuris in origin, regardless of whether they had lived in  Darfur  or
    elsewhere in Sudan, would be at risk on return to Khartoum.

 7. On 7th August 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 4th July 2019, Mr Howard  relied  upon  the
    grounds of application, and Ms Aboni, for her part, conceded  that  the
    judge had indeed failed to apply the country guidance  cases  that  had
    been referred to in the grounds of  application.   Both  sides  agreed,
    that given that all non-Darfuris are at real persecutory risk on return
    to Darfur, the appropriate course of  action  in  this  case  for  this
    Tribunal would be to make a finding of an error of law  and  to  remake
    the decision, by allowing the appeal.

Decision

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2009) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are that the judge failed to  apply  the  country
    guidance case of AA (non-Arab-relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT  00056,
    which is  to  the  effect  that  all  non-Arab  Darfuris  are  at  real
    persecutory risk.  In this  case  the  Appellant  is  both  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri of black African origin as well as being a member of the  Hausa
    tribe.  I remake the decision on the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before the Tribunal on that occasion,  and
    the submissions that I have heard today.  This appeal is allowed.

10. No anonymity order is made.

11. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019

