
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05601/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2018                             |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    [M M]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. In this case it is the  appellant  who  has  appealed  against  the
         decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  on
         protection and human rights  grounds.  The  appellant,  an  illegal
         entrant, claimed asylum some nine years after his arrival in the UK
         on the basis he was gay. Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Aziz
         found the appellant was not credible and dismissed the appeal.

      2. Whilst the grounds seeking permission to appeal made  a  number  of
         challenges to  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  protection  claim,
         permission to appeal was granted on a single,  narrow  ground:  the
         Judge had failed to determine the appellant's article 8 claim.

      3. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal  on
         the basis it was not clear that article 8  was  relied  on  at  the
         hearing and, in any event, the ground had not been particularised.

      4. I note that the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
         raise article 8  and,  in  particular,  it  was  claimed  that  the
         appellant met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, HC395, on  private  life  grounds  and  that  he
         enjoyed family life with Ms [MM], his "adoptive mother".

      5. It is also clear the Judge did not address human rights beyond  the
         protection claim. There is nothing I can see in either the decision
         or the record of proceedings to show that article 8  was  abandoned
         as a discrete ground of appeal outside the protection claim.

      6. I heard submissions from the  representatives  as  to  whether  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law in his decision.  In
         brief, Mr Syed-Ali relied on  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
         appeal and his own "grounds of appeal". Rightly, he did not seek to
         reopen the matter of  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  protection
         claim. Ms Isherwood sought to defend the decision  because  it  was
         not clear how article 8 was to be argued.

      7. I indicated my view that the decision of Judge Aziz,  whilst  sound
         as far as it goes, is erroneous to the  extent  he  has  failed  to
         determine one of the grounds of appeal before him. His decision  is
         formally set aside although all his findings  in  relation  to  the
         protection claim are preserved.

      8. This would be a suitable  case  to  remit  to  the  same  Judge  to
         complete his decision. However, Judge Aziz has recently transferred
         his main hearing centre away from Hatton  Cross  so  this  was  not
         convenient in this case.   I  therefore  indicated  that  I  should
         remake the decision myself  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Mr  Syed-Ali
         accepted that standard directions had  been  issued  in  this  case
         alerting the appellant's solicitors  to  the  likelihood  that  the
         remaking of the decision would take  place  at  the  same  hearing.
         Indeed, a supplementary bundle has been filed by them, attached  to
         which is another copy of the bundle previously filed in the  First-
         tier Tribunal. It was plain to me that it had been anticipated that
         the decision could be remade by the  Upper  Tribunal  at  the  same
         hearing. The representatives did not oppose my  indication  that  I
         could remake the decision.

      9. The appellant was called but said he could not  understand  English
         and he needed an interpreter. An interpreter had not been booked. I
         discussed the position with Mr Syed-Ali and it was agreed that  the
         hearing could proceed by way of submissions. I took Ms Isherwood to
         agree that the appellant's witness statement  could  stand  as  his
         evidence and she did not need to cross-examine him.  The  witnesses
         who supported the appellant's protection appeal and whom Judge Aziz
         found not credible, Mr [AP] and Mr [AR], were not relied on.  There
         is a statement in the appellant's bundle made by Ms [MM] which  was
         relied on by Mr Syed-Ali. She did not attend  the  hearing  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal and she was not present at the  hearing  before
         me either. Mr Syed-Ali  took  instructions  and  told  me  she  was
         housebound. There was no application for an adjournment so that she
         could give oral evidence.

     10. Having carefully considered the documents filed and the submissions
         made, I have made the following  findings  of  fact,  applying  the
         civil standard of proof.

     11. I have kept in mind Judge Aziz's finding  that  the  appellant  had
         manufactured a claim to be gay and that his asylum application  was
         contrived after he had been  caught  working  illegally.  As  said,
         Judge Aziz's findings are not the subject of challenge.

     12. The appellant's immigration history is  set  out  in  Judge  Aziz's
         decision and is not disputed save for the date of  the  appellant's
         first entry to the UK. He has claimed he arrived in the UK in  2001
         as a minor. The respondent accepts he had entered by 2004, although
         the GP's letter submitted in the appellant's bundle states  he  has
         been known to the practice since September 2003, at which  time  he
         would have been 18. In her statement, Ms [MM] states  she  met  the
         appellant in 2001, when he was "about 16", and that she immediately
         gave him a home. However, as said, Ms [MM] has not come forward  to
         give oral evidence and there is a conflict between the  appellant's
         claim to have lived with Ms [MM] in East London and the GP's letter
         which gives an address in Norwich, local to the  practice.  I  also
         note Judge Aziz recorded that the appellant  was  fingerprinted  in
         France in June 2003. I find it is more probable than not  that  the
         appellant entered the UK no earlier than late 2003, aged 18.  I  do
         not believe his account of being taken in by Ms [MM].

     13. It is uncontested that the appellant has never had leave  to  enter
         or remain. He made an unsuccessful application for ILR in 2007  and
         he did not  exercise  his  right  of  appeal  against  the  refusal
         decision, which was taken in 2009. An  article  8  application  was
         made in September 2013 and was also  refused.   The  appellant  has
         been encountered working  illegally  on  three  occasions.  He  has
         failed to  report  and  been  treated  as  an  absconder  on  three
         occasions.

     14. The appellant has not claimed to have a partner  or  children.  His
         claim to have had same-sex partners has been rejected. I proceed on
         the basis the appellant is single. He is now 33 years of age.

     15. The GP's letter shows that, as at  June  2017,  the  appellant  was
         receiving anti-depressant treatment. He was due to have a follow-up
         appointment in July but I have no further information about that.

     16. Mr Syed-Ali argued the appellant's case based on his "family  life"
         with Ms [MM]. The appellant  has  stated  he  regards  her  as  his
         adoptive mother and she makes  similar  claims  in  her  statement.
         However, the closeness of the relationship has not been established
         with satisfactory evidence. As said, I reject the  claim  she  took
         the appellant in when she found him crying in Mile End Road, having
         been abandoned by child-traffickers. It is wholly  unexplained  why
         the appellant would have registered and been seen over the  ensuing
         years at a GP's practice in Norwich if he was living as part of  Ms
         [MM]'s household in East London.

     17. The appellant is now a mature man. Ms [MM]'s statement includes the
         claim  that  the  appellant  has  always   been   financially   and
         emotionally dependent on  her  and  her  family  but  this  appears
         unlikely  given  the  known  facts  that  the  appellant  has  been
         encountered working on no less than three  occasions  and  he  most
         likely lives in the Norwich area. The GP's letter makes no  mention
         at all of Ms [MM] or any supportive family or  friends  and  states
         only that he attends  the  surgery  with  a  friend  who  comes  to
         interpret. At the time the appellant was unemployed. I find that Ms
         [MM] may well be a family friend of the  appellant  but  I  do  not
         accept she has taken the place of his mother or that the  appellant
         is financially dependent on her or her family.

     18. In the course of making his claim to international protection,  the
         appellant claimed to have come from  Mokrompur  in  Bangladesh  and
         that his family were "impoverished". Having rejected his account of
         being trafficked, it is more likely he financed his own trip to the
         UK so  it  may  be  an  exaggeration  to  describe  his  family  as
         impoverished.  It  is  clear  he  has  a  number  of  siblings   in
         Bangladesh.

     19. I approach my evaluation of article 8  by  reference  to  the  five
         questions to be asked as set out in paragraph 17 of  Razgar  [2004]
         UKHL 27, an approach confirmed in paragraph 7 of EB (Kosovo) [2008]
         UKHL 41.

     20. The question of whether family life  exists  between  adult  family
         members was considered in detail in the  case  of  Ghising  (family
         life  -  adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160  (IAC)  in
         paragraphs 50 to 62. The guidance given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         that case was approved by the Court of Appeal in  paragraph  46  of
         Gurung & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8. Most of the case  law  has  been
         concerned with adult children living with their parents. The thrust
         of the guidance is that each case depends on  its  own  facts.  The
         most recent of these decisions was AA v United Kingdom (Application
         No.8000/08), a decision of the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights,
         where it was said at paragraph 49 that:

             "An examination of the court's case law would tend to  suggest
             that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who resides
             with his mother and has not yet founded a family of  his  own,
             can be regarded as having 'family life'."

     21. As was said in Ghising at paragraph 61, AA appears to  support  the
         proposition that one of the  factors  which  could  be  taken  into
         account in relation to the issue of "family life," was  whether  or
         not the adult child is still living with the parents upon  whom  he
         is alleged to be dependent. If so, that would be a positive  factor
         to be taken into account in his favour.

     22. In Pun & Ors (Gurkhas - policy - article 8) Nepal [2011] UKUT 00377
         (IAC) the Upper Tribunal recorded  counsel's  submission  that  the
         test was whether there was "real, effective and committed support",
         which could be demonstrated by a strong family bond  and  financial
         support. The Tribunal accepted that, where this is shown, it  is  a
         factor of some weight (paragraph 23). The wording appears  to  come
         from the consideration of Strasbourg authorities by  Sedley  LJ  in
         Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2003]  EWCA
         Civ 31. It is now recognised that the test has been interpreted too
         narrowly in the past. There  is  certainly  no  artificial  cut-off
         point when a person reaches majority and the test is  highly  fact-
         sensitive.

     23. In Rai v ECO, the Court held that the Upper Tribunal in  that  case
         had failed to focus on  the  "practical  and  financial  realities"
         entailed in the decision by the appellant's parents to leave  Nepal
         and settle in the UK. The  question  was  whether  the  appellant's
         family  life  with  his  parents  subsisted  then  and  was   still
         subsisting at the date of the decision. Those are questions of fact
         for the tribunal.  Beatson LJ concluded:

             "61.  ...  the  judge  below  appeared  to  apply  a  test  of
             "exceptionality" in order to  determine  whether  family  life
             exists  between  the  appellant  and  his  parents.   This  is
             contrary to the approach in the Ghising cases approved in this
             court in Gurung's case and what was expressly stated  by  this
             court in Singh v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
             [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  In Singh's  case,  Sir  Stanley  Burnton
             (with whom Richards and Christopher Clarke LJJ agreed)  stated
             at [24] that there is no requirement of "exceptionality", that
             all depends on the facts, and that  there  must  be  something
             more than the love and affection  between  an  adult  and  his
             parents or siblings which will not in itself justify a finding
             of family life".

     24. I consider the facts do not come close to supporting a finding that
         the appellant enjoys family life in the UK with Ms [MM]  or  anyone
         else. I am not satisfied there is any degree of real  emotional  or
         financial dependency between them. The  reality  is  the  appellant
         came to the UK as a young adult, presumably for  economic  reasons.
         He will no doubt have received assistance and support in  one  form
         or another from friends, which he values. The claim that Ms [MM] is
         the appellant's adoptive mother is not made out in fact and appears
         to have been contrived. The appellant's friendships, including with
         Ms [MM] may form important strands of his private life but  he  has
         not shown he enjoys family life.

     25. It is clear the  appellant  will  have  established  some  form  of
         private life through his employment and social  relationships.  The
         exact nature of those ties are obscure. To that extent,  article  8
         may be engaged.

     26. However, I see no reason the appellant could not  successfully  re-
         establish his private life in Bangladesh. He does not meet  any  of
         the  requirements  of  the  rules  under  paragraph  276ADE(1),  as
         acknowledged by Ms Syed-Ali. He has  a  family  to  return  to,  he
         speaks the language of Bangladesh,  he  is  Muslim  and  he  is  in
         reasonably good health. There is no reason  at  all  he  could  not
         reintegrate.

     27. The appellant has resided in the UK for around 14 years  and  three
         months. However, little weight can be given  to  his  private  life
         ties, which have been entirely developed at  a  time  that  he  was
         without leave, in accordance with section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.
         Despite his lengthy residence, the appellant told me he has not yet
         managed to learn English. This is a another  feature  of  his  case
         which would weigh against him because it is in the public  interest
         that he should do so in order to avoid becoming  a  burden  on  the
         State.

     28. The public interest would  clearly  prevail  over  the  appellant's
         interests as an economic migrant. The article 8 claim is very  weak
         and the decision is proportionate.

     29. The appeal is dismissed on article 8 grounds.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision is set aside.

    The following decision is substituted:

         The appeal is dismissed on protection  and  human  rights  grounds,
         including article 8.

         No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 9 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom

