
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05811/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 April 2019                     |On 09 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     BH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Raw of Counsel (Middlesex Law Chambers)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  10  June  1987.   He
    appeals the determination of a First-tier Judge following a hearing  on
    18 December 2018.  The judge dismissed his appeal against the  decision
    of the respondent on 24 April 2018 to refuse his protection claim.  The
    appellant had come to this country as a student and had  completed  his
    courses in 2015.  He had applied for a  further  visa  which  had  been
    granted from 13 September 2016 to 28 February 2018.  He  had  travelled
    to Pakistan in July 2017 and had later returned to the UK arriving on 7
    August 2017.  He had applied for asylum on 27 October 2017.

2.   Although the appellant's claim was rejected the respondent  did  accept
    that the appellant had converted from Sunni to Shia as claimed.  It was
    not accepted that the appellant had a genuine fear of return however in
    the light  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    threatened and assaulted by his family had not been accepted.  Even  if
    he was being  sought  by  the  family  the  appellant's  fear  was  not
    objectively well-founded as there was a sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Pakistan and he could internally relocate.

3.   In the  First-tier  Judge's  decision  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant had exaggerated the sort of influence his family could  have.
    The appellant's family were not so hostile towards the  appellant  that
    they really would try to cause him harm if he were to return.

4.   In the application for permission to appeal  it  was  argued  that  the
    judge had failed to consider the essential documents that went  to  the
    core of the appellant's case and in particular had failed to take  into
    account documents from  two  different  criminal  courts  in  Pakistan,
    documents from  two  different  lawyers  and  attested,  and  documents
    relating to the medical records  recording  the  appellant's  injuries.
    The view of the documents had tainted the rest  of  the  determination.
    Having not given consideration to the appellant's documents  the  judge
    had  been  unable  to  make  adequate  and  appropriate   findings   on
    returnability and internal relocation.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on all the  grounds  by  a  First-tier
    Judge on 15 February 2019.

6.   At the outset of the proceedings before me Mr Kandola  stated  that  he
    was in agreement with Counsel about the grounds as lodged.   There  was
    an error in dealing with the documentary evidence.

7.   Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  had  overlooked  the  appellant's
    corroborative material when coming to his findings in  paragraphs  36FF
    of the decision.  The medical reports in relation to the incident  when
    the appellant ended up in hospital with bruises  had  been  overlooked.
    The  reasoning  given  for  rejecting  the  appellant's   account   was
    inadequate.  In relation to relocation the appellant was  a  member  of
    the bar and it  would  not  be  possible  for  him  to  carry  out  his
    profession on return.  He would come to notice of his  family  members.
    The WhatsApp messages that the judge had been referred to  demonstrated
    that hostilities continued to exist.  The judge had taken too cursory a
    view of matters.

8.   Mr Kandola accepted that the judge had not considered  the  documentary
    evidence and the only way the determination could be saved  was  if  it
    were found that the appellant could relocate and accordingly the errors
    were not material.  Absent that the appeal should  be  remitted  for  a
    fresh hearing before a different First-tier Judge.  Counsel argued that
    the appeal should be remitted.

9.   In light of the fact that  Mr  Kandola  did  not  support  the  judge's
    decision in a key aspect and indeed accepted the  points  made  in  the
    grounds that the judge had not  properly  dealt  with  the  documentary
    evidence it is difficult to see how the judge's  factual  analysis  can
    stand.  If the  judge's  approach  was  flawed  as  accepted  then  the
    findings on which it is necessary to consider the risks on  return  are
    rendered unreliable.

10.  In the light of the concession made I find that the decision is  flawed
    by a material error of law.  Bearing  in  mind  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statements and the extent of the fact  finding  necessary  the
    appeal is remitted for a fresh hearing before  a  different  First-tier
    Judge on all issues apart from the matters conceded by  the  respondent
    in the decision itself, in particular the appellant's  conversion  from
    Sunni to Shia.

11.  The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none


Signed                                  Date 03 May 2019

Judge Warr. Judge of the Upper Tribunal

