
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05271/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18th September 2017                |On 29th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                    Wmaz
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nazmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles promulgated on 12 July  2017,  allowing
    the appeal of the Appellant who claimed to be a citizen  of  Syria  and
    brought  a  claim  for  protection  under  Section  82(1)  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse to grant asylum  or  any  other
    form of international protection.

 2. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan.  The grant of permission may  be  summarised  in
    the following terms:

         It does seem that the judge allowed the Appellant's appeal  on  the
         basis of a linguistic report, which, as  to  be  accepted  was  not
         clear-cut in his conclusions.  The  Appellant  did  not  give  oral
         evidence because he was not feeling well.  However,  it  does  seem
         that the judge has not made any other findings in  respect  of  the
         Appellant's claim as a whole.  The fact that the linguistic  report
         was not conclusive and open to interpretation it was all  the  more
         important to consider the report in the context of the  Appellant's
         claim.

 3. There was no Rule 24 reply provided by the  Appellant,  however  I  was
    addressed by his Counsel in oral submissions.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of submissions I indicated that  I  reserved  my  decision
    which I shall now give.  I do not find that there is an error of law in
    the decision such that it should be  set  aside.   My  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.

 5. In relation to the Grounds of  Appeal  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the
    entirety of the appeal focuses upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings in respect of the analysis of  the  Appellant's  language,  in
    that the judge failed to  give  reasons  for  his  conclusions  on  the
    available evidence regarding that linguistic evidence.  In my view  the
    Grounds of Appeal are baseless.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge has  set
    out at paragraph 10.4 of  the  determination  that,  in  terms  of  the
    language analysis, the result of the analysis indicated that the use of
    the language was not consistent with that spoken in the claimed area of
    Syria but was consistent with that spoken in Egypt.  Thus it  is  clear
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was aware of  the  conflict  in  the
    evidence and that it did not favour  the  Appellant.   The  judge  then
    proceeded to explore the Appellant's explanation of this factor and the
    fact that he claimed to have resided in Egypt for two years  and  noted
    that was not considered to be a credible explanation by the Respondent.



 6. The judge further  considered  the  terms  of  the  voice  analysis  at
    paragraph 10.7 of the determination and noted that the  result  of  the
    analysis took no account of the concept of 'socialisation' or the  fact
    that the Appellant claimed to have lived in Egypt for almost two years.
     Then at paragraph 10.9 the judge noted that the  analysis  took  place
    over the course of some 25 minutes  on  the  date  of  the  Appellant's
    interview and noted  the  consistency  and  inconsistency  between  the
    Appellant's speech and the Syrian coastal dialect and further noted the
    conclusion  that  the  language  analysis  suggested  that  the  result
    obtained was more likely than  not  inconsistent  with  the  linguistic
    community as stated in the  hypothesis  before  also  noting  that  the
    analysis suggested that the result obtained is  more  likely  than  not
    consistent with the linguistic community as stated in the hypothesis.

 7. The judge then further  went  on  to  note  the  submissions  regarding
    socialisation at paragraph 10.10 and in particular noted a paper  of  7
    August 2014 from Ms Aisha Maniar which discussed  tests  undertaken  by
    SPRAKAB and pointed out that language tests can disclose the region  of
    socialisation but the report concludes that language analysis should be
    used with considerable  caution  in  addressing  questions  of  origin,
    nationality or  citizenship.   The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider
    socialisation further at paragraph 10.11 and at 10.12, concluding  that
    the central question  for  him  was  one  of  nationality  and  finally
    resolved at paragraph 10.14 that the language analysis evidence had not
    been  challenged  by  the  Respondent  formally   and   alongside   the
    Appellant's stated period of time of almost two years  in  Egypt,  this
    meant that it was arguable at the very least that the  linguistics  may
    have been affected in some way in the period as a result of interaction
    with other individuals most of whom must have been Egyptian and on that
    basis the Egyptian influence in his speech could in fact be  explained.
    Thus, in his judgment the result of the language analysis which he  had
    set out in full were circumspect.

 8. As such the judge's conclusion that followed at  10.15  and  10.16  was
    one, in my  view,  that  was  clearly  open  to  him  to  make,  having
    comprehensively analysed the material before him  and  in  fact  having
    given very clear reasons upon the available evidence  contrary  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal lodged by the Secretary of State.  As such it  is  my
    view that the judge's findings are neither perverse nor irrational  nor
    demonstrate any flaw to the requisite standard identified in R (Iran) &
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    982.

 9. In summary, I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred
    in its consideration of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby affirmed.

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

