
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/05699/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |      Decision & Reasons           |
|                                        |Promulgated                        |
|On 4 April 2018                         |      On 13 April 2018             |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          MS JEYAMALINI LINGESWARAN
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Muquit of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 26 February 1983.  Her
      appeal against the refusal of asylum was allowed by Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Andonian sitting at Taylor House on 1 December 2017. The
      Respondent appeals with  leave  against  that  decision  and  for  the
      reasons which I set out in more detail below I have set  the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal aside. Although therefore this matter  came
      before me initially as an appeal by the Respondent, for  the  sake  of
      convenience I will continue to the refer to the parties as  they  were
      known at first instance.


   2. On 27 September 2016 the Appellant left Sri  Lanka  by  fishing  boat.
      From there she travelled to India. On 2 November  2016  she  travelled
      for 2 or 3 hours to another unknown country and from  there  travelled
      by aeroplane to a European country. On 8 November 2016 she entered the
      United Kingdom and  after  being  served  with  illegal  entry  papers
      claimed asylum on 1 December 2016.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's case was set out by the Judge at [4]  to  [8]  of  his
      determination. In 2004 the Appellant began working for the  separatist
      organisation the LTTE as an administration assistant. From August 2006
      until 2008 she was employed to help the LTTE by taking wounded  people
      for treatment. On 12 August 2016 (the Judge  gives  it  an  impossible
      date of 2060) the Appellant was arrested by officers of  the  CID  who
      came into her textile shop and stated they need  needed  to  ask  some
      questions.


   4. She was taken to Verpankulam a camp run by the CID who she was able to
      identify because they were clean-shaven  and  speaking  Tamil.  Whilst
      detained there she was raped by CID officers and beaten every day.  On
      25 September 2016 she was released from the camp  because  her  father
      and aunt had bribed a CID officer. Since that time  the  CID  day  had
      visited her home looking for her and her husband was in hiding in  Sri
      Lanka. She feared that if she returned  to  Sri  Lanka  she  would  be
      arrested again due to her past involvement with the LTTE.

The Decision at First Instance

   5. The determination of Judge Andonian has been  described  by  both  the
      Respondent and Designated Judge McClure  (who  granted  permission  to
      appeal) as "riddled with errors in both spelling and grammar" and with
      the hallmark of "having been dictated into a computer software program
      then issued without having been proof read." It is indeed difficult to
      follow in places and it is not always easy  to  understand  where  the
      Judge is giving his own views and where he  is  repeating  submissions
      made to him see [31]  for  example.  In  support  of  her  appeal  the
      Appellant had submitted photographs of scars on her back in support of
      her claim to have been detained  and  beaten  in  Sri  Lanka  and  she
      submitted a medical report.


   6. The Judge considered the  risk  categories  set  out  in  the  country
      guidance authority of GJ as they applied to the Appellant. At [34] the
      Judge appeared to have rejected the claim that the Appellant was  ever
      detained in Sri Lanka and did not find that the Appellant had had  any
      role in post-conflict Tamil separatism. She had not  been  politically
      active in any way since she had arrived in United Kingdom. She was  no
      more involved with the LTTE than the general population. The Appellant
      had not given testimony to the reconciliation commission and  even  if
      she had left Sri Lanka illegally without  a  passport  her  activities
      were not such as to indicate she was working to  destabilise  the  Sri
      Lankan state. Previous interest or arrest by the authorities  did  not
      necessarily indicate a future risk  of  arrest.  The  new  Sri  Lankan
      government which had come into power since January 2015 had  vowed  to
      investigate violations of human rights in Sri Lanka.


   7. At [47] the Judge appeared to find that the Appellant did not  have  a
      well-founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka or that she would be  at
      risk upon return. The Judge then went on to consider  the  Appellant's
      claim under Article 8. At [84] on page 16  of  the  determination  the
      Judge began his conclusions. The Judge appeared at [88] to accept that
      the medical evidence supported the Appellant's  claimed  injuries  she
      received in detention. He allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

   8. The Respondent appealed against  this  decision  in  succinct  grounds
      drafted by the Presenting Officer who appeared before me. The  grounds
      commented  on  the  presentation  of  the  determination  (see   above
      paragraph 5). It was unclear on what basis the Judge had  allowed  the
      appeal or which of  the  categories  (if  any)  of  GJ  the  Appellant
      succeeded under. It was unclear at  [107]  what  the  finding  of  the
      Tribunal  was  on  how  the  Appellant  would  be  perceived  by   the
      authorities on return or what reasoning had been  applied  to  support
      the findings. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  Judge
      McClure on 22 January 2018 who, while noting the existence  of  errors
      in the determination, also commented that the Judge appeared  to  have
      accepted some parts of the Appellant's case.

The Hearing Before Me

   9. At the hearing before me it was conceded by counsel for the  Appellant
      that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal could not stand and  that
      the case should be remitted back  to  the  First-tier  to  be  decided
      again. The issue between the parties was to whom the  case  should  be
      sent. For the Appellant counsel argued that the case could properly be
      sent back before Judge Andonian because the argument in the  case  was
      that the Judge had not made any proper findings and therefore  it  was
      still open for him to do that.


  10. For the Respondent the Presenting Officer argued  that  it  was  clear
      from Judge Andonian's determination that the case had not  been  given
      anxious scrutiny. The rehearing should be before  a  different  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge. Sending it back to the same Judge was giving  him
      an opportunity to tidy it up but it did not solve the problem that the
      case  needed  to  be  looked  at  again.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
      submissions I indicated that my view was that the case should be  sent
      back to be re-heard by Judge Andonian. I now give my reasons for  that
      course of action.

Findings

  11.  I  have  highlighted  above  some  of   the   difficulties   in   the
      determination.  From  [88]  onwards  the  comprehensibility   of   the
      determination further deteriorated. The Judge referred to a number  of
      submissions made to him without clearly indicating  what  findings  he
      made on those submissions. The Judge rejected the argument  that  only
      diaspora activities would lead to a person's risk on  return  but  did
      not indicate clearly why the  Appellant's  previous  activities  would
      lead to a risk. I pause to note here that  the  Judge  throughout  the
      determination employed the word "dicer" for "diaspora". The Judge  did
      not indicate into which category of risk (whether in the case of GJ or
      otherwise) the Appellant fell into. If no risk  category  applied  the
      Judge should have stated on what basis the Appellant would be at  risk
      upon return. This was a crucial finding which the Judge needed to make
      but he did not.


  12. It could not be seen from the determination  that  there  had  been  a
      properly reasoned written decision in this case. It  might  almost  be
      argued the matter remained outstanding before Judge Andonian to  write
      a proper determination. Even if that was not  the  legal  position,  I
      consider this was a case where the trial Judge should be  required  to
      complete the task with which he had been entrusted.


  13. There was a further consideration which was that  on  the  Appellant's
      case she was a vulnerable witness having been subjected to severe ill-
      treatment in Sri Lanka. If the matter was remitted back to a different
      Judge, it is difficult to see how  any  findings  could  be  preserved
      since it was arguable the Judge had not made any  findings.  In  those
      circumstances there was a grave risk that the Appellant would have  to
      give her evidence again, a potentially unnecessary trauma for  her  to
      go through. By contrast she had already given her  evidence  to  Judge
      Andonian and would not need to repeat the matters  on  which  she  had
      given evidence.


  14. It might not be necessary were the matter to go back to Judge Andonian
      for there to be any further live evidence at  all.  I  would  envisage
      that once this case was back at the First-tier Tribunal  it  could  be
      dealt with on submissions by the  parties'  representatives  and  then
      Judge Andonian could write a proper  determination,  proof  read  with
      understandable conclusions and identifying what matters were submitted
      by the parties and on what matters he was making  findings.  This  was
      particularly true in relation to whether the Appellant fell within any
      of the GJ categories.


15. It is, I acknowledge, an unusual step to remit an appeal  back  to  the
    same Judge who had heard it at first instance. Where there was a  clear
    error of law, it would normally be appropriate to remit the  case  back
    to a different Judge because the First-tier Judge  might  already  have
    expressed views prejudicial to the outcome of the case. That  does  not
    apply here because of the unusual facts of this case. The determination
    is impenetrable due to the numerous errors, typographical and otherwise
    which permeate the determination. The Judge must make findings of  fact
    on the next occasion, no doubt influenced by the evidence he will  have
    already received. It  is  open  to  the  Appellant  to  submit  further
    evidence if she so wishes. Such evidence must be submitted at least  14
    days before the resumed hearing. I find that there was a material error
    of law in the determination at first instance and I  set  it  aside.  I
    remit the appeal back to be heard by Judge Andonian at Hatton Cross.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I set it aside. I direct that the appeal  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier to be reheard by Judge Andonian at Hatton Cross.

Respondent's appeal allowed to that limited extent.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 4th of April 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although a fee award was made in this case, it is not clear  from  the  file
    whether a fee was actually paid. In any event as I have set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal I have also set aside the fee award
    made on that occasion and the issue of a fee award remains  outstanding
    before the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed this 4th of April 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



