
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05934/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th January 2020                 |On 3rd February 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    ms GK
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Miss Pettersen (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is a rehearing following a decision promulgated on  14.11.2019
         by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, who  found  an  error  of  law  on
         procedural grounds in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (Judge Alis) (FTJ) and  set  aside  the  decision  to  dismiss  her
         protection  and  human  rights  claims.   The  FTT   decision   was
         promulgated on 9.8.2019.  The appellant did not have an interpreter
         at the FTT hearing.   The history of the proceedings is  fully  set
         out in the decision of UTJ Rintoul.



Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya.  She  claimed  asylum  on  the
         grounds of  political/religious  opinion.   She  claimed  that  her
         husband was a member of the Mungiki, a secret  sect,  and  that  in
         1997 he decided to leave that group in order to become a Christian.
          This decision lead to the appellant and her family suffering  from
         persecution.  She argued that on return she faced  a  risk  of  ill
         treatment at the hands of her in laws, his family had disowned  her
         and her husband had suffered from a stroke as a result of beatings.
          She had suffered from numerous  beatings  and  had  fractured  her
         wrist and sustained other injuries. She had adult children who  had
         suffered beatings and harassment remained  living  in  Kenya.   She
         entered the UK in April 2018 as a family visitor but remained after
         her visa expired.



Reasons for refusal - 7th June 2019

      3. The respondent refused the application, whilst accepting  that  the
         appellant had established a  subjective  fear.   It  was  initially
         accepted that there was a Convention reason, but at the FTT hearing
         that concession was withdrawn citing (JA (Mungiki - not a religion)
         Kenya [2004] UKIAT 00266).  There was a sufficiency  of  protection
         and/or the appellant could relocate to another area.  There  was  a
         delay in making the claim for asylum.  The documentary evidence was
         not reliable.

      4. Miss Pettersen confirmed the respondent's position that there was a
         Convention  reason  of  imputed  political  opinion  and  that  the
         appellant had established  a  subjective  fear  based  on  historic
         account  of  the  actions  of  the  Mungiki.    It   remained   the
         respondent's position that she could return to Kenya as  there  was
         no present risk and/or that there was a sufficiency  of  protection
         and relocation was an option.



Hearing

      5. The appellant was not represented at  the  hearing.  I  heard  oral
         evidence from the appellant who gave evidence at the  hearing  with
         the assistance of an interpreter in the Kikuyu  language.    I  was
         satisfied that there were no difficulties with  the  interpretation
         and that the appellant was fully able to engage in the proceedings.
          The appellant relied on the bundle  (including  a  reference  from
         Christ-Embassy Bolton, letter from Kiambu District hospital, letter
         from Ministry of interior & letter  from  Christ  committed  gospel
         church 15.7.2019) that she provided for the previous hearing.   She
         had submitted further evidence in the form of Curriculum  vitae  of
         the young people that she had helped, which were  included  in  the
         respondent's bundle.  The  appellant  also  produced  a  number  of
         articles detailing the re-emergence of the Mungiki in  Kenya  dated
         2018/2019.



Submissions

      6. At the hearing before  me  Ms  Pettersen  and  the  appellant  made
         submissions  which  are  set  out  in  detail  in  the  record   of
         proceedings.



The appellant's evidence

      7. The appellant relied  on  her  witness  statements,  her  screening
         interview and the substantive interview.  The details of  her  oral
         evidence are set out in the record of proceedings.



Findings of fact and conclusions

      8. The appellant gave evidence that was broadly  consistent  with  her
         witness statement  and  the  interview  record.  In  the  screening
         interview the appellant stated that she was in fear of her in  laws
         and that there were fights over land.  There was no mention of  the
         Mungiki at that point.   I have considered all the evidence in  the
         round in reaching my findings. I have  looked  at  the  documentary
         evidence having regard to Tanver Ahmed (2002) UKIAT 00439.  I  have
         taken into account the background material in particular  the  CPIN
         2018 and I have read the article provided  by  the  appellant.  The
         respondent in a request for information described the Mungiki as  a
         "politico-religious group that was outlawed by  the  government  of
         Kenya following atrocities  committed  against  its  victims.   The
         disciples of the  Mungiki  claim  it  is  a  "homegrown"  religious
         organisation committed to upholding the traditional "African way of
         worship, culture and lifestyle."  There is no recent CG relating to
         the Mungiki other than that relating to FGM and I find no objective
         evidence that the group is targeting Christians.

      9. Given the concession by the respondent I am prepared to  find  that
         the historic account was established namely  that  the  appellant's
         husband had been a former member of the Mungiki  and  that  he  had
         left that group in 1997  in  order  to  become  a  Christian.   The
         appellant is a Christian.  I accept that he suffered from a  stroke
         and remained bedridden for 13 years. I accept that the  appellant's
         husband has since died in 2011.  There is no reliable  evidence  to
         show that the cause of the stroke was from beatings suffered at the
         hands of the Mungiki or his family. I accept that  there  may  well
         have been disagreements or family disputes over land and  that  the
         appellant's in laws disowned her. I  place  little  weight  on  the
         letter from the Ministry of Interior. There is no evidence to  show
         how the appellant came to have  this  letter  nor  to  confirm  the
         identity of Patrick Waithaka. There is no evidence as to  the  role
         played by the Ministry of Interior nor why the  appellant  has  not
         been provided with assistance  by  the  authorities.  There  is  no
         independent evidence to show that any  family  members  died  as  a
         result of the actions of the Mungiki. It  is  reasonable  that  the
         appellant would have been able to  produce  death  certificates  or
         reports from the police were that to be the case.

     10. As to the account of other more recent incidents claimed to  be  at
         the hands of the Mungiki I find that  appellant's  account  is  not
         credible. I find that her account lacks detail and is vague  as  to
         important details.  The appellant described a number  of  incidents
         in which masked men regularly infiltrated her property and beat her
         and the children. I find that there is no reliable evidence to show
         that these assailants  were  members  of  or  identifiable  as  the
         Mungiki.  The appellant relied on a medical report in which  it  is
         confirmed that she suffered a fractured wrist on 4.5.2016 after  an
         attack by thugs.  The evidence fails to  show  any  link  that  the
         assailants  were  members  of  the  Mungiki.   The  appellant  gave
         evidence of another incident when she was attacked at a cash point.
         Whilst she believed that the assailants were Mungiki she could give
         no explanation in support or any detailed  information  as  to  the
         identity of the assailants. I accept  that  she  was  assaulted  on
         those occasions but find that there is no reliable evidence to show
         that she was attacked by or targeted by the Mungiki. In addition  I
         find that the appellant did not report the assaults or  go  to  the
         police with her fears about the Mungiki, which in my  view  damages
         the credibility of her  account.  She  claimed  that  her  children
         remained in Kenya living with her sister  for  some  time  and  had
         moved from  place  to  place  in  order  to  hide  from  and  avoid
         harassment from the Mungiki. There was no evidence from any of  the
         children who are adults aged 17,27,24,30,32, 36 years of age or her
         sister and it is reasonable that she could have provided statements
         in support.  In  addition  there  was  no  up  to  date  supporting
         evidence from the pastor  who  it  was  claimed  looked  after  the
         "children" and had given the children a safe house  in  the  church
         after July 2019.  It is reasonable that the  appellant  could  have
         asked him to provide a further statement.  She claimed that her son
         had been held in protective custody for a period of  time  in  2018
         following being targeted by the Mungiki.  There was no  independent
         evidence to support this aspect of her claim. It is reasonable that
         she would have been able to obtain evidence from the police or from
         her son.  The appellant provided no independent or  other  evidence
         to show the identity of her in laws and that they were  members  or
         "leaders" of the  Mungiki  and/or  that  they  had  the  means  and
         resources to be able to track her down in Kenya. I  find  that  the
         appellant failed to provide any clear account as to how and why she
         believed that she remained at risk from either her in laws  or  the
         Mungiki.  Her account was vague unsubstantiated and generalised.

     11. I find that the appellant is aged 60 years old, a Christian  and  a
         member of the Kikuyu.  She has  adult  children  and  grandchildren
         living in Kenya. I find that the  appellant  was  not  involved  in
         converting young people to Christianity or away  from  the  Mungiki
         sect. I place no weight on the evidence of a number of  CV's  which
         the  appellant  claimed  belonged  to  young  people  who  she  had
         converted from the Mungiki.  The CV's were not accompanied  by  any
         witness statements and contained no relevant  evidence  to  support
         the appellant's claim.

     12. I have considered the background material which confirms  that  the
         Mungiki are a criminal group outlawed by the Kenyan authorities  in
         2003.  The  police  have  the  primary   responsibility   for   law
         enforcement and the force has been reformed and increased in recent
         years (CPIN 2018).  It is acknowledged that the  police  force  has
         functional  problems  including  poor  casework,  incompetence  and
         corruption which has undermined prosecutions, but I  conclude  that
         there is a system in place that provides  protection  against  such
         outlawed organisations such as Mungiki.  The  appellant  failed  to
         report any of the serious incidents  to  the  police  and  has  not
         sought protection.  The appellant has failed to  show  a  sustained
         and systematic failure of state  protection  on  the  part  of  the
         authorities in Kenya.  The appellant has failed to  show  that  the
         non-state agents have any influence over the State.  In some of the
         news articles provided by the appellant it is clear that the police
         and the authorities are actively tackling the problems presented by
         criminal gangs.

     13. In terms of relocation I conclude  that  the  appellant  has  adult
         children living in Kenya and I find no credible evidence that  they
         are being targeted by the Mungiki.  The country is large and  I  am
         satisfied that there would be  places  where  the  appellant  could
         relocate outside of her home area or places  where  she  had  lived
         previously.  She has lived in Kenya since 1959 and was last working
         as a house girls  agency  worker.   She  also  has  adult  siblings
         including 4 sisters and 7 brothers.  There is no reliable  evidence
         to show that either the appellant's in laws  are  Mungiki  or  that
         they have the power and influence to locate her in Kenya.  Or  that
         there is any reason why they would wish to do so since her  husband
         died in 2011.

     14. I have considered Article 3 and 8 and conclude  that  there  is  no
         evidence to show that either are  engaged.  The  appellant  has  no
         family life in the UK.  She has lived in  the  UK  since  2018  and
         overstayed since her family visit visa expired. I conclude that she
         fails to meet the private life requirements under paragraph 276ADE.
          The appellant has lived for the majority  of  her  life  in  Kenya
         where she  was  educated  to  degree  level,  has  worked  and  has
         immediate and extended family members.  She has failed to show that
         she is in need of international protection and or  that  she  faces
         very significant obstacles on return.  I find  that  the  appellant
         has suffered from depression and poor health, although there was no
         medical evidence before me.  I find that she would be able to  work
         and that some form of support would be available from her  children
         who she accepted had been able to work and with whom she  had  been
         in recent contact.    I further conclude that her return would  not
         result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  such  as  to  engaged
         Article 8 outside of the Rules, and/or that the decision  would  be
         disproportionate.





Decision

    15.   The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date 29.1.2020


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




ANONYMITY ORDER

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



NO FEE AWARD - the appeal  is  dismissed  and  so  there  is  no  fee  award
payable.




                               Signed   Date 29.1.2020


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


