
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/05705/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th May 2019                        |  On 22nd May 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     Y T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Kimnell  (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 7th March 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a Russian citizen who on 7th February 2017 applied for
    international protection on the basis of her sexuality.  She claims  to
    be a lesbian.  The Appellant has a daughter who is a dependant  in  her
    claim, who was born in the UK on 9th August 2017.  The application  was
    refused on 26th May 2017 and the appeal was heard by the judge  on  8th
    February 2019.

 3. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and a witness, Mr R L.  The
    judge did not accept the Appellant's claim to be a lesbian.  The  judge
    noted that the Appellant had been in the UK since  7th  July  2009  and
    made a claim for asylum two days after arrival  which  was  refused  on
    14th December 2009 although the  Appellant  was  granted  discretionary
    leave until 10th September 2010.  The Appellant appealed and the appeal
    was dismissed on 12th January 2011.  The judge noted that the  previous
    claim and appeal did not relate to the Appellant's sexuality.

 4. The judge concluded at paragraph 52;

         "52. The Appellant's  belated  claim  that  she  is  a  lesbian  is
             unsupported by other evidence and, looked at in the round, the
             evidence indicates that she is heterosexual.  I find that  the
             reason why she has made the claim based on  her  sexuality  is
             because she had knowledge of conditions in Chechnya and Russia
             and has fabricated a claim  designed  to  fit  in  with  those
             conditions.  I find her not to be a credible witness.  She  is
             not at risk of Convention persecution in Russia because of her
             sexuality."

 5. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. In summary it was submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    relevant matters and/or acted unreasonably with respect to the implicit
    finding of a discrepancy between YT's claimed disclosure to her  mother
    in relation to her sexuality, and her claim  of  a  lengthy  period  of
    difficulty in coming to terms with her sexuality.

 7. It was contended that the judge had erred by  failing  to  provide  any
    reasons why it was incredible that YT and her partner had been able  to
    carry on a serious long  term  relationship  for  seven  years  without
    either the Appellant's foster carers or the partner's  parents  knowing
    about it.

 8. It was submitted that the judge had erred by failing to  give  adequate
    reasons why YT's conduct, observed by Mr L which included  kissing  and
    cuddling, was not indicative of the Appellant  being  a  lesbian.   The
    judge had failed to make a  finding  as  to  whether  the  witness  was
    credible or not.

 9. It was submitted the judge in making reference to a  MARAC  report  had
    failed to consider relevant matters.

10. It was contended at paragraph 50 that the judge had erred by making the
    following finding;

         50.   It  is  also  very  difficult  to  understand  how,  if   the
             Appellant's claim that she had been raped  as  a  child  while
             living in Chechnya were true, she would willingly have engaged
             in congress with a man, particularly when, according to  other
             parts of her evidence, she has no interest in men.

11. It was contended  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  YT's
    opportunity to develop a new relationship after her  relationship  with
    her partner ended, was flawed by a failure to consider relevant matters
    and the judge failed to give adequate reasons for his conclusion.

12. Finally, it was contended that the judge failed to make core  findings,
    and failed to make a finding as to whether YT was raped in Chechnya  in
    2008 and in the UK in 2018 as claimed.   It  was  submitted  that  both
    claimed events were arguably material to the assessment of her account.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Povey  of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         2.   The grounds allege that, in rejecting the Appellant's  claimed
             sexuality, the judge erred in his assessment of the  evidence,
             failed  to  make  relevant  findings  and  failed  to  provide
             adequate reasoning.

         3.   The Appellant claimed to be a lesbian, which was  rejected  by
             the judge.  The grounds focused on the judge's fact-finding at
             [47]  -  [51]  of  the  determination.   At  [50],  the  judge
             expressed difficulty in understanding the  Appellant's  sexual
             history, given her claim to have been raped in the  past.   It
             was arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  provide  sufficient
             reasons for why or  from  where  that  difficulty  arose.   In
             addition, the judge did not make any findings  in  respect  of
             the allegations of rape, despite the same being related to the
             Appellant's  claimed  sexuality.   Both  of  these   omissions
             appeared material to the judge's assessment of the credibility
             of the Appellant's account and constituted arguable errors  of
             law.

         4.   As the application for permission disclosed arguable errors of
             law, permission to appeal is  granted.   All  grounds  may  be
             argued.

14. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  It was contended that the judge had not materially erred in  law
    and had directed himself appropriately.

15. Directions were given that there should be an oral hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

16. At the oral hearing Mr Gilbert relied and  expanded  upon  the  grounds
    upon which permission to  appeal  had  been  granted.   Miss  Isherwood
    relied upon the rule 24  response,  arguing  that  the  judge  had  not
    materially erred in law, and the grounds  amounted  to  a  disagreement
    with conclusions reached by the judge, which were open to him  to  make
    on the evidence.

17. In considering the submission made on behalf of the Appellant that  the
    judge provided inadequate reasons for findings, I follow  the  guidance
    in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)  and  set
    out below the headnote to that decision;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

18. The judge found at paragraph 47 that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    Appellant could have carried on a serious  same  sex  relationship  for
    seven years in the UK  without  her  foster  carers  or  her  partner's
    parents knowing about it.  No reasons are given for that conclusion.

19. In the same paragraph the judge comments upon  the  evidence  of  Mr  L
    finding that he had never known her to be in a same  sex  relationship,
    and the evidence that he gave about having observed the Appellant in an
    embrace with another woman is not necessarily  indicative  of  anything
    other than a close friendship.

20. I find that the judge has  not  made  a  specific  finding  on  Mr  L's
    credibility.  In addition, I find that the judge has not considered all
    of the evidence given by Mr L, which should have  been  considered  and
    findings made upon it.

21. In addition to giving oral evidence, Mr L had provided a  letter  dated
    2nd April 2017 contained at pages 158 - 159 of the Appellant's  bundle.
    In this letter he described seeing the Appellant with another woman  in
    a park, and Mr L indicated  that  they  seemed  embarrassed  when  they
    caught sight of him, and "they were being quite  intimate  and  stopped
    when they saw me."

22. Mr L then described in the letter having a  private  meeting  with  the
    Appellant in which

         "She broke down in my office, owning up to her sexuality  and  that
         of her lady friend.  She had wanted to keep that side of  her  life
         private and discreet.  She was embarrassed by this and did not feel
         that she was ready to  come  out  in  the  open  about  her  sexual
         orientation.  That was the winter of 2012, Christmas week".

23. Mr L then stated "I became the person she came to when she had  matters
    of her sexuality unnerving her.  I believe I was the  only  person  who
    knew her secret."

24. Mr L also provided a witness statement dated  22nd  September  2017  at
    pages 23 - 25 of the Appellant's  bundle  in  which  he  described  the
    incident he had witnessed  and  which  was  described  in  his  letter,
    stating that the Appellant and the other girl were hugging and kissing.
     At paragraph 5 of the witness statement Mr  L  describes  the  meeting
    with the Appellant in which she disclosed to him her sexuality.

25. The judge does not consider Mr L's evidence in relation to his  meeting
    with the Appellant and  her  confession  to  him  in  relation  to  her
    sexuality.  The judge only considers Mr  L's  evidence  of  seeing  the
    Appellant hugging and kissing another girl which the  judge  found  was
    "not necessarily indicative of anything other than a close friendship."

26. In my view the judge has  failed  to  consider  material  evidence  and
    therefore failed to make findings upon that evidence and has failed  to
    give adequate reasons for not taking into account and attaching  weight
    to the evidence of Mr L.

27. I find this amounts to a material error of law.   Mr  L's  evidence  is
    potentially significant.

28. In addition, I do find  the  judge  has  made  an  unclear  finding  at
    paragraph 50 in which he appears to indicate that it  is  difficult  to
    understand that if the Appellant had been raped as  a  child,  why  she
    would willingly have engaged in sexual  relations  with  a  man.    The
    Appellant did give evidence to explain she had a  specific  arrangement
    with a man that she would  become  pregnant,  and  the  judge  has  not
    demonstrated that he has considered her explanation and therefore it is
    not clear why he has rejected it.

29. In my view the judge is  entitled  at  paragraph  52  to  describe  the
    Appellant's claim in relation to her sexuality as "belated" but errs in
    recording that the claim "is unsupported  by  other  evidence"  as  the
    judge has not analysed all of the evidence given by Mr L.

30. I conclude that the judge has  materially  erred  by  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons in relation to findings, and not demonstrated that all
    material evidence has been considered.  The decision must therefore  be
    set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

31. The decision must be remade.  I am conscious that  there  have  already
    been three hearings before the FtT, two of which related to  the  claim
    based on sexuality.  I am therefore faced with an appeal which involves
    considerable judicial fact-finding, which has already been heard in the
    FtT.  I have considered the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2 and despite the previous hearings in the  FtT  find  that
    the appropriate course is to remit the appeal back to  the  FtT  to  be
    heard afresh.  In my view it is more appropriate  for  the  substantial
    judicial fact-finding that is required, to be carried out  by  the  FtT
    rather than the Upper Tribunal.

32. The appeal will therefore be heard again by the  FtT  and  the  parties
    will be advised of the venue, time and date in due course.  The  appeal
    is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge Walters, Judge  Dineen,
    and Judge Kimnell.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 16th May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the FtT.





Signed                              Date 16th May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
