
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05954/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2020                  |On 17 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    SHMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ell, instructed by Sutovic and Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1994 and is a female citizen of Iraq. She  is
    of Kurdish ethnicity and her home area lies in the Independent  Kurdish
    Region (IKR).  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 7 June 2019 refusing her claim
    for international protection. The First-tier Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 March 2020, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary  of  State  at  the  initial
    hearing, told me that he was unable to defend the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal. I shall, therefore, be brief.  I  was  assisted  by  the
    succinct submissions of Mr Ell, who appeared for the appellant. I agree
    with him that, notwithstanding that the judge states that he considered
    the evidence 'in in the round', it is apparent that, having found  that
    the appellant had not told truth at her screening interview, the  judge
    was thereafter strongly disinclined to accept any  other  part  of  her
    evidence could be truthful. Several times in the  decision,  the  judge
    prefaces discussion of the appellant's evidence by saying that  he  has
    taken 'account of the general adverse credibility findings...' which  I
    take to be a reference to the screening interview. I fully accept  that
    it is sometimes difficult to consider evidence as a totality  when  one
    is required commence an analysis by considering and making findings  on
    one particular part of that evidence. In this decision, however, I find
    that the judge has not overcome that  difficulty.  Secondly,  I  accept
    that the judge at [39] was factually wrong  when  he  states  that  the
    expert witness had not assessed the 'risk of harm faced by  westernised
    women in the IKR'; the expert's report does address this aspect of  the
    appeal at [22]. The judge has not made any findings on that evidence.

 3. I set aside the decision. Given the appellant circumstances at the date
    of the First-tier Tribunal hearing, it is not  surprising  that  events
    have moved on. The appellant gave birth to a child on 31 May  2020.  Mr
    Ell told me that KSR, whom the appellant claims is a father  the  child
    (a claim rejected by the judge), has been  registered  as  the  child's
    father and, moreover, that on 20 October 2020 the child was issued with
    a  passport  as  a  British  citizen.  Given  that  this  decision   is
    anonymized, I shall not name the child but particulars were given to Mr
    Diwnycz. It is a matter for the Secretary of  State,  but  before  this
    appeal returns for another hearing, she may wish to review the claim in
    the light of the altered circumstances.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge  Moxon;  Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter;  1.5  hours;
    Bradford) for that Tribunal to remake the decision at  or  following  a
    hearing de novo.


Signed                                            Date 13 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
