
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05712/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 12 August 2020                |On the 12 October 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                     KK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Brakaj, Solicitor instructed on behalf of the
appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")
         who allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on the 11 March
         2020.

      2. Whilst the Secretary of State is the appellant, for the sake of
         convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they were before
         the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances of a protection claim.
         Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction applies
         both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      4. The hearing took place on 12 August 2020, by means of Skype for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected to by the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
         practicable and both parties agreed that all issues could be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video. There
         were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing and I am satisfied
         both advocates were able to make their respective cases by the
         chosen means.

      5. I am grateful to Mr Diwncyz and Ms Brakaj for their clear oral
         submissions.

Background:

      6. The appellant's claim is summarised in the decision of the FtTJ at
         paragraphs 10-11.  The appellant is a national of Iraq. He claimed
         to have been a peshmerga soldier who fought against Daesh.

      7. In January 2017, his maternal uncle phoned him and asked the
         appellant to accompany him to Erbil city. Whilst the appellant
         drove his maternal uncle was having a difficult conversation with
         someone on the telephone. As they approached the KDP checkpoint the
         guards opened fire on them. The appellant got out of his car and
         hid behind it whilst his uncle exchanged fire with his gun. The
         appellant's uncle was shot and to the guards was shot in the return
         fire. He managed to get his uncle in the car and drive back to town
         where the appellant took his uncle to hospital.

      8. The appellant was arrested and taken to prison where he was
         detained for 4 � months.

      9. However, he was released without charge following the production of
         some CCTV footage showing the appellant was not responsible for
         firing the gun which had injured the guards at the KDP checkpoint.
         Despite the CCTV footage showing that he was not responsible for
         firing a gun which had injured the guards at the KGB checkpoint,
         the relatives of the injured guards wanted to exact revenge against
         him. The families of the two injured guards contained members who
         held senior positions such as a brigadier general in the army and
         therefore in a position to exert control.

     10. 2 to 3 months before the appellant left Iraq he was stabbed by a
         member of the xxx family in the town centre. The appellant received
         hospital treatment but despite reporting the incident to the
         authorities no further action was taken.

     11. The appellant believed that if he returned to Iraq he would be
         killed by the family members of the two men his uncle injured in
         the shootout at the KDP border.

     12. The appellant left Iraq on 12 May 2018 and travel to Turkey by
         plane using his own passport. He stayed in Turkey until October
         2018 and then travelled to a number of countries finally entering
         the United Kingdom on the 4 February 2019. The records show that he
         claimed asylum in Romania and in Germany.

     13. The appellant claimed asylum on 5 February 2019. In his claim he
         stated that he had been threatened on many occasions including
         whilst he had been in the UK.

     14. The respondent refused his claim in a decision dated 7 June 2019.
         It was accepted that he was an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity,
         but that he had not given a consistent account regarding the core
         aspect of his claim to have been involved in a shooting incident
         and having had subsequent problems with the families of the KDP
         guards. The respondent considered four photographs that have been
         submitted in evidence to demonstrate that he was a Peshmerga
         soldier but the respondent noted that whilst the photographs had a
         resemblance to the appellant, they did not evidence anything in
         relation to the claim problems with the families involved in the
         incident or any subsequent threats.

     15. Consideration was also given to Section 8 of the Asylum and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 on the basis
         that the Home Office records demonstrated that he claimed asylum in
         Romania and Germany in 2018 and that he had not provided a reflex
         relation as to why he did not stay for the outcome of those claims.
         It was also noted that he travelled to the UK via Austria and
         France but failed to claim asylum in either country before arriving
         to the UK.

     16. The decision letter cited the CPIN for Iraq: political opinion in
         Kurdistan region of Iraq (KRI) dated August 2017, noting that the
         KDP did not have full control of Kurdistan including Sulaymaniyah.

     17. The decision letter also considered the feasibility of return
         noting that in the decision of AA(Iraq) [2017] there were no
         internal flights to the IKR and that all returns would be to
         Baghdad and therefore the appellant, as a Kurd would be returned to
         Iraq via Baghdad and then able to return to his home area. It was
         also noted that the recent objective evidence showed that there
         were direct flights from the UK to the IKR.

     18. The decision letter cited the decision of AAH(Iraqi Kurds-internal
         relocation) (CG) Iraq [2018 ]UKUT 00212 noting that he would be
         required to provide a CSID and passport to enter the IKR  and that
         the CPIN :  returns and internal relocation stated that to obtain
         an Iraqi passport he would need to present a form with completed
         personal information filled out according to the information on the
         CSID, and INC residency card (for those outside Iraq) photographs
         and a cheque for 20,000 Iraqi dinars taken to an Iraqi consulate
         where they will take a person's fingerprints. It is therefore
         stated that if he were able to provide a CSID card he would be able
         to obtain a passport. As he had claimed that his CSID was with his
         mother she would be able to send this to him.

     19. Further information in the decision letter made reference to
         material from the Iraqi embassy in London setting out how a CSID
         card could be obtained from the Iraqi embassy in the UK.

     20. In summary it was submitted by the respondent that as the material
         facts of his claim had been rejected, it was not accepted that he
         had faced problems with the relatives of the men concerned. As it
         was noted that he was a Peshmerga soldier in Iraq, there is no
         dispute that he did previously have a CSID card in order to avoid
         destitution. As such, his mother could return his CSID card for him
         to return to Iraq. In the alternative, if the card had been lost he
         could apply for a new one at the Iraqi embassy in London by
         providing his page and volume number details. If he did not know
         them, then you could use his family members, including his male
         relative such as maternal uncle as a proxy in order to assist him
         as family members details are placed together. He could also visit
         the Iraqi embassy in London to provide him with a laissez-passer in
         replace of a passport.

     21. In relation to his personal characteristics, he spoke Kurdish
         Sorani, is a Muslim and had worked as a peshmerga and a plaster and
         had no life-threatening health problems. He had some education and
         there are a number of family relatives currently living in Iraq
         with whom he was still in contact with. His family members would be
         able to attend at the civil register office at Erbil province. He
         would therefore be able to return to his home area.

     22. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. In a decision
         promulgated on 11 March 2020, FtTJ Bircher allowed the appeal. The
         FtTJ dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds but allowed the appeal
         on humanitarian protection grounds and on article 3 of the ECHR.

     23. The respondent sought permission to appeal the decision and
         permission to appeal was issued and on 24 April 2020 permission was
         granted by FtTJ O'Keefe who stated as follows:

             "The judge accepted that the appellant was from Erbil  in  the
             IKR. The appellant's evidence was that he had  male  relatives
             in Iraq and was in contact with his mother.  At  paragraph  21
             the judge  that  it  was  uncertain  whether  the  appellant's
             relatives will be willing to locate the ID documents in  their
             possession  or  help  the  appellant  secure  alternative   ID
             documents.  It  is  arguable  that   the   judge   has   given
             insufficient reasons for finding that the appellant would  not
             have the required identity documents on return to Iraq.

             The ground is closing  arguable  material  error  of  law  and
             permission to appeal is granted."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     24. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic the Upper Tribunal issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could take place via Skype. Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for the hearing to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties. At
         the outset of the hearing Mr Diwnycz indicated that he was not able
         to locate the appellant's bundle. Ms Brakaj highlighted its
         relevance to the hearing as it included the appellant statement and
         was relevant to the risk in Iraq. Therefore, she sent a copy of the
         bundle electronically to Mr Diwnycz so that he had the relevant
         papers.

     25. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent relied upon the written
         grounds of appeal. There were no further written submissions. There
         was no Rule 24 response filed on behalf of the appellant.  I also
         heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful for
         their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     26. On behalf of the respondent it was submitted that the FtTJ had
         failed to apply the country guidance case in SMO, KSP &  IM
         (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400
         (IAC);  and that paragraph 3 of the headnote detailed the formally
         contested areas in paragraphs 25 - 50 gave a detailed expert
         analysis of the security situation. The case law stated that a fact
         sensitive approach was necessary and not just a recitation of case
         law as the judge had done at paragraph 18.

     27. As regards the CSID issue, the judge had failed to take into
         account a material fact that the appellant's mother had his CSID
         (see the appeal hearing note). The FtTJ acknowledged that the
         appellant remained in contact with his family (paragraph 21) and
         thereby there is no reason why the appellant cannot obtain his CSID
         and access services and help through the support of his family. The
         judge's findings at paragraphs 19-22 are therefore wholly
         speculatively and unsubstantiated against the facts.

     28. The written grounds assert that there was no evidence given as to
         whether the appellant had made any attempt to obtain documentation
         through any means by his family all through the Iraqi embassy in
         the UK.

     29. It is further submitted that the findings appear to favour the
         appellant and were subjective rather than factual. The appellant
         had no profile and continued to maintain contact with his family.
         The appellant has male family members, uncles and cousins who
         provide the relevant details to obtain documentation moreover the
         appellant's mother holds the appellant CS ID document, and this was
         entirely overlooked by the judge.

     30. Consequently, the errors outlined infected the judge's
         consideration of the feasibility of return an internal relocation
         to Baghdad, Iraq, or the IKR.

     31. The grounds challenge the findings at paragraphs 19-22 regarding
         the inability to obtain a CSID and internally relocate on the basis
         that it failed to take account that the appellant was a healthy
         male, who spoke Kurdish. He had shown personal fortitude to travel
         across several countries to the UK and there was nothing to prevent
         him finding work in Iraq or in the IKR. Furthermore, the CPIN
         February 2019 shows that internal relocation to Iraq/IKR is
         entirely feasible as the Iraqi government taking control and there
         was no reason why he could not internally relocate in Iraq/IKR
         especially Baghdad city or the Baghdad Belts which was clearly
         feasible.

     32. The FtTJ failed to make findings on the country evidence and
         official embassy letters that supported the feasibility of return.

     33. Ground 2 stated that the judge found that there was no asylum risk
         to the appellant (at paragraph 22) although the appellant was
         implicated in an incident he was exonerated (paragraph 10). Whilst
         the appellant claimed been stabbed there was no medical evidence to
         corroborate his hospital treatment. The appellant has no
         significant profile and there was no evidence to suggest that the
         guard's families continue to be in pursuit of the appellant or that
         his family were being persecuted as a result. Therefore, the
         judge's findings at paragraph 17 are therefore entirely speculative
         and only suggest that the relatives "may continue to hold a
         grievance against the appellant". It was submitted that in any
         event, those findings contradicted the conclusion at paragraph 22.
         Therefore, there was nothing to render his return to his home area
         is not feasible.

     34. In his oral submissions Mr Diwnycz submitted that the appellant's
         family had his CSID document and could therefore be sent to him.

     35. I asked him to explain paragraph 9 of the grounds relating to the
         official embassy letters and he made reference to the previous CPIN
         and that the letters were referred to in SMO at paragraph 352.

     36. In relation to ground 2, he submitted that it was not unduly harsh
         for him to relocate to another place in the IKR.

     37. Ms Brakaj on behalf of the appellant began her submissions by
         dealing with ground 2. He submitted that the FtTJ had found the
         appellant to be credible and that the finding at [22] that there
         was no convention reason mirrored the decision letter which had
         focused on the feasibility of return and whether he could obtain a
         CSID. She submitted that the decision letter did not argue that if
         the appellant had found to be credible that there would be a viable
         internal relocation alternative. The refusal letter was also silent
         as to sufficiency of protection and seem to suggest that that was
         not viable.

     38. She submitted that in terms of risk the judge allowed the appeal on
         Article 3 grounds and that the respondent did not ask the judge to
         consider the appeal on the basis that if he were credible what the
         outcome would be.

     39. Ms Brakaj submitted that the judge did what she had been tasked
         with and that in terms of credibility findings at paragraphs [10]
         onwards the FtTJ had accepted that he was a Peshmerga and his
         background and found to have been at risk from the families of the
         guards who were injured in the shootout and that it was credible
         and plausible that the relatives of the two injured men continued
         to hold a grievance against the appellant ( at [17]). In the
         appellant's witness statement, he set out evidence of continued
         threats against him- he was changing locations between areas, did
         not stay in one place. After five months he was in the town bazaar
         and was attacked and stabbed and was taken to hospital. Following
         this he spent six weeks recovering staying with different family
         members. This was set out at paragraph 11 of the FtTJ's decision
         where the judge recited the appellant's claim and oral evidence.
         The judge had found him to be credible. In the light of that, there
         was nothing to say on behalf the respondent that his claim should
         be refused on the basis of sufficiency of protection or internal
         relocation. The respondents own note did not show that this was
         argued and where he was found to be credible the judge was not
         asked to consider this.

     40. During her submissions I asked Ms Brakaj whether the FtTJ did
         consider risk to the appellant in Erbil. She responded by stating
         that at paragraphs 21 - 22 were the relevant paragraphs but she
         stated that those paragraphs could have been more detailed and that
         it was not clear. However, she stated the judge had not been
         assisted by the respondent's advocate and the failure to make
         submissions on the basis that if he were credible whether he would
         be at risk. It was because of this that the brevity of the
         paragraph was due to not being asked to consider those issues on
         behalf of the respondent at the hearing.

     41. When asked about the issue of risk, Ms Brakaj submitted that the
         appellant feared high-ranking members of the KDP. She submitted
         that in this appeal the only issue is credibility and that was the
         way the respondent had run the case and therefore the judge had
         properly dealt with this.

     42. She submitted that if the tribunal did not accept that, that the
         findings on credibility were detailed.

     43. As to ground 1 she submitted that in relation to the CSID and
         whether he could obtain it he didn't know where it was suggesting
         there would be further difficulties and the question was whether
         his mother would be able send it to him ( see [21]).  Based on the
         credibility assessment the issue was whether he would be at risk.

     44. By way of reply Mr Diwncyz submitted that there was a tension
         between paragraph 17 and 22 and that even if credibility findings
         were open to the FtTJ it did not negate ground 1.

     45. As to whether there was a material error of law, Ms Brakaj
         submitted that there was no such material error as the appellant
         and set out a clear risk to him and that there was an ability to
         locate him in his home area from people who had a level of
         authority. Furthermore, in terms of documents, whilst he had
         certain documents if they could not be located he would need to
         return to his home area and the question was whether his family
         would assist him.

     46. In terms of risk, he had been located previously and was a victim
         of an attack and reported it to the authorities. He had remained in
         hiding and had been located in a KDP area. She submitted that in
         the witness statement of the appellant (paragraph 7) there was a
         connection between the families because his maternal aunt's
         marriage to a cousin of one of the men involved and therefore there
         was a link even if he relocated to a different part of the IKR.
         Therefore, the family of the men knew that he was in the UK and
         there was information about him being leaked by the family and
         would be aware of the location. She therefore submitted there was a
         risk in his home area. His family links had not been challenged and
         therefore any error could not be material.

     47. Ms Brakaj submitted that even if any error was material the
         findings of fact was sufficient to allow the appeal. The judge had
         accepted his account as a whole and the appellant did not know with
         certainty how he had been located. He had been pursued in the past
         and this was accepted. On the unchallenged evidence he was at risk
         in his home area and unable to relocate. The evidence is statement
         was that he was unable to relocate and that the authorities will be
         unwilling to assist him.

     48. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the error was material and that the
         submission made on behalf of the appellant by Ms Brakaj that his
         aunt had betrayed him to the family is a submission that went too
         far and that there was no cogent evidence led on this evidence of
         betrayal. He surmised that she might be able to mediate for them.

     49. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.

Decision on error of law:

     50. I have carefully considered the written grounds and the oral
         submissions of Mr Diwnycz and Ms Brakaj.

     51. The question whether the decision contains a material error of law
         is not whether another Judge could have reached the opposite
         conclusion but whether this Judge reached a conclusion by
         appropriately directing himself as to the relevant law and
         assessing the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

     52. The respondent relies upon two grounds. As ground 2 is a challenge
         in part to the credibility findings, I intend to consider that
         ground first.

     53. It is submitted on behalf the respondent that whilst the appellant
         was implicated in an incident he had been exonerated and there was
         no evidence and suggest that the families continued to be in
         pursuit of the applicant and he had no significant profile. It is
         also asserted that the finding at [17] is speculative. It is also
         argued that the finding at [17] contradicts the conclusion of the
         FtTJ set out at [22]. Ground two is therefore a challenge to the
         credibility assessment made by the FtTJ.

     54. I have carefully considered those submissions in the context of the
         decision of the FtTJ.

     55. The FtTJ's findings of fact can be summarised as follows:

          1. It was accepted by the respondent that the appellant was an
             Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity from Erbil province.

          2. The FtTJ found that the appellant was a Peshmerga who fought
             against Daesh. The finding was based on his ability to provide
             "exceptional detail and answers to the asylum questions". In
             his account, he was sent to fight Daesh almost immediately
             after joining and that he and other Peshmerga would process
             family members of Daesh who would be sent to them and who were
             then dispersed to other towns and cities in the KRG. His role
             was to detain the fighters for a very short period before they
             were sent to the headquarters to be interrogated by others (
             at [13-16]).

          3. The FtTJ found that it was credible that the appellant was
             implicated in an incident at the checkpoint.  The FtTJ
             considered the position of the respondent who had argued that
             he would not be at risk on return to Iraq because the
             authorities acknowledged that he had not been responsible for
             shooting at the guards at the checkpoint and that the
             appellant's uncle had made peace with the relatives of the men
             he had injured. However the judge stated at [17]; " however it
             is credible and plausible that the appellant remains at risk
             from the families of the guards who were injured in the
             shootout if only because he was at least implicated in the
             incident by way of the fact that he was the driver who
             approached the checkpoint and similarly he was the driver who
             rescued his uncle and drove away. It is credible and plausible
             that the relatives of the two injured men may continue to hold
             a grievance against the appellant. "

          4. At [18] the FtTJ found that the appellant did not have any ID
             documents and his original passport was given the agent and
             not return to the family as agreed. At present he has no ID
             documents which would enable him to travel from Baghdad to
             Erbil.

     56. Having considered those findings in the context of the evidence, in
         my judgement the credibility findings made were ones which were
         reasonably open to the FtTJ to make.  The FtTJ gave adequate and
         sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusions set out between
         paragraphs 13 - 17. In doing so the judge stated that she had given
         "careful consideration to the evidence" and at [14] recorded that
         in relation to his evidence of being a  Peshmerga, she was
         satisfied that he had given answers which were "specific" and were
         "given without hesitation".

     57. In relation to the core of his account the FtTJ's findings are set
         out at [17]. The FtTJ did consider the point raised by the
         respondent (and also in the grounds) as to why the appellant would
         be at risk if it had been acknowledged that he had not been
         responsible for the shooting of the guards at the checkpoint.
         However, on the judge's consideration of that issue she found that
         it was both credible and plausible that the appellant would remain
         at risk from the families of the guards who were injured in the
         shooting because he was implicated by the fact that he was the
         driver who resided with his uncle and had driven away. Whilst the
         FtTJ stated "it is credible and plausible that the relatives of the
         two injured men may continue to hold a grievance against the
         appellant", it seems to me that this reflected the acceptance of
         the factual claim that the men concerned continue to hold a
         grievance against the appellant. I do not accept this was a
         speculative finding as the grounds assert but one that was open to
         the FtTJ to make on the evidence.

     58. The other point raised by the respondent is that the findings at
         [17] are inconsistent with paragraph [22] where the FtTJ recorded
         that she was not satisfied that the appellant had discharged the
         burden of proof upon him to show that he had a well-founded fear of
         persecution for a Convention reason and therefore refused the
         asylum appeal. Having read the decision and heard the submissions
         of Ms Brakaj, I do not think that there is a conflict or a tension
         between those two identified paragraphs although I observe that
         paragraph [22] is not as clear as it could have been. The FtTJ
         plainly accepted that it was plausible and credible that the two
         men may continue to have a grievance against the appellant and as I
         have set out that was a finding that was open to the judge to make.
         That being the case, it must follow that the judge was satisfied
         that he would be at risk in his home area. It does not seem to have
         been argued by any of the parties as to whether the factual claim
         did amount to a Convention reason whether by way of imputed
         political opinion or whether the factual circumstances indicated a
         "blood feud". Therefore having not been addressed as to whether
         there was a Convention reason or not, the judge appears to have
         considered the claim on the factual basis that if the appellant was
         at risk of serious harm he was entitled to a grant of humanitarian
         protection (without the need for a Convention reason). There is an
         alternative explanation which is that the FtTJ was considering the
         appeal on the basis of an inability to obtain the documentation. As
         set out above, the judge was not clear in her conclusions at [22]
         but I have reached the conclusion that the only reasonable
         inference is that she had allowed the appeal on the basis that she
         considered the appellant would be at risk of serious harm if
         returned to his home area. When considered alongside the
         credibility findings, I am not satisfied that it has been
         demonstrated that there was any inconsistency between paragraph 17
         and paragraph 22.

     59. Therefore, it must follow that the FtTJ gave adequate and
         sustainable reasons for reaching the factual findings made at
         paragraphs 13-17 of the decision.

     60. Whilst I have found no error in the assessment of the core facts, I
         am satisfied that there are material errors of law in the decision
         of the FtTJ.  I am satisfied that the FtTJ was entitled to reach
         the conclusion that he was at risk in his home area (although the
         FtTJ did not clearly or specifically state that) but that there was
         no assessment of secondary facts which were relevant to the issue
         of risk and internal relocation. Nor was there any reasoning or
         assessment of internal relocation in the light of all of the
         evidence.

     61. Whilst Ms Brakaj submits that the respondent did not set out in the
         decision letter what the position would be in the event that the
         appellant was found to be credible, in my judgement the FtTJ was
         required to consider the issue of risk on return based on her
         assessment of the factual account and if at risk in his home area
         to then expressly consider whether there was another part of Iraq
         which the appellant could return to where he would not be at risk
         of serious harm. Whilst the decision did not accept the factual
         claim and was addressing return to Iraq on the basis of the lack of
         credibility in his claim to be at risk in his home area, there are
         still references to the issue of relocation as can be seen at pages
         15 and 16 of the decision letter where reference is made to return
         to the IKR or another location in Iraq and where reference is made
         to his personal circumstances which were relevant to the issue of
         relocation.

     62. I agree with Ms Brakaj that the decision letter is not clearly
         drafted but in its important aspects it is clear that the FtTJ was
         required to consider whether the appellant had demonstrated his
         factual account as to whether he would be at risk in his home area
         but even addressing that question positively, it was incumbent upon
         the judge then to consider whether internal relocation would be
         unduly harsh.

     63. There is no clear assessment of the issue of internal relocation
         made by the FtTJ. The relevant part of the decision is at
         paragraphs 18-22.

     64. At paragraph [18] the FtTJ recited guidance from the decision in
         SMO (although when citing the material under the heading E. Iraqi
         Kurdish Region did not set out the material relating to returns to
         the IKR.

     65. At paragraphs [19-22] the FtTJ considered the issue of return. The
         FtTJ made the following findings:

           . the appellant is a young man of fighting age from Erbil in the
             IKR.

           . He does not speak Arabic.

           . He is not in possession of a CSID card and has handed his
             Iraqi passport to the agent responsible for bringing him to
             the UK which is unlikely to be seen again.

           . The appellant may well be viewed with suspicion given his
             period in detention for over four months and the fact that he
             was implicated in an incident at the checkpoint where two
             guards were injured.

     66. At [20] the FtTJ stated:-

             "I conclude that he is likely to encounter considerable
             difficulties when attempting to secure a biometric Iraqi
             National Identity Card (the INID). The appellant needs one of
             these two documents to travel from Baghdad to Erbil in the IKR
             governorate or an area he chooses to relocate to. Whilst CSA
             offices have now reopened the extent to which records have
             been destroyed by the conflict with ISIL is unclear. The
             appellant is unlikely to be able to obtain a CSID document in
             Baghdad because neither the central archive nor the assistance
             facilities for IDP's are likely to render documentation
             assistance to an undocumented returnee. Also, the likelihood
             of him securing a CSI is further complicated by the
             introduction of the INID system. In order to obtain such a
             document, the appellant would need to attend his local CSID
             office in person to enrolled as biometrics, including
             fingerprints and iris scans."

     67. At [21] the FtTJ stated:-

             "the appellant has not lost contact with his relatives, but it
             is uncertain whether or not they will be willing to try and
             either locate the ID documents in their possession or help the
             appellant to secure alternative ID documentation. On balance I
             consider that it is neither feasible nor reasonable for this
             appellant to return to the IKR given his lack of documentation
             and his involvement (albeit limited) in the incident at the
             checkpoint where two guards were shot and injured. The
             appellant has no support network in Baghdad and does not speak
             Arabic. It is also clear in light of the recent country
             guidance caselaw that without the necessary travel
             documentation, the appellant would encounter difficulties
             attempting to travel from Baghdad to the IKR by air and land.
             Without the CSID card/INID card or a passport there is a real
             risk you will be detained at a checkpoint until such time as
             his ID had been verified.

     68. At [22] the FtTJ stated:-

             "In conclusion I find that the appellant has not discharged
             the burden of proof to show with a reasonable degree of
             likelihood that he has a well-founded fear of persecution for
             a reason recognised by the Geneva Convention. Accordingly, the
             appellant's removal would not cause the United Kingdom to be
             in breach of its obligations under the Geneva Convention.
             Therefore, it follows that I must refuses asylum appeal.
             However, I am satisfied that it is unreasonable to expect the
             appellant to return to Iraq and attempt to relocate back to
             his home area or to a different location within the IKR or
             Baghdad and other Southern Governorates. Given the guidance
             contained within the recent country guidance case of SMO. I
             reached the conclusion that internal relocation is unduly
             harsh."

     69. As set out above the findings at paragraph 19 are relevant to
         internal relocation. However, there is no assessment of the
         reasonableness of relocation specific to the appellant and any
         particular risk.

     70. In my judgement at [21] the FtTJ's assessment was somewhat
         confused. The FtTJ was seeking to address two distinct issues; lack
         of documentation and internal relocation but did so within in the
         same sentence. The first issue of lack of documentation is, as the
         respondent sets out, considered on the wrong factual basis and the
         FtTJ did not consider the CG decision and issue of return on the
         correct factual evidence that was before the Tribunal. The evidence
         before the FtTJ was that he had left his CSID card at home with his
         mother. The presenting officer's note which is annexed to the
         grounds sets out the cross-examination that he was in regular
         contact with his mother and that she had his CSID card and INC card
         at the family home and that the appellant had not asked her to send
         the documents. As I indicated to the advocates, the ROP in the file
         also reflected that evidence. The ROP set out verbatim that the
         appellant stated in cross-examination that he last had contact with
         his mother four days before the hearing by Facebook messages. The
         ROP also set out the large number of male and female relatives
         living in the IKR. Therefore the finding at [21] that it was
         uncertain whether or not they would be willing to locate the ID
         documents does not reflect the evidence given before the FtTJ nor
         are there any reasons given for any such uncertainty in the light
         of that factual evidence given by the appellant.  The error is
         material because it infects the assessment made by the FtTJ when
         considering the issue of return and the application of the CG
         decision in SMO. The evidence does not support the FtTJ's finding
         that it is not feasible for the appellant to return to the IKR
         given the lack of documentation. At [21] the FtTJ identifies that
         without a CSI D and /or INID that the appellant would encounter
         difficulties attempting to travel from Baghdad to the IKR by air
         and land. Without the CSI D card/ INID card or passport there is a
         real risk you will be detained at a checkpoint until such time as
         his ID had been verified. However, the point made in the grounds is
         that there was cogent evidence before the FtTJ that the relevant
         documents including his CSID were available and could be sent to
         him. The ROP sets out the evidence given by the appellant and his
         answer to the questions relating to the documents and that he had
         left them at home with his mother. He stated that he had contact
         with his mum and when asked why he had not asked to send them he
         said, "I don't know." That being the case, as the documents were
         available to the appellant, this was the factual starting point for
         the assessment of documents available and feasibility for return
         when applying the CG decision. The FtTJ therefore erred in her
         assessment.

     71. As to the issue of relocation, the FtTJ does not provide any
         reasoning. The FtTJ states at [21] "that it was neither feasible
         nor reasonable for this appellant to return to the IKR given his
         lack of documentation and his involvement (albeit limited) in the
         incident at the checkpoint where the two guards were shot and
         injured".  As set out above the assessment of lack of documentation
         failed to take account of the evidence and therefore a flawed
         assessment was undertaken. There was no reasoning either why it was
         not reasonable to return to the IKR due to the involvement in the
         incident at the checkpoint. Whilst I am satisfied that findings of
         fact made at paragraphs 13 - 17 were open to the judge to make,
         there was no assessment as to whether the appellant could relocate
         to another area either in the IKR or another part of Iraq. Neither
         paragraph 21 nor 22 gives any reasoning.

     72. Whilst Ms Brakaj submits that there was evidence of continuing
         threats, no findings are made by the judge concerning the
         appellant's claim of events following the shooting. Even if it was
         accepted on the basis that the judge had a positive view of his
         credibility and that he would be at risk in his home area, there
         was no assessment made of whether that risk would make any return
         to another area of the IKR or any other part of Iraq unduly harsh
         by reference to the appellant's evidence or in the light of any
         objective evidence. Nor was there any assessment made of whether
         the men had the means or intention to locate him wherever he lived
         in Iraq. Ms Brakaj made reference to the evidence in the
         appellant's witness statement about his aunt and messages on social
         media. However, as Mr Diwnycz submits, there is a tenuous link with
         that evidence and there are no factual findings or assessment made
         of that issue all of which were relevant to the issue of relocation
         and the issue of documentation.

     73. In my judgement there are errors of law which are material to the
         outcome. It is not possible for me to remake the decision on the
         basis of the factual findings of the FtTJ as the assessment made by
         the judge did not assess the full factual account and there are
         gaps in the evidence which are relevant to risk on return which
         also need to be seen in the light of the CG decision and the
         objective material.

     74. For those reasons I am satisfied that the decision of the FtTJ
         demonstrates the making of a material error of law and I set aside
         the decision. As set out above the findings of the FtTJ at
         paragraphs 13 - 17 are not in error. The FTT J's assessment of the
         ability to obtain documents is in error and the finding made at
         [21] cannot stand. There was clear evidence before the Tribunal
         that the appellant's family had his CSID card and that they were in
         contact with him. The FtTJ did not properly assess the issue of
         documentation in accordance with that evidence and thus did not
         properly consider the CG decision. This led to the FtTJ confusing
         the issue of documentation risk on return and whether he could
         relocate to a different area of the IKR or in Iraq. No factual
         findings were made as to any risk outside of his home area. It will
         be necessary for the appellant to give evidence on those remaining
         issues and for further findings of fact to be made.

     75. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade in the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In
         reaching that decision I have given careful consideration to the
         Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-

                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     76. I have considered this question in the light of the practice
         statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for the appellant
         to give evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues, further
         fact-finding will be necessary alongside the analysis of risk in
         the light of the relevant law and in my judgement the best course
         and consistent with the overriding objective is for it to be
         remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. The Tribunal will be
         seized of the task of undertaking an assessment of the evidence and
         any updated evidence (whether subjective or objective evidence).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error
on a point of law and therefore the decision shall be set aside save that
the findings at paragraphs 14 - 17 shall be preserved findings and also the
appellant's evidence of the location of his CSID and ID documentation. The
appeal shall be remitted to the FtT.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated    3 October 2020








                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

