
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05044/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2017                   |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Abone (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Rutherford (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as AS.

      1. I have made an anonymity order because this decision refers to  the
         circumstances of AS's minor child.

      2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         ('SSHD') against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')
         dated 27 September 2016, in which it allowed the appeal  of  AS,  a
         citizen of Iraq, on Article 8  grounds  only,  against  the  SSHD's
         decision dated 5 May 2016 to refuse a protection and  human  rights
         claim.

Background facts

      3. The FTT correctly  noted  that  the  background  to  this  case  is
         complicated [7].  It is summarised by the FTT at [8-15] and by  the
         SSHD in some detail in the  chronology  set  out  in  the  detailed
         decision letter at [2-24].  In summary,  AS  has  been  in  the  UK
         continuously since 16 April 2002 (although he also entered  the  UK
         and  claimed  asylum  in  2000,  having  claimed  asylum   in   the
         Netherlands in 1998) when he made an application  for  asylum.   In
         2004 he was sentenced to 15 months  imprisonment  for  assault  and
         recommended for deportation.  He has  not  re-offended  since  that
         time.

      4. The asylum  appeal  was  dismissed  and  AS  became  appeal  rights
         exhausted on 19 January 2006.  No steps were taken to deport him at
         this stage.  He has been in a relationship with a Polish woman, MU,
         since 2007 and they had a child together in 2012.   In  a  decision
         dated 30 October 2013 the SSHD refused AS a residence card  on  the
         basis that he had not provided sufficient evidence that he was in a
         durable relationship with an EEA citizen exercising  Treaty  rights
         and in any event it would not be appropriate to  do  so  given  his
         2004 conviction.  No steps were taken to deport him at this stage.

      5. On 20 May 2012 AS  was  issued  with  a  notice  of  liability  for
         deportation based upon his 2004 conviction and on 13 November  2014
         he was issued with a decision to deport him from the UK.  Ms  Abone
         did not dispute that this was the first time  that  a  decision  to
         deport AS was made.  There has been no explanation for the  failure
         to pursue deportation proceedings before this, particularly in 2006
         when the asylum  claim  was  refused  and  in  2013  when  the  EEA
         application was refused.

      6.  In  response  to  further  submissions  relying  upon  a  fear  of
         persecution  and  serious  harm  in   Iraq   together   with   AS's
         relationship with an EEA citizen, UM, and  their  child,  the  SSHD
         refused all his claims in the decision dated 5  May  2016.   In  so
         doing the SSHD did not accept that AS was in a genuine relationship
         with his partner and child.

FTT decision

      7. The FTT heard oral evidence from AS and MU, as well as AS's mother-
         in-law.  AS's father-in-law also attended the hearing but  was  not
         cross-examined by the SSHD.  Having considered all the evidence the
         FTT found that:

          i) the asylum claim had no evidential foundation at all;

         ii) although AS was convicted of assault in 2004 and sentenced  to
             15 months imprisonment, he no longer posed a danger to society
             and is therefore not  excluded  from  humanitarian  protection
             albeit he does not qualify for it;

        iii) AS has been in a genuine durable relationship with his partner
             since 2007 and they live together with their child as a  close
             family;

         iv) AS should not be removed from the UK under the EEA Regulations
             because he is a family member  of  an  EEA  national  and  his
             removal would not be justified on public policy grounds in all
             the circumstances of the case;

          v) to separate AS from his partner and child by deporting him  to
             Iraq would be unduly harsh and disproportionate.

      8. Having made  those  findings,  the  FTT  dismissed  the  appeal  on
         protection grounds but allowed it on human rights grounds.

Issues arising

      9. FTT Judge Easterman granted the SSHD permission on all the  grounds
         raised in a decision dated 27 October 2016.

     10. At the beginning of the hearing before me both representatives were
         able to narrow the issues in dispute substantially.  The  following
         matters were agreed:

          i) The FTT was entitled to  make  the  findings  it  did  [23-44]
             regarding the claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.

         ii) The FTT was entitled to make  the  findings  of  fact  it  did
             regarding the appellant's family relationships [50, 60-61] and
             criminal offending [38, 68].  These findings contain no  error
             of  law  and  are  preserved,  should  an  error  of  law   be
             identified.

        iii) The  findings  of  fact  that  were  made  regarding  the  EEA
             Regulations are only relevant in so far  as  they  inform  the
             Article 8 balancing exercise. The FTT did  not  have  any  EEA
             grounds of appeal before it. Ms Rutherford accepted  that  the
             FTT was wrong  to  find  the  2013  EEA  decision  not  to  be
             sustainable when the decision was open  to  the  SSHD  on  the
             evidence available to her at the  time.   Ms  Rutherford  also
             candidly pointed out that AS is not a family  member  for  the
             purpose of the EEA Regulations.  Although he  is  an  extended
             family member he has not been issued with  a  residence  card.
             In any event, both representatives agreed  that  these  errors
             are not material because the FTT did not allow the  appeal  on
             EEA grounds but only human rights.

         iv) The only outstanding issue in dispute relates to the Article 8
             assessment and the only ground of appeal available  to  AS  is
             human rights (as the decision post-dates 5 April 2015)

Error of law

     11. Ms Abone relied upon the grounds of appeal in relation to Article 8
         but focused upon the FTT's failure to address  section  117B(4)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002  Act').
         Ms Rutherford relied upon a rule 24 notice and submitted that  this
         was not a material error because the FTT was well aware of the fact
         that  AS  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  when  he  established   his
         relationship in  2007.   Neither  representative  took  me  to  any
         authority to resolve the apparent inconsistencies that might  arise
         in applying both sections 117B(4) and 117C(5).

     12. After hearing from both representatives I gave my decision that  in
         failing to address section 117B(4) the FTT had erred in  law.   The
         reasons for this can be succinctly stated.  Before doing so  it  is
         necessary to set out the relevant legal framework found in part  5A
         of the 2002 Act, in so far as it is relevant to this case.

             "PART 5A??ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST
             CONSIDERATIONS??

             117A Application of this Part??

             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required
             to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
             Acts-??(a) breaches a person's right to respect for private
             and family life under Article 8, and??(b) as a result would be
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.???

             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-??(a) in all cases,
             to the considerations listed in section 117B, and??(b) in
             cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
             considerations listed in section 117C.???

             (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's right
             to respect for private and family life is justified under
             Article 8(2).??




             117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases??

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.??

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-??(a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and??(b) are
             better able to integrate into society.???

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-??(a) are
             not a burden on taxpayers, and??(b) are better able to
             integrate into society.???

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-??(a) a private life,
             or??(b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,??that
             is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.??

             (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.??

             (6)  ...




             117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
             foreign criminals??

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.??

             (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.??

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.??

             (4)  Exception 1...

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

     13. The FTT correctly rehearsed the above provisions  [58]  but  at  no
         point did it address section 117B(4)(b). Ms Rutherford acknowledged
         that AS's relationship was established with MU at a  time  when  AS
         was in the UK unlawfully.  Indeed the FTT appears to accept this as
         a matter of fact [57].  Ms Rutherford also accepted  that  although
         this is a deportation case section 117B applies to all cases.  This
         approach is supported by the wording of section 117A(2)(a) and  the
         guidance in Treebhawon and others  (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT
         00674 (IAC) at [13 and 16].  I acknowledge that in  Treebhawon  the
         Upper Tribunal considered that the  "little  weight"  provision  in
         section 117B(4)(b) may be of no application to  a  section  117B(6)
         case i.e. a non-deportation case involving a  qualifying  child  or
         partner, but declined to give a definitive answer.  In the  instant
         deportation case, Ms Rutherford did not seek to argue that  section
         117B(4) did not apply.  In my judgment it applies in "all cases" as
         set out within the legislation itself and must be addressed.   That
         does not mean that it  will  be  easy  to  reconcile  with  section
         117C(5) but a full analysis still needs to be undertaken.

     14. Ms Rutherford submitted that the result would have  been  the  same
         had there been a proper self-direction to the relevance of  section
         117B(4)(b) to AS.  In my view that cannot be said with  any  degree
         of confidence.  The FTT was clearly aware that AS  was  in  the  UK
         when he met his partner but has simply failed to  attribute  little
         weight  to  the  relationship  or  even  contemplate  how   section
         117B(4)(b) might be  relevant.   It  follows  that  the  Article  8
         assessment needs to be remade with a proper and full  consideration
         of all relevant matters including section 117B(4)(b).

     15. There is an additional error of law in the FTT's  approach  to  the
         Article 8 assessment.  The FTT appears to have  considered  whether
         the effect of AS's deportation would be unduly harsh upon his child
         [69],  when  she  is  not  a  "qualifying  child".    The   child's
         circumstances   are   not   irrelevant.    They    are    obviously
         interconnected with the effect of AS's deportation  on  MU  because
         they are a close family unit.  What impacts the child will  have  a
         bearing on the impact upon MU and vice versa.  The FTT has  however
         failed to direct itself  in  these  terms.   The  FTT's  structural
         approach to the child and her best interests in the  context  of  a
         consideration of the effect of AS's deportation on MU  is  entirely
         unclear.

     16. At the hearing I announced my decision that  the  FTT's  Article  8
         assessment is vitiated by these legal errors.  Both representatives
         agreed that I could go on to remake  the  decision  myself  on  the
         basis that it is accepted that the FTT's factual findings should be
         preserved.

Re-making the decision

Evidence

     17. As set out above both representatives agreed that I  should  remake
         the decision on the basis of the FTT's findings of fact.   However,
         there  was  little  evidence  regarding  MU's  knowledge  of   AS's
         immigration status when they met in 2007 and began living together.
          MU therefore gave brief evidence about this.  She  explained  that
         she was told about AS's lack of immigration  status  shortly  after
         meeting him but felt  very  touched  by  the  difficulties  he  had
         experienced and wished to give him a 'second chance'.  In  addition
         she could not help but love him from the very beginning,  and  that
         she had been proved right  because  they  have  been  together  for
         nearly 10 years.

Submissions

     18. I then heard very brief submissions from Ms Abone.   She  submitted
         that the effect of deportation on the partner would not  be  unduly
         harsh and the Article 8 appeal should be dismissed.  Ms  Rutherford
         relied upon the inordinate delay on the part of the SSHD in seeking
         to deport AS.  She submitted that although  little  weight  can  be
         given to the relationship they were entitled to get on  with  their
         lives, given the extensive delay and  the  past  failures  to  take
         steps to deport AS when the opportunity was available.

     19. After hearing from both representatives  I  reserved  my  decision,
         which I now give with reasons.

Legal framework

The applicable test

     20. Both representatives agreed  that  this  is  a  case  where  it  is
         necessary to apply the relevant provisions of  sections  117A-C  of
         the 2002 Act.  The appeal has been brought on human rights  grounds
         only and the Immigration Rules are only relevant in so far as  they
         set out the SSHD's policy.  I have taken the Rules into account but
         they are largely replicated within the legislation for the purposes
         of the instant case.  Exception 2 potentially applies because it is
         accepted that AS has "a genuine and subsisting  relationship"  with
         MU, who is a "qualifying partner".  The first question to therefore
         consider  is  whether   "the   effect   of   deportation   on   the
         partner...would be unduly harsh" - see section 117C(5) of the  2002
         Act.  Ms Abone accepted that if the answer to this is yes, then  it
         followed that deportation of AS would be a disproportionate  breach
         of Article 8 of the ECHR and there would  be  no  need  to  go  any
         further.

     21.  I  am  mindful  that  "unduly  harsh"   does   not   equate   with
         uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable  or  merely   difficult.
         Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold. "Harsh" in
         this context,  denotes  something  severe,  or  bleak.  It  is  the
         antithesis of pleasant or comfortable. The addition of  the  adverb
         "unduly" raises an already elevated standard still higher.   In  MM
         (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ. 450 the Court of Appeal held  that
         in considering whether the effect of deportation on a  child  would
         be unduly harsh within section 117C(5) the court was  not  required
         to focus exclusively on the effect on the child but was required to
         carry out a balancing exercise in which the wider  public  interest
         was engaged. Laws LJ (with whom Vos and Hamblen LJJ agreed) held at
         [22]-[24]  that  the  court  should  have   regard   to   all   the
         circumstances including the appellant's  immigration  and  criminal
         histories. That decision is binding upon me and  applies,  mutandis
         mutadis, to a case such as this  involving  a  qualifying  partner,
         notwithstanding the contrary view expressed by Elias LJ at [36]  in
         MA (Pakistan)) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 705, with whom King LJ  and  Sir  Stephen  Richards
         agreed.

     22. I acknowledge that in assessing the effect of AS's  deportation  on
         MU I must attach little weight to the relationship formed  with  MU
         because it was  established  when  AS  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully
         (section 117(4)(b)).   I am nonetheless still required to  consider
         the effect of AS's deportation on MU.

Effect of deporting AS on MU

     23. In assessing the effect of deporting AS upon MU it is  relevant  to
         bear in mind, as the FTT accepted, that AS and MU form  part  of  a
         very  close  family  unit  with  their  soon  to  be  five-year-old
         daughter.  That family unit has been considered by  an  independent
         social worker (ISW), Mr Musendo, in a detailed and  helpful  report
         dated 15 September 2015.  I accept that the report is now  of  some
         vintage.  However its contents have not been disputed and I  accept
         the ISW's assessment  in  its  entirety.  The  author  is  a  well-
         qualified and experienced social worker.  He conducted  a  detailed
         and thorough assessment.  I bear in mind the passage of time  since
         the report.  I accept that the family unit remains a very close one
         and AS is inextricably involved in the day-to-day upbringing of his
         child, together with MU.

     24. I accept that MU would be "devastated" by AS's deportation not just
         because he would no longer  be  her  committed  partner,  but  also
         because his absence will render her a single parent.  She is likely
         to find this particularly difficult because, as noted by  the  ISW,
         AS and MU are "co-primary carers".  AS is clearly a very "hands-on"
         father and MU is completely reliant upon him to  cope  with  child-
         care and other related responsibilities.  The ISW  has  provided  a
         number of cogent examples of this.  I  entirely  accept  the  ISW's
         assessment that MU "relies heavily" on AS and is  "overwhelmed"  by
         his potential loss and the potential additional responsibilities of
         becoming a single parent.

     25. I conclude that the best interests of the child, viewed through the
         lens  of  her  mother  and  supported  by   the   ISW,   would   be
         overwhelmingly served by AS remaining in the  UK.  There  are  four
         dominant factors: (i) very strong relationship between AS and child
         (ii) MU's dependence upon AS to facilitate and assist  her  in  her
         own relationship with the child, (iii) child's age (iv) the loss of
         her  father  will  adversely  impact  upon  her  own  cultural  and
         religious identity needs.  For the avoidance of doubt, I have taken
         into account the child's best interests  because  this  informs  my
         assessment of the impact of deportation upon  the  child's  mother,
         MU.  I fully appreciate that the child is not a "qualifying  child"
         and as such the application of exception 2 is limited to the effect
         on the partner, not the child.  However in assessing the effect  on
         the partner it is relevant to take into account her likely distress
         and emotional difficulties when dealing with the inevitable  impact
         upon the child.

     26. I accept the ISW's concern that MU became so  emotional  about  the
         matter that he recommended a psychiatric assessment.  Although  one
         has not been undertaken I nonetheless accept  that  the  effect  of
         AS's deportation upon MU would be seen by her as  catastrophic  and
         that she is likely to  suffer  significant  emotional  harm  for  a
         number of reasons: the loss of her own relationship  with  AS;  she
         will become in practical terms a single mother; she  will  have  to
         bear witness to the impact of her own child losing a  father.   The
         adverse impact upon the child is likely to be significant  for  the
         detailed reasons outlined by the ISW.  It  is  also  likely  to  be
         permanent given the inherent  difficulties  in  Iraq.  It  will  be
         unduly harsh for MU to live in Iraq.  MU and her child  are  likely
         to face very significant difficulties there  given  the  prevailing
         country situation, and the particular difficulties they  will  have
         as westerners  and  Christians  (MU  is  a  devout  Catholic).   As
         explained by the ISW the use of modern means  of  communication  is
         unlikely to obviate the significant adverse impact of separation.

     27.  I  acknowledge  that  little  weight  must  be  attached  to   the
         relationship between AS and MU, but I am still entitled  to  attach
         some weight to it.  It is a very strong relationship of  nearly  10
         years duration.  It has withstood the test of time as well as  many
         other challenges: different  religious  and  cultural  backgrounds,
         AS's uncertain immigration status and  applications  to  the  SSHD,
         financial concerns, difficulties in conceiving a  child.   Although
         the relationship was formed in 2007, after AS became appeals rights
         exhausted in 2006, it is noteworthy that at  this  point  the  SSHD
         made no effort to initiate  deportation  proceedings  against  him.
         Removal to Iraq at this point in time may have  been  difficult  in
         any event.  I acknowledge that MU was aware of AS's unlawful status
         shortly after they met but that the relationship became a committed
         one in a short space of time because  of  the  mutual  strength  of
         feelings they had for one another.  They were granted a certificate
         of approval for marriage in 2009.  I accepted the detailed evidence
         in their witness statements as to why they never married, and  this
         in no way  reduces  the  strength  of  the  relationship  or  their
         commitment to one another.  Although the ISW mistakenly referred to
         the couple as husband and wife this does not diminish  the  cogency
         of the report.  The couple regard each other as  husband  and  wife
         and act accordingly.

Wider public interest - "unduly harsh"

     28. I must have regard to  all  the  relevant  factors  including  AS's
         criminal offending and immigration history, when assessing  whether
         or not the high threshold of the effect of deportation on MU  being
         "unduly harsh" is met - see MM (Uganda) supra.

     29. It is vitally important not to lose sight in these deliberations of
         the public interest concerned with the deportation of AS.   As  set
         out in Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, the Immigration Rules  set
         out the SSHD's assessment of the weight generally to be afforded to
         some of  these  factors.  In  particular,  the  Rules  prescribe  a
         presumption that the deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the
         public interest, except where specified factors are  present  which
         the Rules accept  outweigh  that  interest.  I  must  make  my  own
         assessment of the proportionality / undue harshness of deportation,
         on the basis of my own consideration of the factors relevant to the
         particular case, and application of the relevant law. But in  doing
         so, I give considerable weight to the SSHD's policy.

     30. I acknowledge the significant public interest in the deportation of
         foreign criminals.  The more serious the appellant's offending, the
         greater the public interest concerned with his  removal.  The  AS's
         offence was serious and resulted  in  a  term  of  imprisonment  of
         fifteen months.  It involved assault but there is no indication  of
         a single episode of any repetition of  violence.  Furthermore,  the
         crime took place some 13 years ago following which AS is remorseful
         and appears to have achieved complete rehabilitation (see  the  ISW
         report).  I agree with the FTT [38]  that  he  no  longer  poses  a
         danger to society.  I however acknowledge that the public  interest
         is wider than this - see [70]  of  Hesham  Ali  (supra),  per  Lord
         Wilson and para 126 of the decision letter.

     31. AS's early immigration history  and  use  of  false  names  reflect
         adversely upon him as noted by the SSHD in the decision  letter  at
         para 125.  However he applied for asylum in  2002.   There  was  no
         decision from the SSHD until 2005.  After  this,  there  have  been
         substantial delays in proceeding with AS's deportation, as outlined
         above.  The SSHD has provided no  explanation  for  the  inordinate
         period of time it took to issue the decision to deport in  November
         2014, arising out of a 2004 conviction.  This  is  a  factor  I  am
         entitled  to  take  into  account  when   considering   the   wider
         considerations involved.  In Hashem Ali  (supra)  at  [28]  it  was
         noted  that  in  the  Grand  Chamber's  decision  of   Jeunesse   v
         Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798 a  prolonged  delay  in  removing  the
         applicant  from  the  host  country,  during  which  time  she  had
         developed  strong  family  and  social  ties   there,   constituted
         exceptional circumstances leading to the  conclusion  that  a  fair
         balance had not been struck. Jeunesse was not a  deportation  case.
         The issue of delay has recently been considered  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in a deportation case, RJG v SSHD (2016)  EWCA  Civ  102  at
         [54], per Lloyd Jones LJ:

             "I would accept that, in principle, a substantial delay on the
             part of the Secretary of State in pursuing the deportation  of
             a person convicted of serious  crime  could  be  an  important
             factor in determining the proportionality of the  deportation,
             both because it might reflect on the weight to be given to the
             public interest in deportation and because of  its  effect  on
             the individuals concerned. In the latter regard, I have firmly
             in mind the observations of Lord Bingham of Cornhill, made  in
             another context, in EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2009] 1AC 1159 at [14]-[16]."

     32. There has been substantial  delay  on  the  part  of  the  SSHD  in
         pursuing the deportation of AS and this is a relevant factor to  be
         considered alongside all the other circumstances.

Concluding assessment

     33. In my judgment the effect of AS's deportation upon MU can  properly
         be described as "unduly harsh", when all the relevant  factors  are
         considered. For that reason  I  find  the  case  falls  within  the
         exception identified in section 117C(5).

     34. In performing this exercise I have viewed everything in the  round.
         AS plays a vitally important role in the life of his child and  the
         interference with this relationship via his deportation  is  likely
         to have a significant adverse effect on MU.   MU  is  justified  in
         viewing her future and that of their child as  very  bleak  without
         AS.  She faces much more than a merely  difficult  and  challenging
         time but the decimation of the long-standing and  deeply  committed
         family unit that both she and her  child  are  dependent  upon  and
         thriving within.   AS  is  the  provider  of  stability,  security,
         emotional support and financial support to  the  family  unit.   He
         brings various important benefits and irreplaceable  advantages  to
         the lives of MU and their child, as set out in the ISW report.  The
         removal of these will impact upon MU severely, as set  out  by  the
         ISW and  MU.   Both  MU  and  her  child  are  likely  to  be  face
         significant emotional harm if AS is deported.  This goes beyond the
         relationship between AS and MU,  to  which  I  must  attach  little
         weight.   The consequences of AS's deportation will in my  judgment
         be undoubtedly harsh.

     35. Such consequences will be unduly  or  excessively  harsh  when  the
         wider considerations are factored in.  In so doing I have borne  in
         mind the potency of the main public interest in play  as  AS  is  a
         foreign criminal subject to deportation.  However that offence took
         place in 2004 and he has  completely  rehabilitated  himself.   The
         SSHD's delay in pursuing  deportation  proceedings  remains  wholly
         unexplained.

     36.  By  section  117A(2)  I  am  obliged  to  have   regard   to   the
         considerations listed in section 117B.   I  consider  that  section
         117B applies to this appeal in the following way:

         (a)   The  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
         immigration controls is engaged.  It  is  particularly  significant
         because AS is a foreign criminal - see sections 117C(1) and (2).

         (b)  There is no infringement  of  the  "English  speaking"  public
         interest as AS speaks English.

         (c)  AS was given permission to work in July 2015.  There is little
         evidence that he has worked but the SSHD accepts (para  99  of  the
         decision letter) that MU has permanent residence  having  exercised
         Treaty rights for five years.  In  the  premises  the  family  have
         demonstrated a certain degree of self-sufficiency.

         (d)  The private life established by AS is lengthy (in the UK since
         2002) but qualifies for the attribution of little weight only.

     37. Balancing all of the facts and factors, my conclusion is  that  the
         severity of the impact on MU of  AS's  deportation  with  all  that
         would flow therefrom, would be of such proportion as to  be  unduly
         harsh.   It  follows  that  AS's  deportation  would  constitute  a
         disproportionate breach of Article 8.



Decision

     38. The FTT decision contains an error of law and is set aside.

     39. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal under Article 8 of the
         ECHR


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 January 2017
