
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05882/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st June 2017                       |On 12th June 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     AMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk of Counsel instructed by IAS
(Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is  a  male  Iranian  citizen  who  appeals  against  the
    decision of Judge P J Holmes  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  FtT)
    promulgated on 26th October 2016.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom illegally in November 2015.
     He claimed to be under 18 years of age and made an asylum  claim.   He
    is of Kurdish ethnicity, and feared the Iranian authorities because  he
    had been working for a Kurdish  political  group  against  the  Iranian
    authorities.  He contended that he had been detained in Iran, and  that
    his father had been killed because of his involvement in politics.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's asylum and human rights claim on
    22nd May 2016 and the Appellant appealed to the FtT.

 4. The appeal was heard  on  20th  September  2016.   The  FtT  found  the
    Appellant to be an incredible witness.  It was not accepted that he had
    proved his Iranian nationality.  It was not accepted that he was  under
    18 years of age when he claimed asylum, and  the  FtT  found  that  his
    evidence could not be relied upon.  The appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hodgkinson.   I  set  out
    below, in part, the grant of permission;

         2.   The grounds argue  that  the  judge  erred,  in  [15]  of  his
             decision, in his assessment of  the  Appellant's  nationality,
             essentially by not satisfactorily  considering  the  available
             evidence and by also engaging in speculation on matters not in
             evidence before him.

         3.   All of the grounds have arguable merit, and it cannot be  said
             that the judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
             nationality did not, in turn, impact upon  his  other  adverse
             credibility  findings.   Consequently,  the  judge's  decision
             reveals arguable errors of low.

 6. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  It was contended, in  summary,  that  the  FtT  directed  itself
    appropriately, and the FtT provided adequate reasons for findings,  and
    the grounds seeking permission to appeal amount to a mere disagreement.
     It was noted the grounds focused upon the findings in relation to  the
    Appellant's nationality, and not on the adverse findings concerning the
    core of  the  Appellant's  claim,  which  the  FtT  considered  in  the
    alternative from paragraph 16 onwards.

 7. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. Mr Schwenk relied and expanded upon the grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal and the submissions are summarised
    below.

 9. It was contended that the FtT failed to consider  and  give  weight  to
    evidence which weighed in favour of the Appellant's case,  and  engaged
    in speculation.

10. At paragraph 15 the FtT found  that  there  was  no  evidence,  in  the
    materials before the Tribunal, of the exclusion of Kurds from access to
    primary education.   It  was  submitted  that  this  was  an  incorrect
    approach which called for corroboration of the Appellant's account  and
    the FtT had failed to take into account the Appellant's rural  heritage
    when considering the likelihood of him attending school.

11. The FtT was inconsistent in making a finding that the Appellant may be,
    as he claimed, illiterate, and on the other hand making a finding  that
    he would have attended school.  The  FtT  ignored  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant not speaking Farsi, was consistent with his  account  of  not
    having been to school.

12. The FtT overlooked the Home Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance
    Report at page 97 of the Appellant's bundle which provides at paragraph
    2.3.1 that;

         "Kurds in Iran  face  institutional  discrimination  which  affects
         their access to basic services  such  as  housing,  employment  and
         education".

13.  It  was  contended  that  the  FtT  had  erred  when  considering  the
    description of Iranian currency.  The FtT found at  paragraph  15  that
    people in Iran may well refer to the  currency  as  toman  rather  than
    rials and did not attach  weight  to  the  Respondent's  point  that  a
    description  of  the  Iranian  currency  as  toman  rather  than  rials
    adversely the Appellant's credibility.  It was submitted that  the  FtT
    had erred in law by not attaching  weight,  and  should  in  fact  have
    attached weight to the fact that referring to  the  currency  as  toman
    demonstrated colloquial local knowledge of Iran.

14. It was further submitted  the  FtT  at  paragraph  15  had  engaged  in
    speculation when considering the issue of schooling for Kurds in  Iran,
    by concluding that it might  be  counter  productive  for  the  Iranian
    government to exclude Kurds from education.

15. It was argued that but for the errors summarised above, the  FtT  might
    have reached a different conclusion on the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    nationality, and a positive finding  in  relation  to  his  nationality
    would impact upon his credibility generally.

16. Mr Schwenk argued that the decision of the FtT should be set aside, and
    remitted to the FtT to be considered afresh with no findings preserved.



17. Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 response but accepted that the  FtT
    had placed considerable weight  upon  the  issue  of  nationality.   Mr
    Harrison commented that there was an element of  speculation  contained
    within paragraph 15 and on that point it would be possible to  find  in
    favour of the Appellant.  However, no concession was made  as  reliance
    was placed upon the rule 24 response.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.



My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I do not find that the FtT materially erred in law  for  the  following
    reasons.

20. In my view the FtT considered the  evidence  in  the  round,  and  made
    findings open to it on the evidence, and provided adequate reasons.

21. With reference to paragraph 15 I do not find that the FtT was requiring
    corroboration of the Appellant's evidence.  The FtT does note  that  no
    documentary evidence had been  submitted  to  support  the  Appellant's
    claim to be Iranian, but I do not find, without more, that this amounts
    to a legal requirement of corroboration.  The FtT is entitled  to  note
    and record the absence of documentary evidence.  I do not find that the
    FtT made a negative credibility finding simply  because  there  was  no
    documentary evidence to prove nationality.

22. There is an element of speculation within paragraph 15 in that the  FtT
    notes that it may be  "natural  for  the  authorities  to  see  primary
    schooling as a means of exercising cultural imperialism over  the  next
    generation of ethnic Kurdish citizens, so that  to  exclude  them  from
    access might be counter  productive  from  the  government's  point  of
    view".

23. The FtT appears to have overlooked  paragraph  97  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle, when making the comment that  "I  am  unable  to  find  in  the
    materials before me any evidence of the exclusion of Kurds from  access
    to primary education".  I have already set  out  the  relevant  extract
    from page 97.

24. I do not however regard the above as material errors for the  following
    reasons.

25. I reject the submission that the FtT did not consider  the  Appellant's
    rural heritage when considering the likelihood of him attending school.
     This is specifically considered at paragraph 19 of the FtT decision.

26. So far as the description of the currency is concerned, I find that the
    weight to be attached to the  description  of  the  currency  as  toman
    rather than rials, is a matter for the FtT, and the FtT did not err  on
    this issue.

27. The FtT was entitled to place weight upon  the  answers  given  by  the
    Appellant to questions 27 and 28 of his interview noting that  although
    the Appellant had been able to state his claimed  date  of  birth  with
    precision, he was unable to even state the year when he left Iran.

28. I note the  absence  of  any  specific  challenge  to  the  credibility
    findings made by the FtT at paragraphs 16-21, the case  being  made  on
    behalf of the Appellant, is that  the  finding  by  the  FtT  that  the
    Appellant had not proved his Iranian  nationality,  adversely  affected
    those findings.  I do not  find  that  those  findings  were  adversely
    affected by the conclusion that the Appellant is not Iranian.

29. My reading of the FtT decision is that each element of the  Appellant's
    claim was considered carefully, and considered in the round.   The  FtT
    noted at paragraph 16 the inconsistency as to the identity of the group
    for whom the Appellant claimed to have been delivering  leaflets.   The
    FtT quite correctly pointed out the inconsistency that in interview the
    Appellant claimed he had  only  helped  the  Komala  Group,  whereas  a
    different group was identified in his screening interview  record,  the
    age assessment report, and the health assessment medical  report.   The
    FtT was entitled to find that this significant  inconsistency  had  not
    been satisfactorily explained.

30. At paragraph  17  the  FtT  records  further  inconsistencies,  in  the
    Appellant's own accounts.  These relate to the number of times that  he
    made deliveries, and the number of friends he was with.

31. At paragraph 18 the FtT records a relevant inconsistency in relation to
    the Appellant's father and his alleged involvement in politics.

32. At paragraph 19 the FtT takes into account  the  Appellant's  age,  his
    education, the fact that he came from a rural village, and did not find
    that there was any credible explanation for the internal  inconsistency
    of the Appellant's account.

33. The FtT also considered the Appellant's claim to be under the age of 18
    when he made his asylum claim.  This claim was  rejected  and  adequate
    reasons given at paragraphs 13 and 24.   The  FtT  considered  the  age
    assessment report to be reliable, and did not find that any substantial
    evidence had been produced on behalf of the Appellant to challenge  the
    conclusions in that report.   Therefore  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    truthful when claiming to be under the age of 18.

34. In summary, the FtT erred in engaging in speculation in  paragraph  15,
    and in overlooking part of the objective  evidence,  which  related  to
    discrimination affecting the access of Kurds to education.

35. However, when the decision is read as a whole,  these  errors  are  not
    material, and the FtT was entitled to  reach  the  adverse  credibility
    findings that are set out in the decision,  and  adequate  reasons  for
    those findings have been given.  The FtT did not materially err in  law
    and therefore the FtT decision stands.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law such that the decision must be set aside.   I  do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

I have decided to make an anonymity direction because the appeal involves  a
claim for international protection.  Unless  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14  of  The
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date         5th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date         5th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

