
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05398/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2019                  |On 5 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 ASOO HANIFE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Middleton, Kirklees Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born and 2 October 1994 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iran. He arrived in the United Kingdom in February  2019.  By  decision
    dated 24 May 2019, the respondent refused the  appellant  international
    protection. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in
    a decision promulgated on 5 August  2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing before the Upper Tribunal  in  Bradford  and  29
    November 2019, Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,
    acknowledged that the judge had erred in law for the reasons set out in
    the grounds of appeal. The main argument advanced  in  the  grounds  is
    succinctly summarised  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  in  the  grant
    permission:

         "It is arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  an  incorrect
         approach the appellant's evidence, for example the appellant  being
         clear in his interview that he had worked as  a  smuggler  for  two
         years not 'shortly before' the convoy he was in  was  attacked,  as
         stated by the First-tier Tribunal  judge  at  [32],  the  appellant
         explaining his appeal  statement  having  came  to  find  out  more
         information about the attack on the convoy after he had escaped and
         the short arrests of the appellant's father being  consistent  with
         the country evidence."

 3. I am satisfied that  the  judge  misunderstood  the  evidence  for  the
    reasons advanced in the grounds of appeal and,  in  addition,  at  [33]
    made a finding regarding the information provided to the  appellant  by
    his uncle concerning which the appellant had been given no  opportunity
    to provide an explanation.

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of factual stand. There will need to  be  a  new  fact-finding
    exercise which is better conducted before the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    which Tribunal this appeal  is  now  returned  for  it  to  remake  the
    decision.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of factual stand. The appeal is  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge  Hillis)  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  decision
    following a hearing de novo.


Signed                              Date 2 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

