
 [pic]



The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05967/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18th April 2017                  |On 10th May 2017                      |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                    B.B.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Pratt of WTB Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr.McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq, born in July 1997. He
      lived in a village near Kirkuk.


   2. He made a claim for protection saying that he is at risk on return. He
      indicated he had limited education and sold gas canisters and did some
      farming. Whilst delivering gas canisters he met a girl from Erbil
      called S.  A sexual relationship quickly developed and she became
      pregnant.

   3. Her family were involved with the KDP. Her family found out they came
      to his place of work, and took him away to their home where they
      tortured him. Five days later S was able to arrange his escape. Two
      days later he phoned S's cousin who advised him that her family had
      killed her.

   4. He returned to his home village where he remained until the middle of
      2015 when Daesh attacked his village killing his mother and his
      extended family. He was 15 minutes away caring for animals. His
      brother approached him and told him what had happened and he stayed in
      a place called Telward for two months. He then left his home country.
      He is afraid of the S's family and of Daesh. He claimed to have no
      documentation or support from home.

   5. The respondent accepted he was a Kurdish Iraqi and had demonstrated
      awareness of Kirkuk. The respondent believed the appellant had
      attempted to mislead regarding his date of birth. He claimed when he
      arrived in United Kingdom he was a minor having been born in 1998.
      However, the respondent concluded he was a year older, which the
      appellant then accepted.

   6. His claimed relationship with S was not accepted and inconsistencies
      in his account was referred to. No information about her family's
      involvement with the KDP could be found although the appellant had
      claimed they had a high profile. The KDP maintain a website of leaders
      of the party and he could not be found. It was not considered credible
      that S could arrange his escape. He had not claimed any further
      difficulties from her family after returning to his home village. The
      respondent took the view that even if the claim had some truth then
      the appellant can avoid difficulties by relocating.

   7. Regarding Daesh, his account was considered to be vague and
      inconsistent. Country information was not consistent with his claim of
      an attack by them in May/ July 2015. Furthermore, the appellant said
      he lived in another village for two months without difficulty. The
      country guidance case of AA (Article 15 (c)) Iraq [2015] UKUT 544
      referred to the contested areas as including cookbook. However the
      degree of armed conflict elsewhere did not reach the article 15 C
      threshold. It was suggested the appellant could live in Baghdad city
      or other parts of the country.

   The First Tier Tribunal

   8. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Herwald and was
      dismissed. The judge also considered the appellant's age which had
      been disputed and concluded he had sought to mislead, suggesting he
      was a year younger. The judge also referred to inconsistencies in his
      account about his sexual liaison or that her family were looking for
      him.

   9. The judge also found his account about Daesh lacked credibility
      particularly as he could not recall the date his mother an extended
      family were killed.

  10. Finally, the appellant's credibility was damaged by his failure to
      claim en route.


  11. The judge referred to background information submitted about Kirkuk
      suggesting there had been a change for the better in the level of
      conflict since the country guidance decision. The judge concluded that
      whilst there were still difficulties the level of violence was not
      such as to engage article 15 (c). Consequently, the judge felt able to
      depart from the country guidance decision and to conclude Kirkuk was
      no longer a contested area.

  12. The judge found at paragraph 20 that Kirkuk was no longer a contested
      area and therefore the appellant could return air via Baghdad. He also
      had the option of going to the IKR where it was believed he should be
      able to find work.

The Upper Tribunal

  13. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of what was said in
      paragraph 20 of the decision. It was arguable the judge was wrong in
      finding appellant could return to Kirkuk via Baghdad. The judge had
      also not explained how he could travel to the IKR. It was arguable
      that the judge had not made a fact sensitive assessment in relation to
      the appellant.

  14. The appeal was opposed in a rule 24 statement. The judge found the
      appellant lacked credibility. Consequently, the appellant had failed
      to establish he could not obtain the relevant documentation for return
      and had failed to show he would not receive family assistance.

  15. At hearing I was given the country guidance decision of BA (Returns to
      Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18. I was also given the respondent's
      August 2016 Country Information and Guidance on Iraq and the contested
      areas. The country guidance found that the current evidence did not
      justify departing from the conclusion of the tribunal in AA (article
      15 (c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 which considered the situation as at
      May 2015 and focused on the narrower issue of humanitarian protection
      under article 15 (c) of the Qualification Directive. That decision
      referred to the contested areas as including Kirkuk whereby any
      civilian, solely on account of being present, faced a real risk of
      being subject to indiscriminate violence within the scope of article
      15 (c). However, the degree of conflict in Baghdad was not such as to
      engage article 15 (c). Having said that, a decision maker should
      assess the individual where the general level violence is not very
      high, if they are able to show specific reasons over and above that of
      ordinary civilians.


  16. The respondent's country information is dated August 2016 and at 2.3
      .14 found that Kirkuk no longer met the special for article 15 (c). It
      referred to Daesh experiencing significant losses where the government
      controlling most of Kirkuk.

  17. At hearing Mr Pratt acknowledge the negative credibility findings made
      and did not seek to challenge these. However the focus was upon the
      realities of removal. He submitted it would be too harsh to expect the
      appellant to go to Baghdad and no explanation was given as to how the
      appellant could travel from Baghdad. He submitted that the judge
      failed to make a fact sensitive assessment.

  18. In response, Mr.McVeety pointed out that the burden of proof was upon
      the appellant. He said that the judge had destroyed the appellant's
      credibility. The judge rejected the claim the appellant would be at
      risk in Kirkuk. He referred me to changes within the country and for
      instance Mosel is no longer under ISIS. At paragraph 19 of the
      judgement the judge did not accept he was unable to contact his family
      as he claimed. The judge was not say necessarily had to stay in
      Baghdad but could use this as an entry point. With regard to how he
      gets from Baghdad to cookbook presenting officer pointed out the
      burden of proof was upon the appellant to show we could not get there.
      Cookbook is no longer a contested area. An alternative was the IKR and
      again, the onus was upon the appellant to show there were no planes or
      other means of travel. The information about the IKR indicated that
      they did not remove Kurds.

   Consideration


  19. It was open to the judge, based upon new information about Iraq, to
      conclude that the level of violence in Kirkuk had reduced.


  20. The appellant's representative has contended it would be difficult for
      him to return to his home area via Baghdad or alternatively to the
      IKR.


  21.  It is for the appellant to establish the facts on which any claim to
      protection depends including difficulty in obtaining documentation or
      travel. In terms of AA and as a matter of principle there is no
      obligation on the respondent to demonstrate the mechanism of returning
      an individual. It was for the appellant to do this. When he claimed he
      could not get documentation the judge rejected this. In any event,
      there would be no requirement for preclearance from the authorities of
      the IKR.

  22. It is worth noting the judge found generally that he was not a
      credible witness. This obviously impacts upon his claim that he has no
      documentation; family support; or that he would face any particular
      risk.


  23. It was for the appellant to make out the case there was something
      about his situation which would he would be particularly at risk. The
      appellant is a Sunni Muslim and Shia's control the government of Iraq
      and are the dominant religious group in Baghdad city. However, there
      is a significant Sunni minority living in Baghdad and there is no
      evidence of persistent or widespread attacks upon them. No other risk
      factors were put forward.


  24. Having considered the decision in the round I find no material error
      of law established.


Decision.

The decision of First-tier Judge Herwald dismissing the appellant's appeal
shall stand. No material error of law has been established.


Deputy Judge Farrelly

6th May 2017

