
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05306/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                       |
|On 5 March 2018                        |On 23 March 2018                  |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     T K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Ethiopia.  She appealed to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's  decision  of  19  May
    2017  refusing  her  application  for  asylum  and   for   humanitarian
    protection.

2.   The appellant claimed to be at risk on return to  Ethiopia  on  account
    of fear of ill-treatment on the basis of her Oromo  ethnicity  and  the
    fact that her father  and  brother  had  been  involved  in  the  Oromo
    Liberation Front.

3.   The judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  is  Ethiopia  and  of  Oromo
    ethnicity and also  that  her  father  and  brother  had  come  to  the
    attention  of  the  authorities  in  Ethiopia  as  a  result  of  their
    activities in relation to the OLF and that it could  properly  be  said
    that the appellant was a sympathiser with the aims  of  the  OLF.   The
    judge went on otherwise to accept that the appellant  had  not  in  the
    past nor would she in the  future  be  likely  to  be  engaged  in  OLF
    activities.  The judge attached weight to the fact that  the  appellant
    had not taken steps to be involved in OLF activities  until  after  her
    asylum interview and was of the view that her credibility  was  damaged
    by the fact that she did not claim asylum in  Italy  or  France  before
    arriving in the United Kingdom.  The appeal  was  dismissed  under  the
    Refugee Convention and under the Human Rights Convention.

4.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the judge  had  failed  to  factor  into  his  findings  that  the
    appellant had been concluded by the competent authority to be a  victim
    of trafficking and this was of relevance to the credibility findings in
    that for a period after she arrived she was and remained  to  a  degree
    under the control  of  the  traffickers  and  that  was  of  particular
    relevance to the eight month period after her arrival.

5.   In a Rule 24 response received on 1  February  2018  the  Secretary  of
    State accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  engage  with
    the findings of the competent authority and to engage with  the  degree
    of control exerted over the appellant by her  traffickers  at  material
    times when assessing credibility.  As  a  consequence,  the  respondent
    requested that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    de novo hearing.

6.   The discussion before me centred around whether any of the findings  of
    the judge were to be preserved.

7.   Mr Karnik argued that the findings at paragraph  18,  where  the  judge
    accepted that the appellant's  father  and  brother  had  come  to  the
    attention  of  the  authorities  in  Ethiopia  as  a  result  of  their
    activities in relation to the OLF and the finding at paragraph 20  that
    the appellant could properly be regarded as a sympathiser with the aims
    of the OLF, were to be preserved.  Mr Karnik argued that  the  decision
    could be divided between the appellant's activities  and  circumstances
    in Ethiopia and her activities and circumstances in the United  Kingdom
    and the latter had a bearing on the former  on  return.   There  was  a
    sensible division between the two and the  separation  was  appropriate
    and it also focused the attention of the judge on moving forward.

8.   Ms Everett argued that the Rule 24 response had conceded the impact  of
    the appellant being a victim of trafficking, not having  properly  been
    factored in by the judge.  If the positive findings had to be  factored
    in, on the grounds suggested that it could  not  be  adverse  that  the
    appellant had failed to claim early as she was being trafficked, and it
    could be she could not do anything independently.  If it was a question
    perhaps of the judge not having grasped the fact of the appellant being
    trafficked then the findings could be preserved as she could  be  found
    to be at risk.  The well-reasoned negative  credibility  findings  were
    nothing to do with the trafficking point.  The court was being asked to
    say that if the decision was flawed with respect  to  credibility  that
    other findings be preserved.

9.   Mr Karnik argued that there was a logical separation and it made  sense
    to preserve the positive findings and the respondent  was  saying  that
    there should be a de novo right to preserve negative  findings  in  the
    circumstances.

10.  I reserved my decision.

11.  It is clear that this appeal is to be remitted  for  rehearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and the only outstanding issue is whether  any  of
    the findings of the judge are to be  preserved.  The  findings  on  the
    appellant's nationality and ethnicity are uncontroversial, and there is
    no reason for them not to be preserved.

12.  It is the case that in the  decision  letter  the  respondent  said  as
    follows at paragraph 43:

         "Taking all of the above in the round, it is considered  that  your
         account of being linked to the OLF is internally  inconsistent  and
         lacking in detail.  You  have  not  shown  any  evidence  of  being
         personally linked to the OLF, nor have  you  substantiated  a  link
         between the OLF  and  your  family  with  firm  details.   This  is
         therefore rejected."

13.  It was common ground that the judge's decision was flawed on the  basis
    that the findings of the competent authority had not been engaged  with
    and the judge had failed to take into account  the  degree  of  control
    exerted over the appellant by her traffickers at  material  times  when
    assessing credibility.  This is clearly a matter of materiality to  the
    credibility findings.

14.  It does not seem to me however that the positive findings  with  regard
    to the appellant's father and brother and her being a sympathiser  with
    the aims of the OLF are similarly affected.   There  was  no  challenge
    made by the Secretary of State to those findings, and it  seems  to  me
    that in principle, where positive findings have been made by a judge in
    a decision which otherwise falls  to  be  reconsidered,  the  appellant
    should retain the benefit  of  those  findings  unless  there  is  good
    evidence for her not to do so.  I do not think it has been  shown  that
    it was not open to the judge to find as he did in relation to those two
    points, nor that those findings are in any sense infected by the flawed
    findings in relation to the matters set out  above.   Accordingly,  the
    findings that I have set out above will be preserved and otherwise  the
    matter will go for a rehearing before a different judge in  Birmingham.
    There will need to be an Oromo  interpreter  and  the  appeal  will  be
    listed for half a day.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

