

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05043/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in Liverpool                    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Tuesday 22 August 2017             |On Friday 25 August 2017             |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    B S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mrs L Barton, Counsel instructed by Jasvir
                 Jutla & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal,  as
a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies  amongst
others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge J Austin promulgated  on  11  October  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 4 May 2016 refusing his protection and  human  rights
       claims.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq.   He claims to have arrived  in
       the UK on 12 December 2015 and claimed asylum on the same  day.   He
       claims to  be  from  Kirkuk.   He  claims  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
       ethnicity. He says he is at risk  on  return  to  Iraq  because  his
       father was a soldier in the Ba'ath party and that he and his  mother
       were suspected of involvement with that party  by  the  authorities.
       This part  of  his  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Respondent.   The
       Respondent accepted that, based on current country guidance,  return
       of the Appellant to his home area would breach Article 15(c) of  the
       Qualification  Directive  but  decided  that  the  Appellant   could
       relocate either to Baghdad or IKR (it being worthy of note that  the
       Appellant left Iraq via Erbil airport and has sisters living in that
       area).


    3. I do not need to deal further at this stage with  the  substance  of
       the Decision because the Appellant's challenge to it is a procedural
       one.  In short, he says that for a combination of  reasons,  he  was
       not aware of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  He had been moved  to
       different accommodation by accommodation agents for the Home  Office
       following an altercation with another asylum seeker.  He  says  that
       he tried to contact his solicitors to inform them of  the  move  but
       they did not answer.  He also says that he managed  to  contact  the
       interpreter who acts for  that  firm  who  told  him  that  he  (the
       interpreter) would let them know.  However, the solicitors came  off
       the record because, unbeknownst to  the  Appellant,  they  had  lost
       their legal aid franchise. They therefore did not attend the hearing
       on his behalf.  The Appellant also admits that he did not notify the
       Tribunal about his move because he was  told  by  the  accommodation
       agents, SERCO, that they would inform the Home Office and he assumed
       that they would notify the Tribunal.


    4. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nightingale  on
       25 April 2017, permission having been sought out  of  time,  in  the
       following terms, so far as relevant:-


            "[2] The grounds  are  accompanied  by  a  statement  from  the
           appellant for late application and  I  consider  it  is  in  the
           interests of justice to admit and consider this application.
            [3]  The statement discloses a catalogue of events which led to
           the appellant not receiving the notice of hearing.  Whilst it is
           unclear why the appellant did not write to his former solicitors
           and the Tribunal to notify the change of NASS  accommodation,  I
           note that the appellant  was  informed  by  NASS  that  his  new
           address would be forwarded to the respondent.  This is an asylum
           appeal, where  only  the  highest  standards  of  fairness  will
           suffice.  Whilst the Judge could not  have  been  aware  of  the
           circumstances, it is arguable that there was a procedural  error
           amounting to an arguable error of law.  Permission is  therefore
           granted."


    5. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision involves a
       material error of law based on the  above  procedural  history.   In
       this particular case, if I find an error of law, the appeal must  be
       remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal in order to afford the Appellant
       the fair hearing of which he has been deprived  (if  I  accept  that
       there has been unfairness which amounts to an error).

      Decision and Reasons


    6. Mrs Barton drew my attention to the  Appellant's  witness  statement
       confirming what he says occurred and  why  he  did  not  attend  the
       hearing.  It is not in issue that the  Appellant  was  indeed  moved
       from his previous accommodation on 9 June 2017 and that he was moved
       to other accommodation arranged by the Home Office.  Mrs Barton also
       drew  my  attention  to  a  letter  from  the  Appellant's  previous
       solicitors which his current solicitors managed to obtain, dated  29
       July 2016 informing him that they could no longer  act  for  him  as
       they had lost their legal aid  franchise.   There  is  also  in  the
       Appellant's bundle the hearing notice for the CMR and  full  hearing
       which is addressed only to those solicitors.  Given that by 29  July
       2016, the Appellant had been moved from  his  previous  address,  it
       stands to reason that he would not  have  received  the  solicitor's
       letter informing him that they could no longer act for him.


    7. Mrs Barton accepted that the Appellant has not explained why he  did
       not initially contact the Tribunal, a  step  which  he  later  took,
       having sought advice from the Asylum Support Housing Service.  It is
       certainly unfortunate that he did not do this earlier  but,  as  Mrs
       Barton indicated, the Appellant has limited English and did not know
       what he should do.


    8.  Mr  Bates  accepted  that  the  Home  Office  was  aware   of   the
       accommodation move.  It was notified on 10 June 2016.  If the  point
       had arisen and enquiries had been made of the  Home  Office  at  the
       hearing therefore, it would have been confirmed to  the  Judge  that
       the Appellant was no longer at the address which the Tribunal had on
       file.  However, the Presenting Officer's minute made no  mention  of
       that enquiry having been made by the Judge.


    9. The Judge  did  address  the  question  of  an  adjournment  in  the
       Decision.  He did so on the basis that none had been sought but that
       in any event he would not have granted it.  As  Mrs  Barton  pointed
       out, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  Judge  could  reach  that
       conclusion without considering the reasons why  an  adjournment  was
       sought.  Be that as it may, the more important  point  is  that,  in
       considering this, the Judge said the following:-
            "[6] In considering whether  to  adjourn  this  matter,  I  had
           regard to the following matters:
              i) The appellant has submitted an appeal against the  decision
                 to refuse asylum  through  his  appointed  solicitors,  AJO
                 Solicitors.
              (ii)     the appellant had been given notice of  the  hearing
              date and location on 26th
                 September 2016 by first class mail to his home  address  of
                 13 Grimshaw Street, Darwen BB3 2QJ.  Further the  appellant
                 had been given notice of the CMR hearing date and  location
                 in a similar manner by letter dated 18th July 2016."


   10. Whilst Judge Nightingale was right to observe that the Judge did not
       apparently know that the Appellant  had  moved,  it  seems  that  no
       enquiries were made to ensure this remained the position as Mr Bates
       confirmed that an enquiry of the Home Office would have revealed the
       true  position.   As  it  is,  therefore,  the  Judge's  assumptions
       underlying his decision that an adjournment was not  necessary  were
       factually inaccurate. It is also worth noting in that  regard  that,
       by then, to the Tribunal's knowledge, the solicitors  had  come  off
       the record (which it is not clear that the  Judge  appreciated)  and
       that, at least in relation to the 18 July letter, that was not  sent
       to the Appellant but to his former solicitors.


   11. As Mrs Barton submitted, and I accept,  in  an  asylum  appeal,  the
       utmost standard of fairness is essential given the importance of the
       substance of the appeal to the Appellant.  As Mr Bates pointed  out,
       the grounds do not  challenge  the  substance  of  the  Decision  or
       suggest that there is any error of law in the content.  However, the
       very fact that the Appellant has been deprived of the opportunity to
       put his case, give oral evidence and submit documentary evidence  is
       of itself sufficient to give rise to an error of  law  for  lack  of
       procedural fairness.  The issue of unfairness is the more  acute  in
       this particular case since the Appellant was moved within  the  NASS
       estate and the fact of his move was known  to  the  Respondent,  the
       other party to the appeal.


   12. Whilst Mrs  Barton  recognised  the  importance  of  the  overriding
       objective, she pointed out  that  this  too  favours  the  Appellant
       since, by reason of the failure of notification of the  hearing,  he
       has been deprived of the opportunity to  participate  fully  in  the
       proceedings.


   13. For those reasons, I am satisfied that there is an error of  law  in
       the making of the  Decision  because  the  hearing  leading  to  the
       Decision  was  procedurally  unfair  since  the  Appellant  was  not
       informed of the date of the hearing and was  therefore  deprived  of
       the opportunity to present his case.  Both parties agreed that if  I
       accepted there were an error of  law  in  this  case,  it  would  be
       appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal;  to  do
       otherwise would simply compound the unfairness.   Having  regard  to
       the Tribunal's guidance, I accept that it  is  appropriate  in  this
       case for the appeal to be remitted.


      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision involves an error of law  because  the
    Appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing as he was  not  aware  of
    the hearing date and was therefore unable to attend or be  represented.
    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge J Austin  promulgated  on  11
    October 2016 is set aside. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 25 August 2017

      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
