
                                    [pic]
IAC-BFD-MD-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05176/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 December 2016                           |On 13 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                          mr parvinder singh kalra
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and of the Sikh religion.  He
    claimed asylum on 27 November 2015. His application was refused and  he
    appealed. Following a hearing at Bradford on 19 September 2016 Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal S Gillespie, in a decision  promulgated  on  10
    October 2016, dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett. Her reasons for so doing were:-

         "1. The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against  the  decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie promulgated  on  10  October
         2016 to refuse his protection claim.

         2.  The Appellant says  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
         Appellant's wife's evidence with regard to the kidnapping of  their
         daughter. The Judge referred neither to her witness  statement  nor
         her oral evidence in the conclusions and it is  therefore  arguable
         that there was an error of law."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. The nub of Mr Brown's submissions can be gleaned from  paragraph  8  of
    the grounds. There it is asserted that the Judge  materially  erred  by
    completely failing to consider or  make  findings  on  the  Appellant's
    wife's written and oral evidence which supported  his  claim,  came  to
    conclusions based upon how the  Judge  believed  the  kidnappers  would
    behave and disregarded  country  evidence.  Mr  Brown  also  emphasised
    factual errors made by the Judge  which  he  submitted  amounted  to  a
    material error of law  in  relation  to  whether  or  not  the  claimed
    kidnapping was reported to the police.

 5. Mr Diwnycz, whilst formally opposing  the  application,  accepted  that
    having listened to the submissions of Mr Brown  he  would  be  in  some
    difficulty in opposing the application made.

 6. I agree with that analysis. The Judge  has  materially  erred  for  the
    reasons put forward within the grounds seeking permission to appeal and
    the submissions of Mr Brown.

 7. There needs to be a full fact finding exercise in this  appeal.  I  was
    unable to proceed as no interpreter had been provided.

 8. In the circumstances both  representatives  invited  me  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  hearing.  That  is  a
    course which I find appropriate.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    contains errors of law and has to be set aside  in  its  entirety.  The
    appeal will be considered afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement  Act   2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any Judge aside from Judge S Gillespie.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 12 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
