
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/05467/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 June 2017                         |      On 28 June 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                farhad vatani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wood, instructed by Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Farhad Vatani, was born  on  22  March  1966  and  is  a
    citizen of  Iran.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Bannerman) against a decision by the respondent to  refuse  him  asylum
    which is dated 19 May 2016.  The First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 November 2016, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are four grounds of appeal.  First, the  appellant  asserts  that
    the judge made a material misdirection in law by failing to assess  the
    appellant's credibility against the background of the country material.
     The appellant claims that he had accurately described the  uniform  of
    the Basij that he had correctly noted that the Green Movement was still
    active in 2011.   The  appellant  complains  that  the  judge  had  not
    referred to parts of the evidence which might support  the  appellant's
    credibility in his analysis and also that he had only made "very  brief
    mention of the US State Department Report."

 3. I find that the ground has no merit.  The judge  was  not  required  to
    refer to each and every part of the background material and to each and
    every item of evidence which an appellant may  adduce.   Significantly,
    the grounds fail to indicate any particular instance  where  the  judge
    may have made an unsound finding of fact by reason  of  having  ignored
    the background material or evidence.  I have no reason  to  doubt  that
    the judge has considered  all  relevant  evidence  and  the  background
    material in reaching his decision.  It is also completely unclear as to
    why a "very brief mention" of  a  US  State  Department  Report  should
    vitiate the judge's analysis.

 4. Secondly, the appellant asserts that  the  judge  has  failed  to  give
    proper and adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  credibility  of  his
    account.  I find that that ground of appeal has not  merit  also.   The
    judge's assessment of credibility is set out in his  decision  at  [75-
    87].  The appellant complains that the judge had given  no  reason  for
    finding it "bizarre ... that the [Iranian] authorities would  re-arrest
    [the appellant] 25 days  after  releasing  him  from  prison  ..."  The
    appellant asserts that this is  to  "state  a  conclusion  rather  than
    provide any meaningful reasoning for  that  conclusion."   I  disagree.
    The judge found a sequence of events described by the appellant in  his
    account to be bizarre and it is clear from the context that  the  judge
    did not believe that the Iranian  authorities  would  arrest  and  then
    release the appellant and that they  should  seize  computer  equipment
    which the  appellant  claimed  would  show  that  he  had  breached  an
    undertaking given to the authorities only a few days earlier.  From any
    reading of the background material, the  judge  would  have  been  well
    aware of the sophisticated and ruthless nature of the Iranian  security
    forces and I find he was entitled to express disbelief  at  an  account
    which would appear to be completely at odds with what is  known  as  to
    the activities of such forces.

 5. Thirdly, the appellant states that he  produced  three  documents  (two
    court summons documents and a court sentence) in support of  his  claim
    that he had been arrested, detained and  punished  for  anti-government
    political activities.  The appellant complains that [81] the judge only
    refers  in  any  detail  to  the  sentence  document.   I  reject  that
    submission.  The judge was well aware of the other two documents  since
    he refers to them at [50].  Again, I find that there was  no  need  for
    the judge to provide a detailed analysis of  each  and  every  item  of
    documentary evidence.  The grounds do  not  seek  to  explain  how  the
    contents of the arrest warrants, had they been discussed in any  detail
    by the judge, would have led him  to  take  a  different  view  of  the
    appellant's credibility.  I am satisfied that the judge  was  aware  of
    the arrest warrants and has considered them together with all the other
    evidence before making any findings of fact.

 6. Fourthly, the appellant asserts that the judge states at  [81]  and  by
    reference to the sentence document, that  the  appellant  had  made  no
    mention in his interviews or elsewhere in  his  evidence  that  he  had
    received 70 lashes in addition  to  twenty  months'  imprisonment.   In
    fact, in answer to question 185 of his asylum interview, the  appellant
    had referred to a sentence "...  twenty  months'  imprisonment  and  70
    lashes."  Mr McVeety, for the respondent, acknowledged that  the  judge
    had made an error but submitted that it was not material to the outcome
    of the appeal.  I agree.  The remark at [81] to which I  have  referred
    follows a finding by the judge that the appellant had  neither  been  a
    demonstrator for the Green Movement nor had he  been  imprisoned.   The
    judge then refers to the absence of any  reference  to  the  70  lashes
    elsewhere in the evidence in parenthesis; having read the decision as a
    whole, I am not satisfied that this is the only reason  for  the  judge
    finding that the appellant had  not  been  imprisoned  as  he  claimed.
    Indeed, in the  proceeding  paragraphs  the  judge  has  given  several
    reasons  for  rejecting  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  entire
    account.  Moreover, much of the judge's decision is  given  over  to  a
    consideration of the appellant's evidence which he says  supported  his
    claim that he had converted to Christianity.  That  was  a  claim  also
    rejected by the judge (who describes  it  as  a  desperate  attempt  to
    bolster a weak asylum claim) and I note the grounds of  appeal  do  not
    challenge the judge's complete rejection of the  appellant's  claim  to
    have converted.  The judge has given adequate reasons for rejecting the
    credibility of this appellant and, although  the  judge  has  erred  as
    regards the punishment the appellant claims to have received, I do  not
    accept that, had the judge been aware that the appellant  had  referred
    to the punishment in his asylum interview, that his overall  assessment
    of credibility would have been different at all.  I accept  that  there
    are cases where a factual error in the judge's assessment  may  vitiate
    the overall credibility analysis but I emphasise that I find that  this
    is not such a case.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 23 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

