

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05264/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons promulgated   |
|on 8 February 2018                        |on 26 March 2018                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  DILU MIAH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masood instructed by Law Dale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Rowlands promulgated  on  19  July  2017  in  which  the  Judge
       dismissed the appellant's appeal on both protection and human  rights
       grounds.






Background


    2. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, was born on 15 April 1981. On
       26 May 2017 an application for international protection  was  refused
       against which the appellant appealed.
    3. The appellant's immigration history is not in issue. This  shows  the
       appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 9 March 2004 with  a
       work permit valid until 23 February 2005.  On  1  February  2005  the
       appellant was allowed to remain as a visitor until  the  8  September
       2005. The appellant overstayed only making his next application on 28
       December 2012 when he applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis
       removal would interfere unlawfully with his human  rights.  This  was
       refused on 15 April 2013  with  no  right  of  appeal.  A  subsequent
       family/private life  application  was  rejected  in  2013  and  on  4
       November 2015 the appellant was encountered working illegally  in  an
       Indian takeaway and served with notice of  intended  removal.  On  29
       January 2016 the appellant made a  further  application  relating  to
       human rights which was refused on 23 February 2016. On 8  March  2017
       the appellant was encountered in Cardiff claiming asylum  three  days
       later.
    4. Notwithstanding the appellant being  legally  represented  the  Judge
       notes at [5] that there was no witness  statement  from  him  in  the
       bundle. A document purporting to  be  a  witness  statement  was  not
       signed and the copy in the Judges  papers  has  been  struck  through
       which Ms Masood confirmed was  as  a  result  of  the  appellant  not
       seeking to rely upon what was  said  in  that  statement  before  the
       Judge. The appellant was, however, able to set out his  case  as  the
       Judge permitted that to be provided by way of oral evidence.
    5. The Judge found the appellant not to be a credible witness.
    6. At [31] the Judge finds "I am satisfied that the Appellant  has  told
       the truth about his nationality and identity, there is no issue  over
       his immigration history either. However I am not  satisfied  that  he
       has ever been a member of Chatra Shibier nor that he has  ever  faced
       any difficulties as a result."
    7. The Judge found the appellant had difficulties in answering questions
       about how  the  party  hierarchy  was  formed.  In  relation  to  the
       appellants title in the party the Judge records that he  had  claimed
       first of all to be  an  ordinary  member  but  later  claimed  to  be
       different kinds of president depending on which letter was read about
       him. The Judge notes the appellant then claims that  unite  and  ward
       presidents mean the same thing whereas it was found they do not.  The
       Judge records "this indecision damages his credibility" [32].
    8. The Judge noted the appellant claims to have been physically attacked
       because of his political involvement in 2002 but that it took him two
       years thereafter to leave the country. The Judge noted the appellants
       evidence on his own admission was that he applied for a visa  to  the
       UK intending to return to Bangladesh and not overstay [33].
    9. The Judge deals with documentary evidence  provided  concluding  that
       little weight could be attached to the same for the  reasons  stated.
       At [38] the Judge writes:

           "There is then another  letter  from  Bangladesh  Islami  Chatra
           Shibir claiming that he was a member and activist but not saying
           for how long and also claiming that he  was  a  Unite  President
           from 2001 to 2002, which flies in the face of his 2003 statement
           in which he claims to be a member of the BNP during  that  time.
           Again, this document is wholly unreliable."

   10. The Judge concludes by finding the appellant had not shown there  was
       a real risk of harm on return  demonstrating  an  entitlement  to  be
       recognised  as  a  refugee  or  a  person  entitled  to  a  grant  of
       humanitarian protection. The claim was dismissed on the same  grounds
       pursuant to articles 2 and 3 ECHR.
   11. In relation to article 8 ECHR the Judge found the appellant  had  not
       established he had any or private life in  the  United  Kingdom  that
       would engage article 8 outside the immigration  rules  and  that  the
       appellant could not meet any of the requirements of the Rules; making
       the only possible option being for the appellant to demonstrate there
       were insurmountable obstacles to his return which,  in  view  of  the
       conclusions reached in relation to the protection claim, and the fact
       the appellant is a person who is fit and able to work  and  fend  for
       himself in Bangladesh, the same were not made out.
   12. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was  granted  by
       another judge of the First-tier Tribunal. Although the wording of the
       grant is slightly ambiguous in terms of  whether  it  is  a  full  or
       partial grant it was accepted before the Upper Tribunal that there is
       no indication it is a limited grant and  accordingly  Ms  Masood  was
       permitted to argue all the points she sought to rely upon.



Grounds



   13. The appellant challenges the protection claim on the basis set out at
       [5 (a-c)] of the grounds which read:

             a) Paragraph 32 of his determination the FTTJ states  'he  [the
                Appellant] now claims that unite and ward president mean the
                same thing, clearly they do not.' The  basis  on  which  the
                FTTJ was able to say that unite and ward president  did  not
                mean the same thing is  unclear.  There  was  no  evidential
                basis  for  that  conclusion.   It   is   an   impermissible
                supposition.


             b) At paragraph 33 of his determination the FttJ observed  that
                it took the Appellant two years to leave the country and  at
                paragraph 34 the FTTJ concluded: 'the fact that he was  able
                to apply for and obtain a  Visa  without  any  problems  and
                leave  the  country  using  his  own  passport   and,   more
                importantly, live at  home  for  most  of  these  two  years
                totally negates any claim that he was wanted by  either  the
                Awami League or anyone else.' In so finding:


                     i. The FTTJ failed to have regard to  the  Appellant's
                        explanation, at interview, about why he was able to
                        leave Bangladesh without difficulty: 'there  wasn't
                        any  fingerprints  there.  You  could  escape  from
                        authorities. Unless you are a murder case wanted or
                        something like this' (AIR 116): when it was put  to
                        him at interview that the police/A L were not  able
                        to find him when he was in Bangladesh and were  not
                        able to stop him at the airport, he responded 'that
                        time our situation wasn't that bad now it is worse.
                        Now majority of president and secretary are  inside
                        jail or members. Or they hide them.'  At  the  time
                        (in 2002 - 2004) the AL  were  not  to  the  ruling
                        party. They are now the ruling party, and have been
                        in power since 2009. Indeed, the FTT was  expressly
                        invited to bear this in mind when  considering  the
                        Appellant's ability  to  leave  Bangladesh  without
                        difficulty. It failed to do so.


                    ii. It was wrong to say that it took two years for  the
                        Appellant to leave the country  after  his  attack,
                        and that the Appellant was able to live at home for
                        most of these two years. The Appellant was attacked
                        at the end of 2002 and he came to the UK  in  March
                        2004 (less than two years). It  is,  in  any  case,
                        wrong to say that the Appellant was able to live at
                        home for most  of  this  time.  At  interview,  the
                        Appellant explained, in  terms,  that  he  had  not
                        lived over most of this period.  At  interview  the
                        Appellant explained that 'We lived  in  hiding.  We
                        never slept in our house' (AIR 111-113).   He  went
                        to explain in detail  that  after  the  attack,  he
                        stayed at home for around one month and  then  went
                        to live in his maternal  uncle's  house  in  Sylhet
                        where he was for six months, after which he was  in
                        hiding for around 3-4 months in Jogonatpur (AIR 182-
                        187). When asked whether he  had  problems  in  the
                        places he relocated to, he stated that: 'they  used
                        to find out somehow and I had to move one place  to
                        another. I didn't want to given  problems  with  my
                        family so I moved (AIR 192).


             c) Paragraph 35 of the FTTJ's  determination  is  difficult  to
                follow and, with respect, is confused, and in some  respects
                the conclusions expressed therein are perverse:


                     i. The FTTJ states 'I am not sure how much link  there
                        is between Chatra League and Chatra Shibir....' yet
                        the FTTJ was referred  to  a  passage  in  the  CIG
                        report, Bangladesh  opposition  to  the  government
                        (February  2015)  indicating,  clearly,  that   the
                        Chattra League was the student wing  of  the  Awami
                        League, and Chattra Shibir was the student wing  of
                        the Jamaat-e-Islami party.


                    ii. The FTTJ fails to take into account the  correction
                        made by the Appellant, in his oral evidence, to the
                        dates in his statement submitted in support of  his
                        human  rights  claim  in  2013  (see   the   FTTJ's
                        determination at paragraphs 5 and 12).


                   iii. The  fact  that  someone  might  support  different
                        parties    over    time    is    not     inherently
                        plausible/incredible and the FTTJ's  conclusion  to
                        the contrary is wholly perverse.


                    iv. The penultimate sentence of  paragraph  35  of  the
                        determination is, with respect, confused in that it
                        appears to conflate the Appellants  evidence  about
                        his political activities in Bangladesh and the UK.

   14. The appellant also challenges the Judges consideration of  the  human
       rights claim stating the appellant had by  the  time  of  the  appeal
       hearing been in the United Kingdom for around thirteen years and  had
       given evidence that he had friends and relatives and claimed  removal
       would amount to a disproportionate interference with his private (not
       family) life.
   15.  The  appellant  asserts  the  reference  by   the   Judge   to   the
       insurmountable obstacles test is not relevant to the claim which  was
       a private life claim and in relation to the claim outside the  Rules,
       bearing in mind the length of the appellant's residence in the United
       Kingdom his evidence he had  friends  and  family  here,  the  Judges
       conclusion that article 8 was not even engaged is said to  be  wholly
       perverse or in the alternatively that the Judge erred in that he gave
       no reasons for his finding that article 8 outside the rules  was  not
       engaged.

Submissions and discussion



   16. As noted above the Judge was faced with a situation in which for some
       unexplained reason there was no signed  statement  of  evidence  upon
       which the appellant or his representative were willing to  place  any
       reliance before the Judge who was, therefore, required  to  establish
       the appellant's case  on  the  basis  of  the  oral  and  documentary
       evidence before him.
   17. In relation to the challenge at paragraph 5(a) of the grounds, it was
       accepted during the course  of  the  hearing  when  this  matter  was
       explained further that the Judge has accurately recorded the evidence
       given by the appellant that unite and ward president means  the  same
       thing. At [5] of the decision under challenge the Judge  records  the
       appellant's evidence in response to a question asking him the  reason
       why he could not go back to Bangladesh. The Judge writes:

           ".. He said it was because of his political involvement. He  was
           asked what the relationship between Chatra Shabir was and Jamat-
           e-Islami and he said that Chatra was a part of JEI.   He  was  a
           member of Charta from 2001. He was  asked  about  the  statement
           that he had submitted in 2013 and he confirmed that it  had  his
           signature in it. It was put to him that in that statement he had
           claimed to have joined JEI in 2003 and he said as far as he  was
           concerned he had mentioned 2001 but he believed  the  Solicitors
           got it wrong. He said he was a ward president and a member. Ward
           is much smaller than district. He was then asked about a  letter
           dated 4 November 2013 where he was described as Unite  president
           between 2001 and 2002 and he said that that was correct, he  was
           going around asking people to vote for them. He said that  unite
           and ward are exactly the same person. He was  then  asked  about
           questions in his interview to which he had  answered  about  not
           being a president and not being a Unite president and he said he
           didn't understand the question is clearly at the time".

   18. The grounds challenge one part of the findings in [32] which  has  to
       be read in full both in terms of the content of  this  paragraph  but
       also the rest of the decision. At [32] the Judge writes:

           "The Appellant had  some  difficulties  in  answering  questions
           about how the party hierarchy was whilst I accept  that  he  may
           have considered  corrected  himself  rather  quickly,  it  still
           damages his credibility. So far as  his  title  in  the  parties
           concerned he had claimed first of all to be an  ordinary  member
           but later claimed to be different kinds of  president  depending
           on which letter was read about him. He  now  claims  that  unite
           ward president mean the same thing, clearly they  do  not.  This
           indecision damages his credibility."

   19. The appellant asserts there was no evidential  basis  for  concluding
       that united and ward president do not mean the same thing but this is
       only one line of paragraph 32 which records difficulties in answering
       questions regarding matters of which the appellant  should  have  had
       knowledge  and  conflicting  claims  in  relation  to  any  role  the
       appellant had in the parties.
   20. Ground 5(b) challenges the finding by the  Judge  that  it  took  two
       years for the appellant to leave the country and that he was able  to
       apply for and obtain a Visa without any problems. It is submitted the
       alleged two-year period was wrong although  on  the  applicant's  own
       chronology at interview  he  remained  in  Bangladesh  for  at  least
       eighteen months if not two years without evidence of anything adverse
       happening to him.
   21. The applicant asserts the  Judge  did  not  address  the  appellant's
       explanation as to his passport but these are  matters  considered  by
       the Judge within the evidence as a whole. The statement by the  Judge
       the appellant remained in his home address for all the time he was in
       Bangladesh arguably does contradict the appellants claim that he  was
       moving around after having remained at home for only  one  month  and
       that he moved around for periods of six months and  four  months  not
       remaining at home for the period the Judge believed. It was  accepted
       that on its own this  point  was  not  determinative  but  Ms  Masood
       submitted that it could be material combined with the other aspects.
   22. The appellant claims the Judge  was  wrong  to  state  there  was  no
       evidence to support his claim that after nearly nine years a  warrant
       had been issued for his arrest. The applicant had provided a FIR  and
       the applicant said it was a false claim  in  any  event.  The  charge
       sheet was dated October 2006 and judgment given in February  2010  it
       was submitted it was not clear what the Judge meant by a warrant.  It
       was  argued  there  was  other  evidence  supporting  the  appellants
       contention that the Judge failed to consider.
   23. It is accepted the appellant  was  asked  in  his  oral  evidence  to
       address the inconsistencies and that  the  Judge  did  address  these
       issues in the decision. It was argued, however, that the Judge failed
       to mention corrections made by the appellant in relation to parts  of
       the evidence and has not given reasons why the earlier  evidence  was
       rejected. It was argued a statement dated  September  2013  had  been
       provided by the respondent on the day of the hearing.  The  appellant
       challenges the Judge's failure to accept  that  the  appellant  would
       "flip-flop" between allegedly conflicting political  parties  arguing
       it was not implausible or incredible. The appellant could be a member
       of both the BNP and Awami League.
   24. The appellant submitted that various errors made by the Judge  relied
       upon did not instil confidence to show that the Judge had applied the
       required degree of anxious scrutiny to a  protection  claim.  It  was
       argued this is material as it impacted on credibility and the  weight
       given to the documents.
   25. The appellant asserted in relation to article 8 ECHR that he had only
       made a private life claim. He had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
       thirteen years, there was evidence before the Judge  of  friends  and
       family in the United Kingdom, the appellant  had  not  been  back  to
       Bangladesh. It was argued the Judge was wrong to say that  article  8
       was not engaged and that a proportionality exercise should have  been
       conducted. It was private life outside the Rules.
   26. On behalf the Secretary  of  State  Mr  Mills  submitted  this  is  a
       challenge to the protection claim only. Discrepancies were identified
       by the Judge in the evidence and the Judge  was  right  to  refer  to
       differences in the claims made in the  evidence.  In  the  appellants
       2013 statement produced at the  hearing  a  number  of  discrepancies
       arose between what the appellant now says regarding dates  he  joined
       and which party he  joined  and  also  the  statement  the  appellant
       intended never to overstay and return, which  was  shown  not  to  be
       true.
   27. The fact the appellant  remained  in  Bangladesh  for  two  years  or
       eighteen months is a matter  of  semantics  as  he  remained  in  the
       country where he claimed his life was at risk for a long  time.  Even
       if the appellant was only at home  for  a  month  after  the  initial
       attack he obtained his passport and so could not have been in hiding.
   28.  Mr  Mills  argued  the  Judge  dealt  with  the  credibility  points
       cumulatively and was entitled to find  on  the  evidence,  even  with
       those matters that may be infected by error, that the  appellant  was
       not a credible witness.
   29. The Judge dealt with the issue of delay in making the  claim  and  Mr
       Mills submitted there are so many problems with the evidence that the
       Judge found the appellant not to be credible and  it  not  a  genuine
       claim. The Judge was  entitled  to  find  as  he  did  regarding  the
       documents and deals with the same in  the  decision  as  per  Tanveer
       Ahmed. It was  argued  the  Judge  could  not  ignore  the  fact  the
       appellant had given two different statements  that  he  then  claimed
       were wrong. Any errors made by the Judge are minor factual errors not
       material in light of the weight of the issues  the  Judge  considered
       and in relation to which he  found  against  the  appellant.  It  was
       submitted nothing was put forward in relation to article 8.
   30. In reply Miss Masood submitted that statement originally produced had
       been abandoned and not relied upon by the Judge  as  the  Judge  only
       makes mention of the 2013 statement.  Miss Masood repeated her  claim
       that a reading of the determination gave the sense the Judge had  not
       paid attention to the evidence and submissions made. It was submitted
       the Judge approached the evidence without the required degree of care
       that he should have done. It was  argued  individually  some  of  the
       matters may not be enough but cumulative  they  are  and  that  error
       should be found.
   31. This tribunal disagrees with the appellants submissions. Even  if  it
       is accepted the Judge made  errors  such  as  whether  the  appellant
       remained in Bangladesh for two years or eighteen months  and  whether
       he was at home or living elsewhere, the fact of  the  matter  is  the
       Judge clearly considered the evidence with  the  required  degree  of
       anxious scrutiny and has given  adequate  reasons  for  the  findings
       made.
   32. The core finding is that the appellant is not a credible witness. The
       Judge had ample reasons for coming to such a conclusion in  light  of
       the deficiencies and problems identified in the evidence.  The  Judge
       did not approach the matter in an inappropriate manner or  failed  to
       apply the required degree of anxious scrutiny.
   33. It is well within the range of findings reasonably open to the  Judge
       on the evidence that the appellant failed to make out that his  claim
       was  credible  or  that  he  had  any  entitlement  to  a  grant   of
       international protection.
   34.  The  Judge  gives  ample  reasons  to  support  the  conclusion  the
       protection claim should be dismissed.
   35. In relation to article 8 ECHR this is a private life claim  only.  It
       is not made out the Judge erred in concluding the appellant could not
       meet the requirements of the rules meaning  he  would  have  to  show
       circumstances sufficient to warrant a grant of  leave  on  article  8
       grounds on the basis of his private life outside the rules. The Judge
       found no such grounds had been made out. It was not made out that the
       appellant could not re-establish a private life  in  Bangladesh.  The
       overall conclusion the appellant could not succeed in relation to his
       private life  outside  the  rules  must  be  a  conclusion  that  the
       respondent's decision is  proportionate.  Looking  at  the  evidence,
       submissions, and findings as a whole, this conclusion is one that can
       be inferred and one that  is  fully  within  the  range  of  findings
       reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.
   36. No arguable error of law material to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal is made out sufficient to warrant  this  Tribunal  interfering
       with this determination.

Decision

   37. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


   38. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 15 March 2018

