
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05712/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (by Teams)       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 25th July 2021                |On the 3rd August 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

      KSK                                                          Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bracaj
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1994. He appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 7 June 2019 refusing his claim  for  international  protection.
    The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 23 February 2021,
    dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The only issue between the parties is that of internal flight. At [26],
    the judge recorded that the appellant would face a  real  risk  in  his
    home area of Iraq (Koya, where  the  appellant's  family  member  still
    reside). The appellant claims that he fears family members of  two  KDP
    guards who died  in  an  altercation  at  a  checkpoint  in  which  the
    appellant had been involved.

 3. Permission was granted in the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge may arguably have failed to take  into  account  certain  factors
    detailed in the grounds of appeal in reaching  his  decision  that  the
    appellant could safely relocate within Iraq.  Those  factors  are:  the
    appellant had been in hiding  following  the  incident  and  that  this
    explains why he had not suffered retribution from  the  family  of  the
    deceased; the appellant could not access direct support  from  his  own
    family who had been 'approached by those the appellant fears' and would
    not 'risk discovery' by openly assisting the appellant;  the  appellant
    sought the help of  the  police  'but  was  not  offered  any'  thereby
    indicating the 'level of influence on those searching for him (sic)'

 4.  I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law for the reasons
    advanced in the grounds of appeal or at all.  First,  the  judge  gives
    sound reasons at [26] for finding that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    prove on the evidence that the family  of  the  dead  guards  had  such
    influence that they would be able to locate and harm  him  anywhere  in
    the IKR. It was plainly open to the  judge  to  find  'the  appellant's
    evidence [on this part of the claim] to be vague and  lacking  detail.'
    In my opinion, that  primary  diminishes  any  possible  error  in  the
    judge's assessment in the following paragraph [27] regarding  the  time
    which the appellant spent in Sulaimaniyah following the incident. It is
    the case that the judge does not in terms refer to the  fact  that  the
    appellant claimed that he spent that period  in  hiding.  However,  the
    judge is not required to  refer  to  each  and  every  element  of  the
    evidence; he was well aware of the appellant's claim to  have  been  in
    hiding as this was detailed in the appellant's witness statement  which
    the judge confirms was in the bundle  of  documents  before  him  [29].
    Moreover, the judge's comprehensive finding at [26] (see  above)  means
    that the appellant could relocate to the IKR and  not  be  required  to
    hide whilst remaining undetected by those who may seek to harm him.

 5. Secondly, I note that, whilst they may have been  'approached'  by  the
    family of the dead guards, the appellant's own family members have  not
    been harmed. It is not likely that, by seeking to assist the appellant,
    his family would have to expose themselves  to  risk  from  others  who
    would not even be aware that the appellant had returned to Iraq.

 6. Thirdly, I note that the appellant has a copy of his  CSID  whilst  his
    family hold the original. Significantly,  the  appellant  is  still  in
    touch with his family, speaking to them once or twice every month [29].
    The judge found that the appellant 'is able  to  have  access  to  [the
    original CSID] should it  required'  [29].  I  take  this  to  indicate
    several possible courses of action. First, the family  could  meet  the
    appellant at the airport and give the card to him  (as  the  respondent
    suggests in the Rule 24 response [5]) but it must also include  sending
    the card by post or courier to the appellant whilst he remains  in  the
    United Kingdom. If that course of action were taken, the  family  would
    not need to expose themselves to risk (even assuming such risk  exists)
    and the appellant could travel from Baghdad to safety in  the  IKR.  In
    the IKR, the appellant, a fit young man capable of work, would have the
    continuing support of his family (albeit perhaps  at  a  distance),  to
    find accommodation and employment.

 7. Finally, the grounds at [7] assert that the appellant  had  sought  the
    help of the police and their failure to assist him  'is  indicative  of
    the level of influence on those searching for him (sic)'. With respect,
    there are very many possible reasons why the police did not assist  the
    appellant whilst there is absolutely no evidence that the  reason  they
    did not help him had anything to do with those who may wish to harm the
    appellant. The assertion wholly  fails  to  disturb  the  judge's  firm
    finding at [26] that the appellant would not be located and  harmed  by
    hostile third parties if he relocated the IKR.

 8. For the reasons I have given, the First-tier Tribunal did  not  err  in
    law. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

     The appeal is dismissed.



         Signed                              Date 25 July 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



