
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/05798/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2017                           |On 05 July 2017                   |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                      Chamal Dissanayaka Mudiyanselage
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Kumdusena, Liyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka,  has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  Emerton  sent  on  31
    March 2017 dismissing his appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and
    human rights grounds.

2.   The written grounds of appeal are inordinately  long,  but  in  essence
    raise five arguments to the effect that the FtT Judge materially  erred
    in law in (1) his treatment of the medical evidence; (2) his  treatment
    of the documentary evidence; (3) giving undue weight to the appellant's
    delay in claiming asylum; (4) expecting  the  appellant  to  prove  his
    claim with corroborative evidence; and failing to make  findings  about
    the appellant's claim.

3.   I am grateful to both parties for their submissions.

4.   I have concluded that the FtT Judge did not materially err in law.   It
    is convenient if I deal with grounds 1, 3, 4 and  5  before  addressing
    ground 2.

5.   As regards the medical evidence, I do not  consider  the  grounds  have
    arguable merit.  The medical report in question, by Mr A Mason, did not
    address the respondent's refusal decision or the  respondent's  reasons
    for not accepting the appellant's core claims.  It does not make  clear
    what details the appellant had provided to the doctor about his adverse
    experiences in Sri Lanka.  Although the doctor made  reference  to  the
    Istanbul Protocol, he appears to have no understanding of the different
    thresholds of likelihood set out in that Protocol as  between  findings
    of 'consistent' and 'highly consistent'.  Although noting in respect of
    several of the scars and injuries that accidental causes could  not  be
    ruled out, he nevertheless finds that they are 'highly consistent' with
    the appellant's account.  That without more is illogical.   He  nowhere
    addresses the significant reduction in the ability of  medical  reports
    to ascertain the causation of scarring when the latter is said to  have
    happened over seven years ago.  It was open  to  the  judge  to  attach
    little weight to this report  for  the  reasons  given.   In  attaching
    little weight to this report, the judge  did  not  seek  to  act  as  a
    medical expert; he simply identified significant  shortcomings  in  it.
    The  judge  did  not  compartmentalise  the  non-medical  and   medical
    evidence, but properly considered the medical evidence in  the  context
    of the evidence as a whole.

6.   There is nothing in ground 3.  The judge  properly  took  into  account
    that the appellant made an  asylum  claim  over  five-and-a-half  years
    late.  In evaluating what weight to  attach  to  this  fact  the  judge
    considered the appellant's attempted explanation in terms  of  reliance
    on the advice of an agent.  It was entirely open to the judge to  count
    against the appellant that he had used professional  representation  to
    apply for two extensions of leave which was not indicative  of  someone
    misled by an agent.  It is nonsense to suggest that the judge took  the
    appellant's delay in claiming  asylum  "as  a  starting  point  of  the
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility".  The judge made very  clear
    in paragraph 25 that "I have assessed the evidence in the round  before
    reaching my findings".

7.   I see nothing in ground 4 either.  The  grounds  are  simply  wrong  to
    state the judge errs if he "expects" a claimant "to  pursue  his  claim
    with  corroborative  evidence".   Article  4(1)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive requires an applicant to substantiate  his  application.   If
    there are elements of his application that are not substantiated he may
    only be excused the needs to corroborate ("confirm") them in  specified
    circumstances.  The appellant plainly did not show  that  he  fulfilled
    all the specified circumstances.  The judge was well-aware  from  cases
    cited (e.g. Tanveer Ahmed) that an asylum applicant may not be able  to
    corroborate all or some aspects of his account but properly  identified
    certain respects in which the appellant was in a realistic position  to
    provide corroborative evidence but failed to do so.
8.   As regards ground 5, it has  all  the  appearance  of  a  make  weight.
    Insofar as it contends that the  judge  should  have  made  a  specific
    finding in relation to the appellant's uncle, it is not the task  of  a
    judge to do  anything  more  than  decide  the  appeal  before  him  by
    identifying  the  material  reasons  for  accepting  or  rejecting  the
    appellant's account.  The judge did that.

9.   It was not necessary for the judge to make findings on every aspect  of
    the appellant's account.  The only documentary evidence  relied  on  in
    relation to the uncle was a death certificate but its details (both  in
    relation to the cause of death and nature of the uncle's business)  was
    inconclusive.

10.  Turning then  to  ground  2,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge's
    treatment of the documentary evidence fell into material error.   I  do
    not accept that the judge can be criticised for  attaching  significant
    weight to the failure of the appellant to produce satisfactory evidence
    as regards the warrant: At paragraph 33 the judge stated that:

     "the main document is an alleged copy  of  a  police  report  asserting
         that a case would be presented on 27 July 2010 to obtain a warrant.
          There is no warrant.  The report refers to the magistrate's  court
         having authorised detention in October 2010, but there is  no  such
         document from the court."

11.  That was correct.  The police report was simply  a  statement  of  what
    the police officer had presented to the court; it did not  record  that
    the court had issued  a  warrant  or  certainly  the  judge  cannot  be
    criticised  for  reading  the  translated  version  as  being  only   a
    presentation of the police case.  I see force in the criticism that the
    judge was wrong to expect that applicants would be able  to  apply  for
    copies of arrest warrants (paragraph 18 of the grounds), but I fail  to
    see that this resulted in any legal  error  since  such  documents  are
    accessible to Sri Lankan attorneys and the  principal  reason  why  the
    judge found the documents submitted regarding the  appellant's  claimed
    arrest on a warrant unsatisfactory was that,  despite  stating  he  had
    instructed a lawyer in May 2016,  he  had  provided  nothing  from  the
    person who sent these documents: see paragraph 33.

12.  A further reason why I consider the judge's treatment of the  documents
    contains no  legal  error  is  that  the  judge  made  clear  that  his
    consideration of them took place in the context of  his  assessment  of
    the evidence as a whole.  This was a case  in  which  the  shortcomings
    identified by the judge in the appellant's account  were  legion.   The
    judge identified significant inconsistencies  and  implausibilities  in
    the appellant's account, several of which  are  not  addressed  in  the
    grounds, notwithstanding that they run to some sixteen pages.  There is
    no attention, for example, to the judge's reasoning in  paragraphs  37-
    40.

13.  The judge can be criticised for seeming to count against the  appellant
    the lack of original documents, but I do not see that this was material
    to his rejection of the reliability of the copies.

14.   The  grounds  particularise  some  other  challenges  to  the  judge's
    findings of inconsistencies.  In my judgment those made amount to  mere
    disagreements with the judge's findings of fact.   In  particular,  the
    judge to be fully entitled to consider that  the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding his past employment in a communications shop run by his uncle
    was at odds with his own passport entry which  states  that  he  was  a
    chef.  It was open to the judge to reject the  appellant's  explanation
    of the entry in terms of 'chef' being just a part-time job.  I entirely
    concur with the judge that in any event, of more significance  was  the
    complete failure of the  appellant  to  provide  any  evidence  of  his
    employment in a telecommunications  shop  for  three-and-a-half  years,
    from July 2006 to October 2009.  His claim to have worked in this  shop
    was central to his claim as to  why  he  had  been  arrested  and  ill-
    treated.  As the judge said, three-and-a-half years of employment would
    have generated a significant documentary trail, yet none  was  provided
    and no explanation for its lack.

Notice of Decision

15.  For the above reasons:

     The FtT Judge did not err in law.

     The decision of the FtT Judge is accordingly upheld.


Signed                                  Date: 4 July 2017
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


