

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA057472016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court    |Decision and Reasons promulgated  |
|on 27 June 2017                          |on 10 July 2017                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     KOI
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Azmi instructed by Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Boylan-Kemp ('the Judge') promulgated on 4 June 2017 in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
        protection, and human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Eritrea born on [ ] 1998.
     3. The appellant claims to have left Eritrea in 2001, aged three,  and
        to have travelled with his family to live in Saudi  Arabia.  It  is
        said his passport was endorsed with an Umrah visa, although  it  is
        noted Umrah refers to the Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca and  that  an
        Umrah visa does not give entitlement to reside in or work in  Saudi
        Arabia.
     4. The appellant claims to have been deported back to Eritrea with his
        family in May 2015 but also to have left Eritrea in the same  month
        and travelling to Sudan before making the  journey  to  the  United
        Kingdom via Egypt, Italy and France. The appellant entered  the  UK
        on 31 October 2015 and claimed asylum on 26 November 2015 which was
        refused on 25 May 2016.
     5. The Judge noted the basis of the appellants claim at  [13]  of  the
        decision under challenge in the following terms:


         13.  The appellant claims to be an Eritrean national.  He  and  his
             family lived in Saudi Arabia between 2001 and 2015  where  his
             father worked as a chauffeur. His father was allegedly  active
             in the opposition of the Eritrea regime; he was  a  member  of
             the Eritrea Liberation Front (ELF). The family  were  deported
             from Saudi Arabia back to Eritrea  due  to  a  change  in  the
             appellant's father's employment and his inability to secure  a
             new sponsor in  the  country.  Upon  arrival  to  Eritrea  the
             appellant's father was detained by the authorities; the family
             have not seen him  since.  The  appellant  and  his  remaining
             family (his mother and his younger siblings) were  allowed  to
             leave  the  airport  but  were  required  to  report  to   the
             authorities at a later point. The appellant did not report  as
             required and was informed by his  aunt  that  the  authorities
             were looking for him and so he remained in hiding until he was
             able to leave Eritrea and travel to  Sudan  approximately  one
             month later; he left illegally but took  the  family  passport
             with him, although this was stolen  from  him  in  Sudan.  The
             appellant's position is that therefore he  would  be  at  risk
             upon return due to his illegal exit from Eritrea  and  due  to
             being of conscription age; this is the  basis  of  his  asylum
             and/or humanitarian  protection  claim.  At  the  hearing,  Mr
             Vokes, acting for the appellant, confirmed that there  was  to
             be no reliance upon the appellant's article 8  rights  in  the
             UK.


     6. Having considered the background in evidence the Judge sets out the
        findings of fact from [16] of the decision  under  challenge  which
        may be summarised in the following terms:


   i. The first issue to determine was that of the appellant's  nationality.
      The Judge noted the appellant's explanation for his lack of  knowledge
      of Eritrea and of his native language was as a result of him  spending
      the majority of his life living in  Saudi  Arabia  where  he  attended
      school and spoke Arabic. His evidence was that his parents spoke Tigre
      to each other at home but they were also fluent in  Arabic  and  would
      speak to the children in Arabic [16].
  ii. The Judge did not accept it was plausible that the appellant's parents
      had not taught him or the other children their native language despite
      not residing in Eritrea. It was found to be expected that the children
      would have learned more than a few basic abstract words as  a  result.
      It was found there was always the possibility of the family having  to
      return to Eritrea where they would need to speak the native  language,
      especially if the children were to be educated there, a fact of  which
      the appellant's parents  would  have  been  aware.  It  was  found  "I
      therefore find the appellant's inability to speak all but a few  basic
      words of his alleged native language undermine the credibility of  his
      claimed nationality" [16].
 iii. The appellant produced  a  number  of  documents  and  photographs  in
      support of his claim. The appellant stated his mother had sent a  copy
      of his father's ELF card to him which he claimed his mother  had  sent
      to him from Sudan which is where his family now were. The Judge  finds
      concerns over the genuineness over the document as it  was  not  found
      plausible that the appellant's mother would have sent  this  and  only
      this document to him in error especially when his  evidence  was  that
      his mother had sent him copies of other documents by instant messenger
      due to her not being able to afford the cost of postage [17].
  iv. The appellant provided translated copies  of  the  documents  sent  by
      instant messenger referring to the nationality of  the  appellant  and
      one of his siblings as Eritrean in relation to which the  Judge  finds
      the documents were sent by photograph so there could be no  inspection
      of the originals undertaken [18].
   v. The Judge finds the appellant has not satisfied the tribunal as to the
      genuineness of the documents applying Tanveer Ahmed  for  the  reasons
      set out at [19] resulting in the Judge not accepting the ELF card is a
      genuine document and that little weight can be placed upon  the  other
      documents when assessing the appellant's nationality [19].
  vi. The Judge expressed concern over the  credibility  of  the  appellants
      claim that he left Eritrea illegally with his  family  passport  which
      was subsequently allegedly stolen in Sudan. The appellant is  said  to
      have failed to provide any reasonable explanation as to why his mother
      would have given him the family passport especially when his  evidence
      is that the whole family wished to leave but could not afford to do so
      at that time and so would have required the passport at a later stage.
      The Judge finds the fact it was stolen and could not be produced to be
      "convenient" considering the basis  of  the  claim  which  focuses  on
      nationality [20].
 vii. The Judge took into account the appellant's lack  of  knowledge  about
      Eritrea claiming he would expect him to know the name of  the  village
      in which he was born. It is also  stated  the  appellant  was  worried
      about having to do military service and it was not found credible  the
      appellant would not know the age at which conscription occurs [21].
viii. The Judge noted the account of the appellant's family  being  returned
      from Saudi Arabia as they no longer had a sponsor, which was  accepted
      as being in line with the country evidence provided, but then went  on
      to state that there was little evidence  except  the  appellant's  own
      testimony which was not  found  to  be  credible  to  demonstrate  the
      appellant's family were in a position of being  forcibly  returned  to
      Eritrea as he claimed [22].
  ix. The fact the appellant  travelled  through  various  countries  before
      arriving in the UK without claiming asylum undermines the  credibility
      of his claim resulting in an adverse inference pursuant to  section  8
      Asylum Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004 [23].
   x. At [24] "overall, I found the appellant to not be a  credible  witness
      and due to the issues I have identified with his evidence, such as his
      lack of knowledge of the language and  the  country  and  due  to  his
      inability to  produce  any  satisfactory  evidence  demonstrating  his
      nationality, I find that his account has been  undermined  to  such  a
      degree that I am not satisfied, even to the lower standard,  that  the
      append is an Eritrean national as he claims. Therefore, I find that as
      the appellant has failed to satisfy me that he is an Eritrean national
      then he has failed to establish that he is outside of his  country  of
      nationality owing to a well-founded fear of persecution. Consequently,
      no Convention reason is engaged, meaning  that  the  appellant  cannot
      claim asylum on this basis".
  xi.  The  Reason  for  Refusal  letter  indicates  that  even  though  the
      appellant's nationality was not accepted by the respondent he  was  to
      be removed to Eritrea being  his  claimed  nationality  [25].  As  the
      appellant did not satisfy the Judge that he is a national  Eritrea  it
      was found he cannot be removed to Eritrea  resulting  being  concluded
      there was no well-founded risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  or
      breach of ECHR or humanitarian protection on this  basis.   The  Judge
      was unable to comment upon which country the appellant is  a  national
      of as it was stated there had been no  positive  evidence  upon  which
      such a finding could be made, and that  the  issue  therefore  remains
      open and should be returned to the Secretary of State for  a  decision
      to be made on this matter [26].


     7. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 4 April 2017.
     8. The Secretary of State opposed the grant in a Rule 24 letter  dated
        24 April 2017.



Grounds and submissions



     9. The grounds of appeal are detailed raising a number  of  challenges
        to the decision of the Judge. In relation to the finding at [16] it
        was submitted that:


   a. the finding is a Wednesbury unreasonable  finding  as  it  was  not  a
      rational finding  on  the  lower  standard  that  a  second-generation
      migrant must speak the first language of his parents rather  than  the
      language of the country he grew up in  as  his  first  or  predominant
      language. It is said the adverse  plausibility  finding  made  by  the
      Judge sets the standard of proof too high for a protection  claim  and
      was not one reasonably open to the Judge.
   b. The Judge made a finding based on no evidence as there was no evidence
      before the Judge that Tigre was  the  appellant's  'native  language',
      that education in Eritrea is conducted in Tigre, or that Tigre is  the
      'native language' of Eritrea. The only  available  evidence  was  that
      Tigre was  the  appellant's  parent's  most  fluent  language.  It  is
      asserted the Judge made a speculative finding  based  on  no  evidence
      which is fundamentally and objectively incorrect. It is noted for  the
      appellant's ethnic group of the Bilen people, Tigre is not necessarily
      the native language, even though it is widely spoken.
   c. The Judge failed to take  into  account  relevant  evidence  that  the
      appellant's experiences were those of a child rather  than  an  adult,
      that the appellant's father held strong  political  opinion  including
      about the treatment of Muslims in Eritrea and that for him  the  right
      to speak Arabic is a  complex  political  issue.  The  appellant  gave
      evidence regarding his father's  political  views  about  language  at
      paragraph 12 of his initial witness statement but the Judge  fails  to
      make findings on this aspect of the appellant's case at  all,  and  it
      does not appear to have been a matter that was  considered.  Whilst  a
      child at the date the appellant gave a statement and when  he  claimed
      asylum, there is no sign when assessing credibility that the Judge has
      taken the appellant's age into account or factored in that in his oral
      evidence the appellant was having to recall events that happened  when
      he was a child.


    10. It is also pleaded there  has  been  a  failure  to  make  material
        findings regarding the appellant's case  as  there  is  no  finding
        about whether it is  accepted  the  appellant  lived  and  grew  up
        spending the majority of his life in Saudi Arabia, which is said to
        be a significant fact in the  assessment  of  nationality  and  the
        credibility and to the assessment of risk on return.
    11. The finding by the Judge that the appellant had not  satisfied  the
        genuineness of the school reports provided, because they  were  not
        sent by post with his  father's  identity  card  and  there  is  no
        verification of the original  or  evidence  independent  checks  of
        nationality were undertaken, is said to be flawed as  if  a  proper
        finding had  been  made  on  whether  the  appellant  had  actually
        attended the named school and lived in Saudi Arabia, including as a
        dependent on his father's work Visa, that would have been  material
        to the assessment of the documents in the round.  It  is  submitted
        the lack of a finding  regarding  the  appellant's  time  in  Saudi
        Arabia has tainted the assessment of  the  evidence  regarding  the
        documentation provided.
    12. It is argued that in [19] the Judge has set too high a standard  of
        proof when rejecting the validity of the documents by reference  to
        the terms 'possible' and 'may'. It is argued the obligation on  the
        appellant was to adduce evidence  capable  of  proving  there  were
        substantial grounds for believing that, if the  measure  complained
        of were to be implemented, he will be exposed to  a  real  risk  of
        being  subjected  to  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  of   the
        Convention, and that where such evidence was adduced it was for the
        government to dispel any doubts about it.
    13. It is argued that in [19] there is also a failure to  give  reasons
        as no reasons are given for the finding  the  photographs  provided
        did  not  assist  the  Judge   in   determining   the   appellant's
        nationality, given  the  photograph  of  the  appellant's  parent's
        wedding including a banner written in Tigrinyan, which is  said  to
        be strong primer fascia evidence that the appellant's parents  were
        married in Eritrea and are Eritrean.
    14. At [20] it is said there is a mistake of fact amounting to an error
        of law as the appellant's evidence was not that he had  been  given
        the family passport but his own passport. The  adverse  credibility
        finding made in relation to the belief the appellant had taken  the
        family passport is said to amount to a mistake of  fact  which  has
        prejudiced findings in respect of  credibility  to  a  degree  that
        constitutes an error of law.
    15. At [21], in which the Judge finds one would expect the appellant to
        know the name of the village where he was born, it is asserted  the
        Judge failed to take into  account  or  give  reasons  for  finding
        against the appellant's evidence that he lived  in  a  city  not  a
        village as a child in Eritrea even though he was born in a village,
        and that he left Eritrea at the age of three and so has  no  memory
        of this  time.  The  appellant,  at  paragraph  6  of  his  witness
        statement, noted he is only be able to  repeat  what  he  was  told
        about his birthplace.  It is argued the Judge  fails  to  make  any
        reference to this or to factor this evidence into  the  conclusions
        reached.
    16. At [14 and 21] it is argued the Judge made adverse  findings  on  a
        matter that was not in issue. It is said at [14], when  summarising
        the refusal letter an adverse finding is said  to  have  been  made
        because the appellant was not aware of the conscription age,  which
        was maintained in the Judges own findings at [21] which are said to
        be incorrect as this was not a  point  taken  in  the  reasons  for
        refusal letter and therefore not in issue.
    17. It is argued that at [23] the Judge failed  to  take  into  account
        relevant considerations in relation to section 8 as  the  appellant
        was a minor in control of an adult agent at the time.



Error of law


    18. In his oral submissions, Mr Azmi  relied  on  the  pleaded  grounds
        which were opposed by  Mrs  Aboni  who  argued  the  appellant  was
        expected to know some basic knowledge of Tigre which it  is  stated
        had been spoken at home. It is also argued the Judge  had  accepted
        the appellant lived outside Eritrea for most of his life.
    19. In relation to the conscription issue, Mrs Aboni accepted this  was
        not part of the asylum claim and did not know if it had been raised
        in the hearing and did not know if the family passport was  his  or
        was the document found by the Judge  to  have  been  given  to  the
        appellant.  It was argued the findings were open to the  Judge  and
        that adequate reasons had been given.
    20. The grounds of challenge identify a number  of  concerns  with  the
        decision. It is not argued the Judge would not have  been  able  to
        make the adverse credibility  findings  recorded  in  the  decision
        under challenge per se but it is arguable that such conclusions can
        only be reached having considered all the available  evidence  with
        the required degree of anxious scrutiny and  when  giving  adequate
        reasons.
    21. The starting point in this case was the appellant's claim that from
        the age of three to 15 he had been brought up in Saudi Arabia.  The
        Judge makes no finding in relation to the appellant's account which
        I find to be an arguable legal error as the other  aspects  of  the
        case, taken into  account  by  the  Judge,  can  only  be  properly
        considered against this background. Accepting the family  lived  in
        Saudi Arabia between 2001 and 2015 is, in  isolation,  insufficient
        without more. It is not the fact they lived  in  Saudi  Arabia  for
        this period, if indeed the Judge accepted this fact, but the impact
        of a person living in Saudi Arabia  during  their  formative  years
        upon the weight to be given to the evidence the Judge was asked  to
        consider.
    22. In this respect the language issue was of concern to the Judge  and
        there  is  merit  in  the  challenge  to  the  decision  that   the
        conclusions at [16] are inadequately reasoned and based upon a lack
        of evidence to support the findings made.
    23. In relation to the documentation, especially  the  school  reports,
        the grounds refer to the relationship between the  need  for  clear
        findings in relation to the  appellant's  previous  life  in  Saudi
        Arabia, which should include a finding as to  whether  he  actually
        attended the named school and lived in Saudi Arabia or  not,  which
        must be a relevant issue when assessing the weight to be  given  to
        the documents. The Judge also gives no reason for  why  it  is  not
        plausible that the appellant's mother sent a  document  to  him  in
        error even if other documents were sent by  Instant  Messenger  and
        why no weight could be attached to the documentation  in  light  of
        the shortfalls in the assessment of all  relevant  aspects  of  the
        appeal.
    24. It is also noted the Judge applied Tanveer Ahmed at [19] leading to
        a conclusion that little weight was attached to the documents  when
        assessing nationality. It is accepted weight is ordinarily a matter
        for the Judge, but this can only be the case if  the  evidence  has
        been considered with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny  and
        adequate findings made. In this case, it is not made out  that  the
        two criteria have been satisfied. It is  also  the  case  that  any
        decision as to the weight to be attached to  the  documents  should
        form part of the overall assessment of the available evidence,  yet
        the finding in relation to the documents appears quite early on  in
        the Judges assessment of the evidence rather than being arrived  at
        once all relevant aspects have been taken into  account.  Otherwise
        an artificial separation of the assessment of  the  credibility  of
        documents can occur.
    25. The  issue  in  relation  to  the  alleged  make  mistake  of  fact
        concerning the family passport is made out. The  appellant  in  his
        witness statement clearly states that he had his Eritrean  passport
        stolen in Sudan. The Judge  fails  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
        rejecting this aspect of the claim or indeed  for  considering  the
        circumstances in which the appellant  would  been  issued  with  an
        Eritrea passport, which may be relevant. The mistake of fact led to
        the adverse credibility finding at [20] which was arguably not open
        to the Judge on the basis of the available material.
    26. A fairness point also arises at [21], as the appellant's  knowledge
        of the conscription age is not a matter that  was  said  to  be  an
        issue in the appeal. The Judge  may  have  been  entitled  to  make
        adverse findings in relation to this aspect  but  would  have  been
        required to put the appellant on notice of this matter and to  give
        the appellant the opportunity to respond.
    27. It  also  appears  that  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  evidence
        adequately when  concluding  that  there  was  an  expectation  the
        appellant would know the name of the village in which he was  born,
        in light of the fact his evidence was that he moved to  a  city  in
        Eritrea and left that country when he was three years of age.
    28. It is accepted this appeal would not have been easy to determine as
        there are a number of elements that required proper  consideration.
        It is not a "run-of-the-mill" appeal when an individual claiming to
        be from Eritrea may have a lack of knowledge  of  aspects  of  that
        country, including language, whilst also  claiming  to  have  lived
        there for a number of years. In such cases the lack of knowledge of
        language and other aspects of  life  within  Eritrea  may  properly
        warrant adverse credibility findings being made. The  determination
        is suggestive of an approach being taken that this was such a "run-
        of-the-mill" appeal when the factual matrix suggested otherwise.
    29. I make a finding of fact that the Judge has materially erred in law
        for the reasons set out in the application for permission to appeal
        and highlighted  in  this  decision.  As  the  adverse  credibility
        findings reached by the Judge were all based upon an assessment  of
        the evidence set out in the determination and have been shown to be
        unsafe, there can be no preserved findings.
    30. As a comprehensive fact-finding exercise is required in relation to
        all aspects of this appeal it was accepted the only way to proceed,
        in accordance with the Presidents practice direction,  is  for  the
        appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Birmingham  to
        be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Boylan-Kemp  who  shall
        be required to make findings in relation to each and every  factual
        aspect of the case and to set out properly and adequately  reasoned
        conclusions regarding the merits of the appeal.

Decision

    31. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
        tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham to be heard afresh by  a  judge
        other than Judge Boylan-Kemp.




   Anonymity.


    32. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 7 July 2017











