
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/05979/2017
                                                               PA/05980/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th March 2018                            |On 2nd May 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                     MRS VERA TSIMBALA (FIRST appellant)
                   MISS OLA AL-KHURAYBI (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of the Russian Federation born respectively
    on [ ] 1969 and [ ] 1997.  They are mother and daughter.  They  applied
    for asylum in the United Kingdom asking to be  recognised  as  refugees
    claiming to have a well-founded fear of persecution in  Russia  on  the
    basis of their race as they claim that their father is from  Yemen  and
    they are of mixed race and fear they will be persecuted because of this
    upon their return to Russia.  They also fear they  will  be  persecuted
    because of  their  religion  as  they  claim  they  are  Islamic.   The
    Appellants' application for asylum was refused  by  Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 9th June 2017.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Cox sitting at Stoke on 21st July 2017.   In  a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 28th July 2017 the Appellants' appeals  were
    dismissed on all grounds.  Grounds of Appeal were lodged to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 27th October 2017 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bird
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Bird noted that the grounds allege
    that the judge had failed to consider properly the  evidence  given  by
    the Appellants to show the discrimination faced  by  the  family  on  a
    daily basis when living in Russia  because  of  the  first  Appellant's
    marriage to a  Yemeni  citizen  which  amounted  to  persecution.   She
    considered that it was arguable  that  although  the  judge  noted  the
    evidence briefly at paragraph 44  his  conclusion  that  this  did  not
    amount  to  persecution   failed   to   consider   whether   cumulative
    discrimination can amount to persecution and that an arguable error  of
    law had been made in the judge's assessment of the evidence.

 3. On 22nd November 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  That response submitted that the  Grounds  of
    Appeal are a general disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
    findings and any claimed discrimination experienced by the  Appellant's
    husband (who is not in the United Kingdom) is not  sufficient  to  meet
    the threshold of persecution.  The response  also  contended  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had properly directed himself to the question
    of internal relocation.

 4. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me  solely  for  the
    purpose of determining whether or not there is a material error of  law
    in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellants
    appear by their instructed Counsel, Ms Khan.  The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Ms Khan relies on the Grounds of Appeal submitting that  the  important
    question to be answered is whether or not the  fear  expressed  by  the
    Appellants, particularly by the first Appellant  for  herself  and  the
    second Appellant amount to persecution.  She  submits  that  the  judge
    appears to have accepted part of what occurred, refers me to the bundle
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal with regard to that conduct and
    the very serious incident  that  culminated  thereon  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 5 on page 11.  She submits that the judge does not appear  to
    reject the evidence and refers me to paragraph 40 of the decision where
    the judge acknowledged that it is not in issue that there are  concerns
    in Russia about the conduct of some groups  although  the  judge  quite
    rightly had pointed out that there  are  many  people  in  Russia  from
    ethnic minorities and that there are  significantly  large  numbers  of
    Muslims and about half of all conscripts to the army are Muslims.

 6. Ms Khan notes the finding at paragraph 41 relating to conscription  but
    submits that  the  judge  does  not  take  into  account  all  factors.
    Referring me to paragraph 59 of the decision there is evidence that the
    authorities are not challenging the existence of  neo-Nazi  groups  and
    that there is some societal discrimination.   Ms  Khan  challenges  the
    finding of the judge at paragraph 59 that the problems do not  approach
    the level that equate to persecution.

 7. Ms  Khan  explains  to  me  the  position  with  regard  to  the  first
    Appellant's husband (the second Appellant's father), namely that he was
    initially working in the UAE but he lost his job and that he is waiting
    for  the  situation  in  the  Yemen  to  improve  and  that  the  first
    Appellant's husband's status is not  lawful.   The  current  Appellants
    came to the UK on visit visas and thereafter claimed asylum in the  UK.



 8. She refers me to various extracts from the bundle by way  of  objective
    evidence including the Human Rights Watch Report and submits  that  the
    error that has arisen is the failure to look at the cumulative approach
    rather than individual incidents.  She submits that there is a lack  of
    protection from the authorities and that the judge has failed  to  take
    into account his own findings in reaching his ultimate conclusions.

 9. In response Mr Bates indicates  that  the  status  of  the  Appellant's
    husband has been thoroughly addressed at paragraphs 50  to  57  of  the
    decision and that the judge did not accept there was  any  satisfactory
    evidence relating  to  the  contention  that  the  husband  had  ceased
    employment and  that  it  was  not  possible  for  the  Appellants  and
    dependants to return to the UAE and to continue their family life there
    if they wished to  do  so.   He  takes  me  through  the  judgment,  in
    particular pointing out the judge's analysis at paragraphs 39 and 40 of
    the background evidence regarding Russia and takes me to  paragraph  60
    noting that the judge in coming to his findings had considered the full
    content of the objective evidence that the Appellants rely on  and  the
    source of the same.  He also points out that the judge has  taken  into
    account published articles as referred to at paragraph 71 and  specific
    documents as referred to at paragraph 73.

10. He submits that Russia is ethnically diverse and that  if  there  is  a
    problem then internal relocation could be considered.   He  notes  that
    there are significant numbers of  the  population  who  are  of  ethnic
    minorities and that no reason has been sustainably given as to  why  it
    would be unreasonable for the Appellants to return.   He  submits  that
    any suggestion of persecution is effectively historical in  nature  and
    rejects the contention put forward that having a Ukrainian accent is  a
    problem pointing out the first Appellant has in fact made a visit.

11. In brief response Ms Khan submits that internal relocation has not been
    properly considered within the determination and whilst it is submitted
    that 50% of conscripts are Muslim information  as  to  when  that  took
    place has not been provided and how that percentage has  been  reached.
    However, she takes me back to paragraphs 41 to 43  of  the  bundle  and
    documentation  relating  to  the  position  of  the  first  Appellant's
    husband.  She asks me to find there are material errors of law  and  to
    remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. This is a well constructed decision.  The judge has heard the  evidence
    and has given full and proper consideration to the factual history.  At
    paragraph 68 the judge has quite properly made a finding that a  single
    incident, albeit a violent attack, is not evidence of persecution or  a
    lack of sufficiency of protection.

15. I do not find that the decision discloses any material errors  of  law.
    I agree with  the  submissions  made  in  the  Rule  24  response  that
    effectively  what  is  being  suggested  amounts  to   no   more   than
    disagreement with the findings of the judge.  It is  important  that  I
    give my reasons for this.  That is best addressed  by  looking  at  the
    decision as set out by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  judge  has
    thoroughly analysed the evidence.   He  has  considered  the  objective
    evidence including accepting that there is some societal discrimination
    and some evidence that the authorities are not challenging the same but
    made a finding which he was perfectly entitled to that the problems  do
    not approach the level that equate to persecution.

16. The judge has considered the objective  evidence  and  the  sources  in
    reaching that conclusion, published articles that the  Appellants  rely
    upon and internet publications including blogs and Twitter.  The  judge
    has been fair in his analysis.  At paragraph 74 he  has  accepted  that
    the Appellants are correct that the political situation has changed and
    that it is on a balance of probabilities that the Ukrainian authorities
    are no longer willing to allow those who have  Russian  citizenship  to
    enter and remain in Ukraine as was previously the case.   However,  the
    judge found as the Appellants can return to  Russia  the  inability  to
    relocate to Ukraine is not relevant and  this  was  a  finding  he  was
    entitled to make.

17. The judge has analysed all issues that have taken place.   One  of  the
    criticisms that has been made is that the  judge  has  only  looked  at
    isolated incidents rather than looking at matters in the round.  It  is
    clear from an analysis of the decision  that  that  is  not  the  case.
    Cumulatively the judge has made findings for which he has given reasons
    and has reached conclusions that he was  entitled  to  on  hearing  the
    evidence.  It has to be remembered  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not
    rehearing the evidence but merely analysing whether or not  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in law.  Further, the judge was  entitled  to
    find at paragraph 81 that there was sufficiency of protection and  that
    internal relocation was a reasonable outcome.

18. For all the above reasons I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  has  made
    findings that he was entitled to and has  given  full  and  sustainable
    reasons for these findings.  Overall, the submissions amount to  little
    more than mere disagreement with the findings of the  judge.   In  such
    circumstances the decision and reasons disclose no  material  error  of
    law and the Appellants' appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the Appellants' appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
