
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/05135/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 May 2017                            |  On 25 May 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                    y a a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Polpitya & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 5  December  2016
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain which refused  the  protection
    and human rights claim of the appellant.

 3. The appellant was born in Somalia on 25 November 2001.  He came to  the
    UK on 17 November 2015 and claimed asylum.  His application was refused
    by the respondent on 16 May 2016.  Because of  his  age,  however,  the
    applicant was granted discretionary leave to remain until  10  November
    2018.  He appealed the refusal of his asylum claim and a  hearing  took
    place before Judge Chamberlain on  22  November  2016.   The  appellant
    disagreed with her decision and therefore challenged it, permission  to
    appeal being granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew in a  decision
    dated 13 March 2017 which was issued by the Tribunal on 22 March  2017.



 4. The appellant's asylum claim is that he is  from  the  minority  Ashraf
    clan. That aspect of his claim is not  disputed.   The  appellant  also
    maintains that he lived with his family in Mogadishu  until,  in  2009,
    his mother, brother and sister left Mogadishu for Kenya.  The applicant
    remained behind living with his uncle.

 5. The applicant also maintains that his older sister,  AA,  left  Somalia
    for the UK in  2009.   It  is  undisputed  that  she  was  subsequently
    recognised as a refugee and is now settled here.

 6. The appellant's account of his history from 2009 to 2015  when  he  was
    living with his uncle in Mogadishu is that he and his uncle  were  able
    to live in the uncle's home and find work to  support  themselves.  The
    appellant maintained that his uncle  was  killed  in  an  explosion  in
    November 2015.  A friend of his uncle was able to bring  the  appellant
    to the UK where he claimed asylum and was able to make contact with his
    sister, AA, with whom he went to live.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain did not find the evidence of  the
    appellant's mother and siblings living in a refugee camp in Kenya to be
    credible. She therefore assessed the risk on return to the appellant on
    the basis that  his  mother  and  siblings  were  in  Mogadishu.  After
    applying the Country  Guidance  case  of  MOJ  and  Others  (return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) to the findings of  fact,
    she concluded that the appellant's protection and human  rights  claims
    were not made out.

    The Grounds

 8. The appellant brought two main challenges to the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal. Firstly, he maintained that the credibility  finding  on
    the evidence that the appellant's mother and siblings were in a refugee
    camp in Kenya contained errors of law.

 9. The first ground contained a number of elements. Firstly, at  paragraph
    3 of the grounds, the respondent had  not  challenged  the  appellant's
    evidence that his family were in Kenya so it  was  not  a  live  matter
    before the First-tier Tribunal. In addition,  at  paragraph  4  of  the
    grounds, where this was not a  live  issue,  the  judge  had  erred  in
    placing weight on the absence of documentation showing the family to be
    in Kenya.

10. Secondly, at paragraph 5 of the grounds, the judge had made a  material
    error of fact as to  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  at  the  hearing
    concerning his mother being in Kenya.

11. Thirdly, at paragraph 6 of the grounds, the First-tier Tribunal took an
    erroneous approach to the evidence of the appellant's sister as to when
    she knew that the appellant's uncle had remained in Somalia.

12. The appellant second ground of appeal was that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had failed to distinguish MOJ in light of new country evidence.

    Discussion and Findings

13. I did not find that the appellant's  first  ground  had  merit.  It  is
    correct that the respondent made no comment in the  refusal  letter  on
    the appellant's claim that his family were in Kenya. However,  firstly,
    the appellant, who had legal advice at  all  material  times,  was  not
    entitled to take the absence of a specific rejection of  this  part  of
    his account in the refusal letter as a concession that bound the judge.
    The absence of a view from the respondent on the point in  the  refusal
    letter was not capable of  amounting to a legally binding concession.

14. Secondly, the issue of the family being in Kenya  was  the  subject  of
    evidence, cross-examination and submissions at the hearing;  see  [22],
    [26], [30] and [31]. The decision records at [22] that  the  respondent
    specifically raised the issue at the hearing.  It  is  not  correct  to
    suggest that it was not a live issue at the hearing,  therefore.  There
    is no suggestion that the appellant, his sister or his  legal  advisers
    were taken by surprise before the First-tier Tribunal at the respondent
    seeking to dispute the evidence of the family living in Kenya. There is
    also no suggestion that an adjournment was sought in order  to  address
    the issue or obtain documentary evidence showing the family were living
    in a refugee camp in Kenya.  Where the account was that the family  had
    been in a camp in Kenya since 2009 and the sister  had  been  in  touch
    with them, it was reasonable for the judge to expect some corroborative
    evidence to have been obtained.

15. Thirdly, the First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in  her  record  of  the
    appellant's evidence on the whereabouts of his mother and was  entitled
    to place adverse weight on that evidence.

16. At the hearing before me the legal representatives had the  opportunity
    of  comparing  the  judge's  record  of  proceedings  to  that  of  the
    appellant's legal representative at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
    The judge's record of proceedings states that the appellant  was  asked
    "Is your mother still in Somalia?". His response was "The last  time  I
    spoke to her she was in Somalia".  The next  question  is  recorded  as
    "Last time in Somalia?". The appellant's response was "No, at a refugee
    camp in Kenya".  This is consistent  with  the  handwritten  record  of
    proceedings from the appellant's legal representative before the First-
    tier Tribunal. The records are the same other than the absence  of  the
    checking question, "Last time in Somalia?" in the record of  the  legal
    representative.

17. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  therefore  that  the
    appellant said initially that his mother was in Kenya and  then  stated
    that she was in Kenya. The judge was entitled to find at [26] that  the
    appellant had changed his evidence and to draw  an  adverse  conclusion
    from this.

18. In addition, that finding was made in the context  of  the  appellant's
    oral evidence was that he knew his mother  was  in  Kenya  because  his
    sister had told him this; see [25]. The sister was  found  in  her  own
    asylum appeal and before this First-tier Tribunal to be a significantly
    unreliable witness; see [23], [24], [28],  [30]  and  [31].  Where  the
    appellant's evidence on the family  being  in  Kenya  changed  and  was
    stated by him to have come  from  his  sister,  Judge  Chamberlain  was
    entitled to find  that  part  of  the  claim  lacking  in  credibility,
    regardless of the appellant's statement in his witness statement  dated
    23 December 2015 that his uncle had told him that his mother and sister
    were living in a refugee camp in Kenya.

19. The  grounds  only  challenge  the  findings  of  the  sister  being  a
    significantly unreliable witness concerning the issue of when she  knew
    that her uncle was still in Mogadishu. This was addressed at [29]:

         "The Appellant's sister had told the Tribunal  in  her  own  appeal
         that she had been unable to find any family members,  and  did  not
         know where they were.  However, she accepted in evidence before  me
         that she knew that the Appellant was living in  his  uncle's  home,
         which was the same house in which his uncle had been living  before
         she left Somalia.  She did not answer the question of why  she  had
         not tried to contact her uncle  when  she  arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom, but answered this question by saying that her  mother  had
         told her before she left Somalia that she was going to  Kenya,  and
         that was why she had not contacted her mother.  She said  that  she
         did not have her telephone number.  She did not address  the  issue
         of why she had not contacted her  uncle.   I  find  that  when  the
         Appellant's sister arrived in the United Kingdom in 2009 her  claim
         that she had no relatives remaining in  Mogadishu  was  untrue.   I
         find that she knew it to be untrue, and she has  acknowledged  that
         her uncle was living in Mogadishu."

20. This paragraph is clear. The sister's evidence before Judge Chamberlain
    was that she knew before the appellant came to the UK that  he  was  in
    Mogadishu with his uncle. She was asked why she did not try to  contact
    the uncle. If her evidence was, in fact, that she had only  learned  of
    the appellant living with his uncle in Mogadishu  after  the  appellant
    came to the UK and after the uncle had been killed, she would not  have
    been asked why she had not contacted the uncle. If she had  been  asked
    that question nevertheless,, she could simply have said  that  she  had
    only found out after the uncle had died and the appellant had  come  to
    the UK. She did not. She did not answer the question as to why she  did
    not contact her uncle. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  draw  a
    negative credibility finding from this.

21. In addition, as above, this finding was not made in  isolation  but  in
    the context of the significant other concerns the judge had  about  the
    evidence of the sister. She was found in her own appeal to  have  given
    unreliable evidence about her knowledge of the  whereabouts  of  family
    members; see [23] and [24]. It was also made  in  the  context  of  the
    sister giving unreliable evidence as to how she could be a full sibling
    of the appellant if their father disappeared more than 9 months  before
    he was born; see [28].

22. At the hearing before me, Mr Slatter raised other points going  towards
    this ground but they were not, on any reading, issues contained in  the
    written grounds and no application was made to amend  the  grounds  and
    seek  permission  to  appeal.   I  do  not  comment  further  on  them,
    therefore.

23. The applicant's second main  challenge  submitted  that,  even  if  his
    mother and siblings were in Mogadishu, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had failed to assess the risk on return in light of  the  new  material
    before her as well as that in the Country Guidance case of MOJ.

24. The case of SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 provides an answer  to
    this ground. In that case the Court of Appeal provides guidance on  the
    correct approach to Country Guidance cases. The Court stated at [45]:
         "45. It is for these  reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability  of
         consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges are  required
         to take Country Guidance determinations into account, and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are
         adduced justifying their not doing so."

25.  Nothing  here  indicates  that  the  appellant's  case  before   Judge
    Chamberlain was that there  were  "very  strong  grounds  supported  by
    cogent evidence" for not following MOJ. The  skeleton  argument  before
    the First-tier Tribunal sets out part of the head note of MOJ and  then
    under the heading "Home Office Directives" in paragraph 17 and then  in
    paragraphs 27 and 28 (the  numbering  appearing  to  be  a  typographic
    error), refers to country evidence postdating MOJ.  The  skeleton  does
    not argue at all that the new evidence was  capable  of  distinguishing
    MOJ or capable of meeting the test for doing so from [45] of SG (Iraq).
    In fact, the record of proceedings records that the oral submission for
    the appellant was that he came within the head note of MOJ.

26. The First-tier Tribunal here  therefore  took  a  correct  approach  in
    applying the guidance  in  MOJ  and  where  the  facts  were  that  the
    appellant and his uncle lived there  for  a  number  of  years  without
    difficulty, both finding employment, and that he had family  to  return
    to, it was open to Judge Chamberlain to find no risk on return.

27. For all of these reasons I did not find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge disclosed an error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

28. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error
    on a point of law and shall stand.


Signed: [pic]                           Date: 24 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

