
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05475/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 16 August 2017                             |On 17 August 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [F F]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officier
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Gore, counsel instructed by R. Spio & Co,
solictors


                                  DECISION
   1. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Rodger who, by a determination promulgated on 5  April  2017,  allowed
      [FF]'s appeal against a decision to refuse the human rights claim upon
      which he relied in seeking revocation of a deportation order that  had
      been made against him, the judge finding that  his  deportation  would
      bring about an  impermissible  infringement  of  rights  protected  by
      Article 8 of the ECHR.


   2. The high water mark of the challenge pursued by the Secretary of State
      was to assert that it was not open to the judge, having found that  it
      would not be unduly harsh to expect his partner and  their  two  young
      children, all of whom are British citizens, to move with him to Ghana,
      yet to find that it would be unduly harsh to expect two other children
      of the appellant by previous relationships, who continue to live  with
      their respective mothers but with whom the appellant maintains genuine
      and subsisting parental relationships either to move with him to Ghana
      or to remain in the United Kingdom without him.


   3. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Staunton asked if I  had  formed  a
      provisional view of the likely outcome of  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. I was not surprised to be invited to  express  such  a  view
      because it is not altogether easy to see why permission to appeal  had
      been granted by the First-tier Tribunal and  the  provisional  view  I
      expressed was as  follows.  In  a  long  determination,  written  with
      evident care, the Judge has directed herself correctly in  law  before
      carrying out a meticulous examination of the evidence after which  she
      has given clear cogent and legally sufficient reasons for arriving  at
      what are, frankly, unassailable findings  of  fact  that  led  to  her
      conclusion that the appeal must succeed. The different approach to the
      positions of the appellant's partner and their two children  who  live
      together as a family unit and the two  young  children  from  previous
      relationships with whom the appellant maintains a significant role  in
      their lives has been explained and cogent reasons have been  given  by
      the judge for her conclusion that it would be unduly harsh  for  those
      children either to move to Ghana  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
      without their father.


   4. It is evident that in reaching that conclusion the  reasoning  of  the
      judge was fully informed by the public interest arguments  that  arise
      in deportation cases and it is not arguable that the judge left out of
      account any material  factor  when  striking  a  balance  between  the
      competing interests in play.

   5. Even if the draftsman of the grounds for seeking permission to  appeal
      considered that this was not the only outcome possible, that does  not
      identify any arguable  error.  As  Lord  Carnwath  (as  he  then  was)
      observed at paragraph 40 in Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045:
           "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy, but they are
           not made easier or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
           analysis. It is of the nature of such judgments  that  different
           tribunals,  without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may   reach
           different conclusions on the same case (as is indeed illustrated
           by Mr Fountain's decision after the second  hearing).  The  mere
           fact that one tribunal has reached what may  seem  an  unusually
           generous view of the facts of a particular case  does  not  mean
           that it has made an error of law, so as  to  justify  an  appeal
           under the old system, or an order for reconsideration under  the
           new. Nor does it create  any  precedent,  so  as  to  limit  the
           Secretary of State's right  to  argue  for  a  more  restrictive
           approach on a similar case in the future. However, on the  facts
           of the particular case, the decision of the specialist  tribunal
           should be respected.


   6. I do not, in any event, consider this decision by  the  judge  is  one
      that discloses an "unusually  generous  view  of  the  facts".  It  is
      entirely clear from a reading of the determination as a whole why  the
      judge reached the conclusion she did. It is plainly apparent that  she
      has had regard to all that was material  and  arrived  at  conclusions
      that were rationally open to her and in respect of which she has given
      ample and sufficient reasons.


   7. Understandably, and realistically, Mr Staunton did not seek  to  offer
      any submissions in support of the grounds and I am entirely  satisfied
      that those grounds fail to identify any error of  law  by  the  judge,
      material or otherwise.


   Summary of decision:
   8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger made no material error of law and her
      decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.


   9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 16 August 2017

