
                                    [pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05039/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 November 2016                  |On 30 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal is against a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Sangha
    promulgated on 20 September  2016  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's  refusal  to  grant  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

2.    The  appellant  is  a  Pakistani  national.   He  entered  the  UK  in
    circumstances into which it is not necessary to go for present purposes
    and he claimed asylum on 6 November 2015, that claim being refused.

3.   A number of grounds were advanced before us. We can deal  very  quickly
    with ground 1, which is predicated upon what is nothing  more  than  an
    obvious typing error in the judge's determination. We need not go  into
    details about that mistake. It suffices to say that when the  paragraph
    in which it appears is read as a whole it is plain that  it  is  of  no
    materiality.

4.   Ground 2 is of more substance.  It is  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in consideration of the appeal because he may have
    considered the  appellant's  oral  and  written  evidence  first,  made
    certain findings based on his finding that the  appellant  was  of  low
    credibility and then considered the expert report, which, on  the  face
    of it at least, contains material which could be regarded as supportive
    of the appellant's case.  It is our opinion that this is  an  error  of
    law. A fair reading of the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    brings us to the conclusion that he has looked at the evidence  of  the
    appellant, has decided whether or not to accept it, and having  decided
    not to, has then looked at the report and considered  its  contents  in
    the light of his own finding that  the  appellant  lacked  credibility.
    This is an error.  It seems to us that what he ought to  have  done  is
    look at all the evidence  in  the  round  and  should  have  considered
    whether the contents of the expert's report could  have  supported  the
    appellant's credibility, and if they could have done, whether they  did
    so or not. It was an error to consider the appellant in isolation.   In
    these circumstances we are satisfied that ground 2 is made out.

5.   A number of other grounds were  advanced.  They  deal  with  particular
    criticisms of the First-tier Tribunal's treatment of the expert report.
     We do not think it appropriate to say very much about  those  at  this
    stage.  We have decided that this case must be reheard and if  we  were
    to say anything about these various matters it might be that  it  would
    influence unduly the consideration of the issue by another judge.

6.   It is to be noted also that we are somewhat  alarmed  that,  while  the
    expert in her report makes it plain that she has been  abused  and  may
    well be on the ground  in  a  delicate  and  dangerous  situation,  her
    request for anonymity was not taken up by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and we expect that that request will be noted in the future  and  acted
    upon.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is accordingly allowed.

Both parties were agreed that in view of the nature of the case and in  view
of the considerable evidence which has to be  considered  of  new  the  case
should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal before a different judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

