
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05879/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 May 2019                                 |On 3 June 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    SQAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Profumo instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order prohibiting the disclosure
    or publication of any matter likely to lead to members  of  the  public
    identifying the appellant or his children.  Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 14 July 1976.  He is
    a Kurd and comes from Sulaymaniyeh in the IKR.

 3. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 January 2013 as a student with a
    visa  to  undertake  a  PhD  at  Nottingham  University  funded  by   a
    scholarship from the Baghdad government.  His wife and  three  children
    joined him in the UK in April 2013.  His visa was subsequently extended
    until 30 January 2018 in order to allow him to complete his studies.

 4. On 1 November  2017,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum  based  upon  his
    political opinion as a result, he said, of threats due to his political
    social media posting against the government in the IKR.

 5. On 24 April 2018, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 23 August 2018, Judge Lever dismissed the appellant's appeal on
    all grounds including under Art 8.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal solely against the  dismissal
    of his appeal under Art 8.  Permission was  initially  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 28 September 2018 but on  4  December  2018  the
    Upper Tribunal (UTJ  Chalkley)  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.

 8. On 29 February 2019, the appeal was initially listed before  me  as  an
    error of law hearing.  At that hearing, the Secretary of State conceded
    that Judge Lever had failed adequately to consider the appellant's  Art
    8 claim, in particular the impact of the appellant's removal  upon  his
    children specifically his twin boys ('A' and 'M') aged 7 who have  been
    diagnosed with Autistic Spectrum  Disorder  ("ASD")  and  have  special
    educational needs.

 9. In a determination sent  on  13  March  2019,  in  agreement  with  the
    Secretary of State's concession, I set aside Judge Lever's decision  in
    relation to Art 8 directing that the decision be remade  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal at a further  hearing  at  which  further  evidence  could  be
    submitted in respect of the children's circumstances.

The Resumed Hearing

10. The appeal was listed before me on 9 May 2019.  At  that  hearing,  the
    appellant was represented by Ms L Profumo and the Secretary of State by
    Mr C Howells.

11. The sole issue was whether the appellant could establish  a  breach  of
    Art 8.

12. Both representatives sought to admit new evidence under rule 15(2A)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).  Both applications were unopposed.

13. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Profumo relied upon a  report  from  the
    special needs school at which the appellant's twins A and  M  were  now
    placed.

14. In addition, Ms Profumo relied upon in translation a  letter  from  the
    appellant's former employer, Sulaymaniyeh University  -  where  he  had
    been a lecturer before coming to the UK - which indicated that  due  to
    his unauthorised absence from work  following  the  completion  of  his
    period of study vacation, if he did not  return  within  30  days  from
    being abroad, he would be considered as "resigning" from his  position.
    That letter is dated 5 May 2018.

15. Mr Howells relied upon the CPIN, Iraq: Medical  and  Healthcare  Issues
    (May 2019); and two news reports printed from the  internet  concerned,
    inter alia, with the provision for those with autism in the IKR.

16. I heard brief oral evidence from the appellant himself.

17. I heard oral submissions from both  Ms  Profumo  and  Mr  Howells.   Ms
    Profumo handed up a detailed and helpful skeleton argument setting  out
    the appellant's case.

The Issues

18. It was common ground between the parties that the appellant  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended)  either  under
    Appendix FM or on the basis of his private life and  para  276ADE.   It
    was also accepted that none of the appellant's children -  in  addition
    to the twins he also has a daughter ("S") aged 13 - nor his wife  could
    succeed under the Rules.

19. A number of matters were common ground between the parties.

20. First, the appellant's claim was a claim under Art 8 outside the Rules.
     Secondly, the appellant's claim was based upon his (and his  family's)
    private life in the UK, in particular the impact upon his twin sons  if
    he were removed to the IKR.  The reality in this appeal is that  either
    all the family stay in the UK or all the family leave and return to the
    IKR.  Mr Howells did not suggest otherwise in his submissions. Thirdly,
    the crucial issue was that of proportionality under Art  8.2.   It  was
    not suggested, nor could it be on  the  basis  of  the  evidence,  that
    Art.8.1 was not engaged based upon the impact upon the family  if  they
    returned to the IKR.  Both  representatives  agreed  that  the  crucial
    issue in determining whether any  interference  was  proportionate  was
    whether there were sufficiently compelling  circumstances  which  would
    result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences" for the appellant  or  his
    family (see, R (Agyarko and Another) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [60]).

The Submissions

21. On behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that
    s.117B(1) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    (the "NIA Act 2002") was important.  As the appellant  and  his  family
    could not meet any of the requirements of the Rules, the maintenance of
    effective immigration control was in the public interest by  virtue  of
    s.117B(1).  Further, the private life of the appellant and  his  family
    had been established whilst their immigration status  was  "precarious"
    and, therefore, should be given "little weight" by virtue of s.117B(5).

22. Mr Howells recognised that the  principal  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    claim related to the impact of removal of his twins, A and M who have a
    diagnosis of ASD.  Mr Howells accepted  that  the  background  evidence
    showed that there was "limited" support for autism in the IKR  but,  he
    submitted, there was some provision.  He referred me  to  a  number  of
    documents.

23. First, he referred me  to  the  "Cara  Report:  A  Study  of  Education
    Opportunities for Disabled  Children  and  Youth  and  Early  Childhood
    Development (ECD) in Iraq (April  2011)"  at  pages  CB  40-82  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  At CB 73 he referred to a section relating to  the
    IKR under the heading "schools"  identifying  a  higher  percentage  of
    special needs teachers with formal special needs training  showing  the
    "growing effectiveness of the Kurdistan Inclusion  Education  Programme
    (KIEP)".  Then at CB 50, the  KIEP  programme  is  discussed  including
    referring to  the  provision  of  an  "early  learning  programme"  for
    children with disabilities.  Then at CB 65-66 further reference is made
    to special needs teachers, albeit on an Iraq  wide  basis  rather  than
    specifically in the IKR, but also notes that the KIEP nevertheless  had
    opposition from "some members of the Erbil Provincial Counsel, who view
    KIEP as pushing a western 'construct'."

24. Secondly, Mr Howells referred to the very recent May 2019  CPIN  report
    at para 15.1.1 referring to the existence of "private institutions" for
    individuals with autism and Downs Syndrome charging $250 monthly.  When
    I enquired of Mr  Howell  whether  this  related  to  the  IKR  or  the
    remainder of Iraq, he was unable to assist.

25. Thirdly, he referred me to the two newspaper  reports  arising  out  of
    'World Autism Awareness Day' in  2019  and  the  provision  of  "twenty
    autism-designed centers in the Kurdistan region, seventeen of which are
    private."  He accepted however that provision did not meet demand.   Mr
    Howells was unable to  assist  as  to  whether  these  "autism-designed
    centers" provided education or, as would appear  from  the  text,  some
    form of "treatment" for children with autism.

26. Mr Howells submitted that the appellant could generate income in  order
    to allow his twins to attend one of these autism-designed centers.   He
    had been a lecturer in Sulaymaniyeh University and now had a PhD.

27. Mr Howells submitted that, despite  what  the  appellant  said  in  his
    evidence, it was likely that the  children  had,  at  least  initially,
    spoken Kurdish before and not just, as the appellant claimed,  and  the
    recent report stated, they now spoke English.

28. Mr Howells submitted that, having regard to  all  these  circumstances,
    there were no compelling circumstances  giving  rise  to  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences to the family, in particular the twin boys, A and  M
    so as to outweigh the public interest.

29. Ms Profumo relied  upon  her  very  detailed  skeleton  argument.   She
    submitted that the twin had initially been in a mainstream  school  but
    had even there they had required 1:1 support.  It had been  recommended
    that they  should  have  special  educational  provision  and  that  in
    September 2018, they had been  placed  in  a  specialist  school.   She
    referred me to a letter from the head teacher dated 3 April 2019  which
    indicated that the ratio  was  six  pupils:  three  adults.   But,  she
    submitted it was clear that they still required 1:1 support on specific
    occasions.

30. Ms Profumo placed  considerable  reliance  upon  the  report  from  the
    specialist school which showed that both A and M were  progressing  and
    thriving relative to their progress whilst they were  in  a  mainstream
    school.  She submitted that they  were  both  in  a  highly  supportive
    environment which would simply  not  be  available  in  the  IKR.   She
    submitted that the background material showed that there was  a  dearth
    of special educational provision, albeit that there was some within the
    mainstream  context.   There  was  no  evidence  that  there  were  any
    specialist schools of the kind which both A and M required and at which
    they were placed in the UK.  She submitted that  the  twins  could  not
    cope with mainstream school in the UK and they would not be able to  do
    so in the IKR.  The evidence about private institution  was  that  they
    were essentially treatment or support centres.  Nothing in the material
    suggested that they were  educational  institutions  such  as  the  one
    attended by the twins in the UK.  She pointed  out  that  the  evidence
    showed that there were 2,800 cases of children diagnosed with autism in
    the IKR.  The second letter made  plain  that  there  was  "not  enough
    support centres or funding to care for them".  She submitted  that  the
    private provision was not, in itself, adequate for the children but  in
    any event the appellant would not  be  able  to  afford  to  place  his
    children there.  It was expensive and his evidence, which he invited me
    to accept, was that he was unlikely to be able to obtain a job.

31. She relied not only upon the impact upon A and  M  but  also  upon  the
    appellant's daughter, S and his wife.  They had been in the UK for over
    six years, the twins were 1 year old when they came and S was  7.   The
    evidence was, she  submitted,  that  the  children  spoke  English,  in
    particular in the report of the school which the twins now attended.

32. She submitted, relying upon matters  set  out  in  paras  9-20  of  her
    skeleton in relation to A and M and in para 21 in  relation  to  S  and
    para 22 in relation to the appellant and his wife, that the appellant's
    removal would not be in the best interests of the three  children  and,
    particularly having regard to the impact  upon  A  and  M,  there  were
    sufficiently compelling circumstances to outweigh the  public  interest
    as there would  be  an  unjustifiably  harsh  consequence  to  them  if
    returned to the IKR.

Discussion

33. I deal first with the appellant's oral evidence.  I accept what he told
    me.  I have no doubt that he was seeking to tell  me  the  truth.   He,
    like his wife, was employed at Sulaymaniyeh University before they came
    to the UK.  I accept his oral evidence supported by the letter dated  7
    May 2018, that he has now been sacked.  He told me in his oral evidence
    that two further letters had confirmed that he had been sacked  but  he
    had not produced them.  Mr Howells did not seek to cross-examine him on
    this matter to suggest that he was not telling the truth and, as I say,
    I accept that he has lost his job.  I also accept his evidence that his
    wife has lost her job as well.  I accept further that it will  be  very
    difficult  for  them  to  obtain   employment,   certainly   employment
    permitting them to afford any private support for their twins A and  M,
    on return to the IKR.  I also accept the appellant's evidence that  his
    family in the IKR would not be able to provide the required finance for
    private support for the twins.  I accept his evidence  that  his  three
    brothers are unemployed, his parents are very old and his  two  sisters
    are married living with their husbands and family.  None  are  employed
    and they are uneducated.

34. Ms Profumo helpfully set out the evidence concerning M and A at paras 9-
    16 of her skeleton argument.  Mr Howells acknowledged  her  summary  of
    their circumstances is accurate.  They have both  been  diagnosed  with
    ASD and suffer from sensory and developmental needs.   The  appellant's
    own evidence, which I accept, was that:

         "everything is difficult for them, eating, changing clothes,  going
         to the toilet...if they meet strangers who do not understand how to
         deal with autism, they cry, they shout, sometimes they run away".

35. Both children have, until September of last year, been in a  mainstream
    school.  They have  been  assessed  as  requiring  special  educational
    needs, including 1:1 teacher support.  The needs of M  are  more  acute
    than those of his brother A.  As I have said, Mr  Howells  acknowledged
    as accurate Ms Profumo's summary of M and A's circumstances set out  at
    paras 11-14 of her skeleton argument.  There, she very  carefully,  and
    in detail by reference to the documents upon which she places reliance,
    sets out their circumstances.   I  accept  what  she  sets  out  and  I
    gratefully adopt it (with  removal  of  her  emphasis  and  identifying
    information, and with some typographical/citation corrections) as  part
    of my decision.  (The reference to the "EHCP" reviews  in  relation  to
    both M and A is to their respective "Education,  Health  &  Care  Plan"
    review in the appellant's bundle ("AB").)

         "11, The EHCP review of [M], dated 30 March 2017 [AB/127-137],  who
             suffers from the most acute needs,  identifies  the  following
             concerns:

             i.   He shows no awareness or interest in other  children  and
                  reciprocal activities [AB/A129&130].

             ii.  His speech is unclear and easier to understand by  adults
                  'tuned into him' [A129].

             iii. He continues to require 1:1 support to facilitate  access
                  to all areas of curriculum, as  well  as  for  health  and
                  safety [AB/A135].

             iv.  He requires help to dress and undress [AB/A131].

             v.   Continues to require close supervision and clear explicit
                  boundaries to remain safe at all times [AB/A131].

             vi.  "As the  gap  between  [M]  and  his  peers  widens,  his
                  reliance on an adult to access the curriculum at [...]  is
                  unlikely to reduce which will impact on [M's]  ability  to
                  develop greater independence" [AB/135].

             vii. His progress has been minimal despite the high  level  of
                  sustained support he receives [AB/A135].

             viii.    The school does not have the capacity to  meet  [M's]
                  needs appropriately or to provide the level of support  he
                  requires to increase to his  time  to  a  full-time  place
                  [AB/A132].

             ix.  [M] requires a specialist school  setting,  with  smaller
                  class sizes, a higher ratio of staff support, and  a  peer
                  group with similar needs with whom he is  best  placed  to
                  access learning [AB/A135].

             x.   The benefits of a move  to  specialist  school  would  be
                  "greater focus on  communication,  interaction,  and  life
                  skills", and in  the  long-term  greater  independence  on
                  reduced reliance on an adult [AB/A135].

         12.  The parallel EHCP review of [A] [AB/A146-154]  identifies  the
             following concerns:

             i.   He does not initiate or respond to peers [AB/A148].

             ii.  Even with his 1:1 support, it is  difficult  for  him  to
                  remain seated for more than 2-3 minutes [A149].

             iii. He will take every opportunity  to  test  the  boundaries
             [A150].

             iv.  He continues to need 1:1 full time support to  engage  in
                  curriculum activities and for health and safety [AB/A152].

             v.   "As the  gap  between  [A]  and  his  peers  widens,  his
                  reliance on an adult to access the curriculum at [...]  is
                  unlikely to reduce which will impact on [M's]  ability  to
                  develop greater independence" [AB/A153]

             vi.  The school does not have the capacity to meet [A's] needs
                  appropriately or  to  provide  the  level  of  support  he
                  requires  to  increase  his  time  to  a  full-time  place
                  [AB/A151].

             vii. [A] requires a specialist school setting as [...]  unable
                  to provide an environment and curriculum conducive to  his
                  progress;  he  would  benefit  from  smaller,   specialist
                  classes with peers with similar needs [AB/A153].

         13.  The twins were thereafter admitted to [...] Primary School,  a
             mainstream school in Bristol, on 11 September 2017, where they
             are similarly supported with SEN [see letter from  SENDco,  Ms
             Williams, at AB/A126].  When the family relocated  to  Cardiff
             in February 2018,  the  local  authority  re-investigated  the
             children's education needs, with the following observations:

                  "these two boys are very complex and would not do well  in
                  a local mainstream school even with full time 1:1 teaching
                  assistant support.  They are both  very  limited  verbally
                  (echolalic  and  key  words),   PECS   (Picture   Exchange
                  Communication System) users, can be very  challenging  and
                  have a very limited sense of danger".

                  They are definitely  special  Autistic  Spectrum  Disorder
                  profile pupils.  Being  without  a  school  placement  and
                  daily routine will also be having a significant impact  on
                  their  wellbeing"  [see  letter  from   Mr   Martin,   SEN
                  caseworker, AB/125].

         14.  In view of such  needs,  Cardiff  SEN  Casework  Team  advised
             [t]hat the twins required specialist educational provision for
             those on the autism spectrum [AB/125].  This was  corroborated
             by the proposed amended statements of special education  needs
             (date June 2018), which advised:

             (a)  [M]:

                  (i)  Unable to independently  access  any  aspect  of  the
                      curriculum [AB/A190].

                  (ii) Only able to concentrate on activities  with  a  high
                      degree of structure and support [AB/A190].

                  (iii)    His speech is  unclear  and  best  understood  by
                      those families with him [AB/A190].

                  (iv) He doesn't initiate interaction with  other  children
                      [AB/A190].

                  (v)  He suffers from ASD and certain  sensory  needs,  his
                      special  educational  needs   likely   due   to   his
                      communication and language difficulties [AB/A190].

                  (vi) He will require specialist education  provision  that
                      provides  a  high  level  of  individual/small  group
                      teaching, with a high adult-pupil  ratio,  and  staff
                      experienced/trained in managing the needs of children
                      with autism spectrum condition and  with  appropriate
                      interventions [AB/A191].

                  (vii)    He should also have access  to  a  clinical-based
                      Speech & language Therapist [AB/A191].

                  (viii)   He will require close  supervision  for  his  own
                      safety, and help with his independence skills such as
                      dressing [AB/A192].

                  (ix) There should be close  liaison  between  the  school,
                      home and outside  agencies  to  ensure  a  consistent
                      approach  and   regularly   review   [M's]   progress
                      [AB/A192].

             (b)  [A]:

                  (i)  He has limited  speech,  requiring  adults  to  model
                      short phrases and develop his language [AB/A199].

                  (ii) He suffers from ASD and his  certain  sensory  needs,
                      his  special  education  needs  likely  due  to   his
                      difficulties  with  his  social   communication   and
                      language [AB/199].

                  (iii)    He will require specialist educational  provision
                      that provides a high level of individual/small  group
                      teaching, with a high adult-pupil  ratio,  and  staff
                      experienced/trained in managing the needs of children
                      with autism spectrum condition and  with  appropriate
                      interventions [AB/A200].

                  (iv) He should also have access to a clinical-based Speech
                      & Language Therapist [AB/A200].

                  (v)  He will require close supervision for his own  safety
                      with the school needing to complete a risk assessment
                      [AB/A200].

                  (vi) There should be close  liaison  between  the  school,
                      home and outside  agencies  to  ensure  a  consistent
                      approach  and   regularly   review   [A's]   progress
                      [AB/A201]."

36. Since September 2018, they have attended a specialist school in Cardiff
    and the position there is summarised at paras 15 and 16 of Ms Profumo's
    skeleton argument as follows.

         "15. The twins accordingly started at the [...] Special  School  in
             September 2018, a specialist school for pupils  with  Autistic
             Spectrum Condition [AB/A125; A186].  .... further evidence has
             been submitted...of the twins' most recent  annual  review  at
             their new school [SB].  [...], the head teacher, confirms both
             pupils receive their education in a small class setting,  with
             a high adult-pupil ratio (1:2).  She observes both children:

                  "have  social   communication   and   social   interaction
                  challenges and require 1:1 support at  specific  times  of
                  the school day in order to access the  curriculum  and  to
                  develop life  skills  required  within  their  development
                  stage" [SB].

         16.  The recent school reviews of both children [SB]  confirm  they
             have thrived within their  specialist  education  settings  as
             relative to their progress in the former mainstream schools:

             (a)  [M]

                  (i)   He  has  made  good  progress   in   engaging   with
                  activities.

                  (ii) He benefits from the structured play in the classroom
                      environment    and    engages    well    with     the
                      individual/class schedules [page 8].

                  (iii)    He has made good progress with self-help  skills,
                      able to put his coat on and toilet independently.

                  (iv) His numeracy and literacy skills have improved.

             (b)  [A]:

                  (i)  He has improved his communication skills,  showing  a
                      clear understanding  of  spoken  language  and  using
                      increasingly varied  spontaneous  language  [internal
                      page 7/8].

                  (ii) He has made good progress with his early literacy and
                      numeracy skills [page 9].

                  (v)  He is able to complete a variety of tasks,  within  a
                      "highly structured environment" [page 7].

                  (vi) His  concentration  is  developing  when  engaged  in
                      independent learning [page 7].

                  (vii)    His social and play skill  are  developing  [page
                      8].

                  (viii)   He is independent with  toileting,  though  still
                      requires supervision [page 9].

                  (ix) Whilst aware of certain sensory aspects,  he  remains
                      unaware of the danger so his actions [10]."

37. I accept Ms Profumo's submission that the  position  of  M  and  A  has
    improved at a specialist school for those with a diagnosis of ASD where
    they obtain a high level  of  support  including  where  necessary  1:1
    support.  The level of support is patently high and the improvement  is
    over, an already significant level of special  needs  provision,  which
    they previously received whilst they were in a mainstream school.

38. It is clear to me on the evidence that the level  of  support  that  is
    required and which they receive in the UK will simply not be  available
    in the IKR.  Added to which, I accept  the  appellant's  evidence  that
    they only speak English.  The confusion of being in a situation where a
    foreign language (to them) is being spoken can only, on any reading  of
    the material concerned with  their  particular  circumstances,  have  a
    deleterious effect upon them.

39. Although Mr Howells sought to identify  from  the  background  material
    support that would be available to the twins in the  IKR,  he  candidly
    accepted it was "limited".  The special  needs  support  in  mainstream
    schools is very limited indeed.  Ms Profumo referred, as para 18 of her
    skeleton argument, to a CBS news report, albeit dated 10  August  2008,
    where it was said that "the problem for autistic children in  Iraq...is
    that nothing is known about this condition".  It may be that  the  more
    recent material shows some improvement.  Nevertheless,  the  USSD  2007
    Report states that:

         "There were reports  that  persons  with  disabilities  experienced
         discrimination due to social  stigma...local  NGO's  reported  many
         children with disabilities dropped out  of  public  school  due  to
         insufficient  physical  access  to  school  buildings,  a  lack  of
         appropriate learning  materials  in  schools,  and  a  shortage  of
         teachers qualified  to  work  with  children  of  developmental  or
         intellectual disabilities."

40. Whilst the Cara Report recognises that there is some  provision  within
    schools in the IKR under the KIEP, it also  recognises  that  there  is
    resistance.  The report refers to the

         "Average special-needs teacher to  special-needs  pupil  ratio  was
         1:8, although 14% of the schools visited with special-needs  pupils
         had no special-needs teacher.  The remaining 86% had at  least  one
         special-education teacher, the majority of whom are  female.   Most
         of the special-needs pupils were not integrated within the standard
         school rooms.  Special-needs classes observed were held  away  from
         the main classes, and are often located in unsuitable areas  within
         the school building, e.g. in a store room without windows and under
         a school stairwell.  The curriculum being taught was  the  standard
         curriculum."

41. This report does not relate exclusively to the IKR although the enquiry
    included visiting five primary schools in the  Erbil  governorate  (see
    para 10.9 at CB 65 - 66).  It is plain that the provision  contemplated
    would fall far short of that provided to the  twins  whilst  they  were
    being educated in the mainstream in the UK.  The latter,  however,  was
    insufficient to meet their needs such that they have now been placed in
    a special needs school where they are provided even  more  intense  and
    focussed education and support.  It is the latter which has resulted in
    their improvement which  Ms  Profumo  recognised  had  occurred.   They
    remain, however, desperately in need of that support in order to fulfil
    their educational and wellbeing needs given their ASD diagnosis.

42. The evidence relied upon by Mr Howells in  the  two  newspaper  reports
    provides little support for any  educational  provision  sufficient  to
    meet the twins needs.  Seventeen of the  autism  designed  centers  are
    private.  Only three in the IKR are state supported.  There is  a  very
    real danger that the twins  will  not  be  able  to  access  the  state
    provision.  I accept the appellant's evidence that he would not be able
    to afford to send them to the private autism-designed  centers  whether
    the cost is US$250 monthly per child or,  as  the  appellant  said,  he
    believed, US$500 monthly.  The second news report makes the prospect of
    the  twins  obtaining  the  support  provided  by  these  centres  most
    unlikely.  It states:

         "Nearly 1,000 children with autism  live  in  Erbil  province,  but
         there is only one center for treatment.  It currently cares for  32
         children..."

43. In any event, it is wholly unclear from these news reports what is  the
    actual provision to children who  attend  one  of  the  autism-designed
    centers.  The reports speak of "treatment" received at the centers.  It
    is far from clear that they are the educational equivalent of what  was
    being received by the twins in mainstream  education  in  the  UK,  let
    alone in the specialist school that they now attend and in  which  they
    are, on all the evidence I have seen, thriving and doing much better in
    their development and education.

44. Although I do take into account the impact upon the appellant, his wife
    and 13 year old daughter if they were removed to the IKR, at  least  as
    regards the appellant and his wife, I agree that s.117B(5)  means  that
    "little weight" should be given to their private life.  It may well  be
    also that although S is 13 and has lived in the UK since she was 7, her
    best interests would be to live with her parents in IKR if they  return
    there  in that it would be reasonable to expect her to return with them
    (see, KO (Nigeria) and Another v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 at  [18]).   That,
    however, cannot be said of M and A.  It is clearly, in my judgment,  in
    their best interest to remain in the UK given  the  deleterious  effect
    upon them as a result of the  removal  of  their  education  and  other
    support for the ASD which would, in  my  judgment,  in  all  likelihood
    occur if they return to the IKR.  A and M were  1-year  old  when  they
    came to the UK and they are now 7 years of age.  Whilst  their  private
    life was also formed whilst their immigration status was  "precarious",
    their circumstances (particularly bearing in mind  their  diagnosis  of
    ASD) falls, in my judgment, for the flexible application  of  s.117B(5)
    read with s.117A(2)(a) recognised by the Supreme Court  in  Rhuppiah  v
    SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 at [49].  There are in my  judgment,  "particularly
    strong features" relating to their private life and their circumstances
    which justify giving due weight to the impact upon their  private  life
    if removed.

45. I am satisfied that the impact upon A and M if removed to the IKR would
    be substantial, significant and highly deleterious to  their  education
    and developmental progress as a result of  their  ASD.   Their  current
    progress would, in all likelihood, be 'stopped in its tracks' resulting
    in behavioural and other detriments to them which  would,  necessarily,
    have a considerable impact  upon  their  family,  in  particular  their
    parents who would be caring for them.   In  my  judgment,  that  impact
    amounts  to  sufficiently  compelling  circumstances  because  of   the
    unjustifiably harsh consequences removal would have for the family, but
    in particular for A and M in the IKR.  As a result, I am satisfied that
    the circumstances I have set out above  outweigh  the  public  interest
    such that A and M's removal would be  a  disproportionate  interference
    with their private life.  Their removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.
     As it has never been suggested that the  appellant,  his  wife  and  S
    should leave the UK if A and  M's  removal  would  breach  Art  8,  the
    reality is that all of the family cannot lawfully be removed  from  the
    UK in accordance with Art 8 of the ECHR.

46. I accordingly remake the decision and allow the appeal under Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

Decision

47. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on international protection and humanitarian protection  grounds
    stands.

48. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 was set aside in the Upper Tribunal's decision sent  on  13
    March 2019.

49. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 29 May 2019





