
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05457/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th August 2019                  |On 24 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     ZA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bashow, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  in  the  light  of  the
    circumstances surrounding this claim.  Unless and until a court directs
    otherwise the Appellant is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly refer to him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The background:

 2. The appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Smith)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination promulgated on the  27  February  2019,
    dismissed his protection and human rights claim.

 3. The background to the appellant's claim is set out in the determination
    of the FtTJ and in the decision letter of the Secretary of State issued
    on the 15th April 2018.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. He claimed to have  arrived  in
    the UK on the 10th April 2008 on a student visa which  expired  on  the
    31st December 2009.

 5. On the  20th  May  2010  he  applied  for  a  certificate  of  approval
    (marriage) to an EEA citizen and he entered into a Nikkah ceremony with
    her but before the notice of refusal was served, on  the  28th  January
    2011, the relationship had dissolved.  He was served with an  IS15A  on
    the 13th October 2013.

 6. He made a claim for asylum on the 13th October 2016 and that claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on the 15th April 2018.

 7. The respondent set out the factual  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim,
    namely that he was a Shia Muslim from xxxxxxxx and  that  he  supported
    the Pakistan People's Party (PPP). He became the local youth  president
    in 2005 and in January 2007, the PPP won an election and he began to be
    threatened by the Taliban.

 8. On 6 August 2007, the appellant stated that  his  home  was  raided  by
    Sunni Muslims, he was kidnapped he believes as a  result  of  his  Shia
    faith and due to his involvement with the PPP. He was detained and ill-
    treated for five days. It was stated that members of a religious  group
    had filed blasphemy charges against him.

 9. A man who was the chairman of the PPP that he  previously  worked  with
    help secure his release by pretending that he wanted to kill him and on
    the proviso that he left Pakistan. The appellant went  into  hiding  in
    Islamabad and subsequently left Pakistan on a student visa, arriving in
    the UK. The man who would help him  stained  his  clothes  with  animal
    blood and made an unmarked grave in his name  so  that  the  kidnappers
    thought that he was dead.

10. In 2010 he received a telephone call from his father  stating  that  it
    was unsafe for Shia people to return. He stated that he had  not  heard
    from his parents since then.

11. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal came before the FtTJ and in a decision promulgated on  the  14th
    April 2009 his appeal was dismissed.

12. Permission to appeal that decision was sought refused by FtTJ Welsh but
    was granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup on the  9th  July
    2019 for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal misconstrued the  test
         for  internal  relocation.  Having  accepted  that  there   is   an
         insufficiency of  state  protection  for  Hazara  Shia  Muslims  in
         Pakistan,  the  section  of  the   decision   addressing   internal
         relocation fails to factor in the insufficiency of  protection,  or
         otherwise explain  how  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  access
         sufficient protection in the  place  of  proposed  relocation.  The
         other grounds have limited merit, but all grounds may be argued."

13. The appeal was therefore listed before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  At  that
    hearing the appellant was represented  by  Ms  Bashow  of  Counsel  who
    appeared  before  the  FtTJ,  and  had  drafted  the  grounds,  and  Ms
    Petterson,  Senior  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

14. I was able to hear detailed submission from  the  advocates  and  I  am
    grateful to both advocates for their  assistance  on  the  issues  that
    arise in the grounds advanced on behalf of  the  appellant.  I  confirm
    that I  have  considered  those  submissions  in  accordance  with  the
    decision of the FtTJ and the grounds which had been  filed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal. I further confirm that I have given full  consideration
    to those submissions which I have heard.

The submissions of the parties:

15. Dealing with ground 1, Ms Bashow  submits that the FTT J misapplied the
    internal relocation test on the basis that he failed to give due weight
    to his earlier findings that the appellant could not obtain  sufficient
    state protection from Sunni Muslims whom had previously persecuted  the
    appellant, had ill -treated him and the accusations made of blasphemy.

16. She submitted that his findings on state protection  were  set  out  at
    paragraphs 140 -  146  and  that  those  findings  should  be  read  in
    conjunction with the findings he made in relation to Shia  Muslims  and
    that Hazara Shia's are a minority within that  minority.  However,  the
    FtTJ's assessment of internal relocation at paragraphs 147 -  187  made
    no reference to the lack of state protection or to the  extent  of  the
    appellant's vulnerability in the place of relocation from the  lack  of
    protection from the authorities.

17. In this  context,  Ms  Bashow  directed  the  Tribunal's  attention  to
    paragraph 18 of the grounds which cited the decision of Januzi  v  SSHD
    [2006] 2 WLR 397 at paragraph 21.

18. She submitted that at paragraph 161, the FtTJ  considered  whether  the
    appellant could access employment and noted that there was a measure of
    discrimination but then dismissed it.  The country  materials  at  page
    330 made reference to discrimination in employment. Similarly  at  page
    350, the material stated that  Hazara  Shi'ites  were  reported  to  be
    disproportionately  vulnerable  due  to  their  visibility   which   is
    reflected in the percentage of  Hazara's  among  victims  of  sectarian
    violence and attacks and that threats  and  risks  of  attacks  imposed
    severe restrictions on their freedom of movement and  their  access  to
    livelihoods and education. She submitted that this built up  a  picture
    of a vulnerable person due to his ethnic and religious background.

19. Ms Bashow submitted that the appellant would be a target of attacks and
    that they were due  to  his  appearance  which  identified  his  ethnic
    background, there was a lack of family connection (he did not come from
    Karachi  or  Islamabad)  and  the  nature  and  duration  of  the  past
    persecution  was  a  relevant  factor.  Those  matters  had  not   been
    considered in the issue of internal relocation. The FtTJ's reference at
    paragraph 157 to spending his  formative  years  in  Pakistan  did  not
    include any references to past persecution. Therefore when taking  into
    account those factors, the FtTJ erred in law as there was no  reference
    to the lack of state protection.

20. As to Ground 2, Ms Bashow submitted that the FtTJ  at paragraphs 176  -
    181 focused on the number of sectarian attacks against Shia Muslims and
    at paragraph 178 he concluded that  it  must  be  assessed  within  the
    context  of  the  attacks.  However,  she   submitted   the   test   of
    reasonableness or relocation is not the same as demonstrating a risk of
    indiscriminate violence as per Article 15 (c ). The relevant factor  is
    the appellant's vulnerability as a member  of  a  minority  ethnic  and
    religious group (Hazara  Shia's)  and  the  lack  of  state  protection
    including legal redress from Sunni Muslims as well as  his  ability  to
    economically survive within the context.

21. Ms Bashow highlighted the conclusions reached by  the  judge  and  that
    they were in her submission, "questionable". For example, at  paragraph
    176, the conclusion that Islamabad had a population of 2 million Shia's
    did not factor into account  the  number  of  Hazara  Shia's;  and  the
    conclusion that  10%  is  a  "relatively  large  proportion  of  ethnic
    minorities" fails to explain relative to what? At paragraph 181  Hazara
    Shia's at the lowest figure number 650,000 out of 197 million which  is
    a very small percentage. It is unclear what the judge  meant  by  this.
    There is also no consideration of the  concentration  of  violence  and
    that at page 28, paragraph 11 of the expert report he noted that 80% of
    sectarian violence took place in Karachi and Baluchistan in 2016.

22. In relation to ground 3,  she  submitted  that  the  FTT  J  failed  to
    consider the appellant's past history and employment in the context  of
    his situation. At paragraphs 161-167, the judge gave too much weight to
    the fact that he was able to get a  university  degree  and  a  job  in
    Karachi without considering that he last worked in Karachi in 2004,  15
    years ago and had a degree in 2003 16 years ago and that he  his  claim
    in interview  (question  11)  was  that  he  left  Karachi  because  of
    sectarian attacks but gave no consideration to those aspects.

23. Similarly the assessment of family support was  not  fair.  He  made  a
    reference to the medical records and this is a  reference  to  February
    2010, but the appellant said it had no contact since February 2010. The
    medical notes and  not  a  signed  statement  and  there  was  no  fair
    opportunity to explain.

24.  Ms  Bashow  therefore  submitted  that  the  decision  of   the   FtTJ
    demonstrated the making of an  error  of  law  but  in  preserving  the
    positive findings and applying his assessment  of  the  sufficiency  of
    protection, the appeal should be remade by being allowed.

25. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that whilst the FtTJ
    had accepted some of the applicants history, it is plain  from  reading
    the findings of fact that he did not accept all that had  been  claimed
    by him-he did not accept that he had been the subject of any  blasphemy
    accusations that had led  to  the  matter  going  any  further  and  in
    particular there was no outstanding issues with any court  proceedings.
    Nor did the FtTJ accept that the Taleban were pursuing him.

26. It was against that background that the FtTJ had considered  the  issue
    of internal relocation by reference to  other  places  within  Pakistan
    including Karachi or  Islamabad  and  took  a  number  of  issues  into
    account. Those issues included  his  education  at  paragraph  154  and
    whilst he made reference to discrimination in relation  to  employment,
    the FtTJ took into account the appellant's evidence that  when  pressed
    in cross-examination he admitted that he thought it could get a job  in
    Pakistan. The judge took into account that his ethnicity  or  religious
    background had not prevented  from  obtaining  a  university  education
    therefore the judge was entitled to take into account those matters  in
    assessing  whether  he  was  vulnerable  in  the  place   of   internal
    relocation.

27. As to family members, he stated that he had not spoken to family  since
    2010. Whilst the point made on behalf of the  appellant  was  that  the
    reference to the medical notes in 2010 was not put  to  the  appellant,
    however the judge made reference to later medical evidence which  post-
    dated 2010 at paragraphs 164 - 165 reflected in the  medical  notes  at
    page 100 which made reference to the appellant's relative  in  Pakistan
    prescribing diazepam. It also stated that he was  "well  educated"  and
    that he was a pharmacist in Pakistan (see page 103). Also at  page  103
    there is further reference to using medication  in  Pakistan  (November
    2016).

28. Ms Petterson submitted that the criticism mounted on the basis  of  the
    failure to take into account the expert  report  about  the  number  of
    attacks in Pakistan was not made out. She submitted that at page 27  of
    the report there was a table showing  sectarian  violence  in  Pakistan
    1989 - 2017. Whilst the submission was made that the  judge  failed  to
    take into account information set out at page 28 of the expert  report,
    that referred to a report of 2012  and  2016.  However  the  judge  was
    entitled to look at the table and the number of attacks in  that  table
    which showed a reduction in 2014 and also in 2016 and  2017.  Therefore
    the judge was clearly aware of the incidents referred to in the report.

29. She submitted that it was open to the FtTJ to reject the expert  report
    for the reasons given at paragraph 167-the expert had not  demonstrated
    that he was aware of the appellant's collocations, his  skills  or  how
    much work he had undertaken in Pakistan prior to leaving  that  country
    and therefore his opinion on this issue relating to the support network
    was not supported by a full assessment by the expert.

30. Ms Petterson submitted that when considering the issue  of  sufficiency
    of protection, it was open to the FtTJ  to  consider  the  threat  from
    Sunni Muslims when considering the issue of  internal  relocation.  The
    judge took into account a number of  factors  which  would  demonstrate
    that there was nothing to suggest that he would  be  located  by  those
    from his home area and that this was relevant to applying  the  correct
    test for internal relocation.

31. By way of reply, Ms Bashow submitted  that  in  relation  to  obtaining
    medication, the appellant stated that  he'd  obtained  medication  from
    Pakistan  from  people  who  would  visit  that  country  and  bringing
    medication (question four). Furthermore, it was whether  the  appellant
    had access to family support network in the place  of  relocation  (see
    paragraph 230 of AK). She further submitted that the fact that  he  had
    been educated was of little relevance when living in environment  where
    there are civil problems for which there was no protection. Looking  at
    the appellant circumstances having had 10  years  absence;  his  mental
    health would impact on his internal relocation. Those on abilities  had
    not been properly taken into account.

32. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Decision on the error of law:

33. Having the  opportunity  to  hear  those  detailed  submissions,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the FtTJ did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law. I shall set out my reasons for reaching that  decision
    below.

34. Before addressing those submissions  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  a
    summary of the decision made by  the  FtTJ  and  the  analysis  of  the
    relevant issues before the Tribunal.

The decision of the FtTJ:

35. The FtTJ set out the issues and paragraphs 24 - 34 of his decision.  It
    was accepted that the appellant was a national Pakistan, a Shia  Muslim
    and was of  Hazara  ethnicity.  It  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that if the appellant  had  established  his  factual  claim
    (which was disputed)  that  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to relocate to  Islamabad  or  Karachi  or  a  similar  city.
    Furthermore, if he did establish his claim, there  was  sufficiency  of
    state protection. In support of the appellant's claim, an expert report
    had been submitted by  Dr  Giustozzi  (A12-23)  and  the  report  of  a
    psychotherapist.

36. The findings of fact of the FtTJ are summarised as follows:

      a)  having  considered  the  evidence,  the  FtTJ  accepted  that  the
         appellant had injuries to his person which were consistent with hot
         rods being placed on his flesh as claimed. The FtTJ found that  the
         scarring was consistent with some form  of  torture  and  therefore
         accepted the appellant account ( see [108]-[110]).

      b) On the basis that his home area was a tribal area, the judge  found
         that it is plausible that the appellant's kidnappers  released  the
         appellant to Mr S if he had convinced them  that  he  had  his  own
         reasons to want to kill the appellant (see [111]).

      c) As to the issue of blasphemy, the judge  accepted  the  appellant's
         account that when he was kidnapped, he was accused of blasphemy  by
         some Sunni Muslims but found that the accusation  went  no  further
         (see [113]).

      d) There  was  no  evidence  of  the  police  seeking  to  locate  the
         appellant, for example, searching the family home and there was  no
         evidence of any FIR being issued and there are no court proceedings
         (see [114 - 116]).

      e) The judge rejected his account that had been threatened with  death
         by the Taleban for the following reasons:

          i) he made no  mention  of  any  such  threat  in  his  screening
             interview,

         ii) in his detailed and comprehensive statement (dated 12/4/17) he
             made no reference at all to the  Taleban  or  any  threatening
             letters from them.

        iii) The appellant asserted that the letters were delivered to  his
             father's house on 25 May 2007 and 28th of June 2007  from  the
             Taleban. The first letter directed that the  appellant  should
             cease all activities supporting women's freedom  of  education
             and leave his job with the NGO. The second said  that  he  had
             not met those requirements and  should  be  delivered  to  the
             court within two days. However, the  difficulty  is  that  the
             appellant's case was that he was in hiding  in  May  and  June
             2007 and not working for the NGO therefore could not have been
             engaged in the activities he was accused  of  when  the  first
             letter was delivered. The logic of the second letter  did  not
             follow because the  appellant  on  his  own  account  was  not
             engaging in any of the activities that he was  criticised  for
             undertaking.

         iv) A document that was produced shows that on 29 July 2007 (A166)
             the appellant reported matters to his  local  police  station.
             The judge found that it was "curious" that the appellant  went
             to the police station bearing in mind that he  contended  they
             could  not  offer  him  sufficiency  of  protection.  It  also
             demonstrated that he was not in hiding but  simply  keeping  a
             low profile. This contradicts the appellant statement in  2017
             that, after he was released with the help of Mr S, he went  to
             Islamabad.

          v) In summary, the appellant had not demonstrated  to  the  lower
             standard that his claim in relation to  the  Taleban  is  true
             (see [117 - 126].

      f) The FtTJ drew an adverse inference under section 8 of the 2004  Act
         due to the appellant's delay in claiming asylum. The FtTJ  rejected
         his account that he did not know what to do  or  how  to  get  help
         until 2016; whilst a short delay after arrival might be explainable
         but the appellant knew his immigration position was precarious.

      g) His marriage to the EEA national was a clear attempt to  remain  in
         United Kingdom. He accepted he sought legal advice in  relation  to
         the marriage in 2010 the judge did not accept that there  had  been
         no  discussion  as  to  his  immigration  status.  Furthermore,  an
         intelligent man such as the appellant who had excellent command  of
         English, would have been aware of asylum and could have taken steps
         for 2016 to explore his rights (see [129 - 134]).

      h) The FtTJ accepted that the appellant was  a  youth  leader  of  his
         local PPP and that he worked as a volunteer for an NGO, that he was
         tortured and accused of blasphemy by a group of Sunni  Muslims  but
         did not accept the threats from the Taliban which he found to be an
         "exaggeration in order to bolster the appellant's claim."

37. The FTT J then considered the issue of future risk of harm taking  into
    account the findings of fact that he had made a set out above.

38. The first issue related to sufficiency of protection  which  the  judge
    addressed at paragraphs 140 - 146. He made  reference  to  the  country
    materials and whilst he noted that in 2014 the government introduced  a
    new counterterrorism plan  to  end  religious  extremism,  he  was  not
    satisfied that there was a sufficiency of state protection  within  the
    meaning of Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489.

39. He gave the following reasons for reaching this conclusion:

      a) the police are  described  as  indifferent,  incompetent  and  even
         complicit in violence against Shiite Muslims (A1,350);

      b) the Asian human rights commission  reported  that  state  bias  was
         evident in the judicial system against  minorities  which  included
         Hazara Shias' (A1,330); and there is other external  evidence  that
         courts are subject to influence from religious figures (A1 303);

      c) the US government commissioned report for Pakistan  2018  confirmed
         that the government of Pakistan had failed  to  adequately  protect
         religious minorities which included  Shia  Muslims  or  to  control
         incitement to religious violence against such minorities.

      d) Dr Giustozzi agreed with  this  assessment  and  noted  that  Sunni
         militant groups operated with widespread impunity  across  Pakistan
         as law enforcement officials effectively turned a blind eye to  any
         attacks (A1, 18).

40. Having found that there was a lack of state protection, the  FtTJ  then
    considered the issue of internal relocation by reference to Lord  Brown
    in AH (Sudan) v SSHD  [2008]  1  AC  678  and  his  self-directions  at
    paragraph 148- 151, that internal relocation  must  be  reasonable  and
    must not have such consequences upon the individual  as  to  be  unduly
    harsh and that it would be unduly  harsh  if  the  appellant  would  be
    unable for all practical purposes to survive with sufficient dignity to
    reflect humanity.

41. At paragraph 152, the FtTJ concluded that internal relocation would not
    be unduly harsh for this appellant. The FtTJ gave the following reasons
    for reaching this conclusion:

      a) The appellant is from Pakistan, he is familiar with the country and
         its culture (see [153].

      b) He is well educated compared with much  of  the  population  having
         worked both in Pakistan and the UK (see [154]).

      c) He has lived in Karachi and spent some time in Islamabad there were
         in relation to the latter, he was not working and possibly  keeping
         a low profile (see [155]).

      d) His command  of  languages  would  not  hinder  his  reintroduction
         (speaking English, Pashto and Urdu) and he has spent his  formative
         years in Pakistan (see [156 - 157].

      e) In relation to his health, he was referred to the trust in 2016 but
         was discharged back  to  his  GP  who  attributed  the  appellant's
         presentation of stress-related  to  his  asylum  claim  and  social
         isolation. He was subsequently re-referred and  is  now  under  the
         treatment of Dr N. He was diagnosed with having mixed anxiety and a
         depressive disorder; he receives antidepressant  and  antipsychotic
         medication. He has  not  been  an  inpatient  in  a  mental  health
         hospital and whilst he stated a  fear  of  return  makes  him  feel
         suicidal, there was no cogent upstate medical evidence  to  support
         the conclusion that it was a suicide risk and to  the  extent  that
         there was any evidence, it was self-reported and he had no plans to
         take it forward (see A80).

      f) It was not challenged by the appellant that there were not adequate
         medical facilities in existence to address his medical condition.

      g) The FtTJ considered his medical condition in the light  of  whether
         it would impact on his earning ability.  The  FtTJ  considered  the
         submission that being a Shia Muslim  and  of  Hazara  ethnicity  he
         would have difficulty in getting a  job  as  there  was  widespread
         discrimination.  The  FtTJ  noted  however  that  the   appellant's
         religion did not prevent him obtaining a  university  education  or
         undertaking employment in  quality  control  in  Karachi  which  he
         described  as  "very  responsible".  Therefore  whilst  the   judge
         accepted there may be a  measure  of  discrimination,  particularly
         having regard to his race and ethnicity, the FtTJ  did  not  accept
         that it was at the level claimed by  the  appellant  such  that  he
         would not be able to  obtain  employment  in  either  Islamabad  or
         Karachi. In cross-examination he admitted that he thought he  could
         get a job in Pakistan but stated his  chief  concern  was  that  he
         would be killed.

      h) As to family support, the appellant claimed that he not  spoken  to
         his family since 2010 when his father told him that  the  situation
         was very bad, and it was not safe  him  to  return.  The  appellant
         stated it did not know where his family was which comprises of  his
         parents, two brothers and a sister. When questioned why he had  not
         spoken to Mr S a person was able to locate him  even  when  he  was
         kidnapped to assist in locating his family, the appellant could not
         give a cogent answer. The FtTJ did not consider that this aspect of
         his account  was  credible.  The  appellant  in  cross  examination
         admitted he had made no attempts to try and trace his family  since
         2010. In summary, he was not satisfied that the appellant  did  not
         have family could call upon which she could not trace.  In  the  GP
         records (February 2010) he told his GP he was taking a cocktail  of
         drugs which he brought within from Pakistan. He describes his uncle
         as an ENT specialist in Pakistan; it is clear his uncle occupies  a
         senior position. Whilst the appellant said  he  was  no  longer  in
         touch with his parents in Pakistan he  made  no  reference  to  any
         other relatives (see [163]).

      i) In the medical records (25 10  16  at  A100),  the  appellant  told
         health worker that he was  taking  diazepam  and  the  entry  reads
         "relative in Pakistan prescribes diazepam says taking half a tablet
         which helps." The FtTJ found that the appellant conveyed to the  GP
         that he was currently taking diazepam. A further entry 11  November
         2016 in the records state "has been using medication from  Pakistan
         and also on 9 December 2016. The FtTJ found that this was "strongly
         indicative" of the appellant still being in contact with a  medical
         practitioner in Pakistan, most likely the appellant's uncle.

      j) The judge therefore concluded that  the  appellant  had  a  support
         network in Pakistan if returned (see [165-166]).

      k) Taking into account the expert report where it was  stated  that  a
         flat in a city would cost half the average salary and it would  not
         be possible for the appellant  to  meet  the  expenses  and  living
         costs, the FtTJ found that that was unsupported by any  examination
         by the expert of the appellant's earning capacity  and  that  there
         was nothing in the  report  to  show  that  he  was  aware  of  the
         appellant's qualifications, his skills,  his  earning  capacity  in
         Pakistan prior to fleeing in the United Kingdom.  Consequently  the
         FtTJ rejected that unsupported opinion of the expert.

42. The FTT J having rejected the appellant's  claim  in  relation  to  the
    Taleban, considered in the  alternative  whether  he  could  internally
    relocate. He made reference to the expert report which stated that  the
    Taleban and other terrorist groups had about 27,000 active members  and
    was strong in the Khyber agency and Baluchistan; it has  some  presence
    in cities including Islamabad, but he did not mention Karachi  at  all.
    The expert did not refer to any attacks at all in 2015  and  2016;  one
    attack in 2017 resulted in one person dead and four injured and in 2018
    there was one attack which was foiled. The attacks have taken place  in
    Islamabad  have  been  high-profile  operations  and  the  only   known
    targeting of individual was in November 2014 in  a  plot  to  target  a
    Pakistani army officer (a1 p26). The expert  accepted  that  relocation
    would reduce risk from the Taliban but not the  threat  from  sectarian
    groups who are operational nationwide.

43. In summary the FtTJ found that if he was at risk from  the  Taleban  he
    could relocate to Islamabad or Karachi (see [168 - 171]).

44. As to the threat from Sunni Muslims, the FtTJ set out   at  [173]  "the
    issue I must determine is whether there is a  risk  given  the  lengthy
    absence of the appellant from Pakistan, the fact that is believed to be
    dead by those he claims to persecute him, and whether they  would  have
    the inclination to try and locate the appellant."

45. In determining this issue, the FtTJ accepted that the appellant did not
    have any ID documents and would need to  obtain  them  and  this  would
    bring him to the attention of  the  Pakistani  authorities  however  as
    there is no death certificate there was nothing particularly suspicious
    about him requiring such papers  as  the  appellant  accepted  (in  his
    evidence)  with  ID  documentation  he  can  access  housing  services,
    employment and medical help ( see [174]).

46. The judge found that there was no cogent evidence before him  that  the
    blasphemy allegation would be seriously pursued; there was  no  FIR  or
    any court proceedings.

47. As to the issue of the appellant's religion, the FTT  J  set  out  that
    whilst he had noted that Shi'ites are the largest minority in  Pakistan
    and are reportedly the  main  target  for  sectarian  attacks  (A  350)
    Islamabad has a population of some 2 million  and  a  relatively  large
    proportion of ethnic minorities, about 10% (A 229).  He  also  set  out
    that terrorism attacks appear to be limited to high-profile targets and
    security is higher than in other regions (A1 229).

48. He accepted that amongst attacks on Shia Muslims, Hazara  Shi'ites  are
    disproportionately vulnerable due to their  visibility  (A1  265),  but
    that this needs to be considered in the context of the attacks.

49. The FTT J went on to find:

      a) The expert report stated that throughout the whole of  Pakistan  in
         2016 there were only 35  sectarian  attacks  on  Shia  Muslims  (no
         breakdown for those of Hazara ethnicity) and in 2017 it had  fallen
         to 16; it appears that the attacks are aimed more  at  groups  than
         individuals.

      b) In 2016, 137 people were killed and 2017, 16. Injuries in 2016  182
         but considerably higher in 2017, 691.

      c) Given Pakistan has a population of 19 7 million  and  Shia  Muslims
         account for about 15 to 25% of the population (A1(A150) and  Hazara
         Shi'ites number between 650,000 to 900,000, the figures have to  be
         seen in that context. The expert  reported  that  the  majority  of
         attacks that had been perpetrated against Hazara Shi'ites had  been
         in Quetta where the local Hazara Shia minority had been attacked by
         local sectarian groups. It is not suggested by the respondent  that
         the appellant would relocate there.

      d) The expert noted that in the absence of specific investigations  it
         was not possible to say whether the alleged accusation of blasphemy
         "still sticks" however if the  appellant  did  resume  his  alleged
         political activities it was highlighted to  become  the  object  of
         threats once again. However the FtTJ found that the  appellant  had
         taken no interest in politics for 11 years and there was no  cogent
         evidence that he would do so again. This is not a  case  where  the
         appellant would be required at contrary  to  his  normal  behaviour
         such as to bring the principles is HJ (Iran) in to play.

50. The FtTJ made reference to the  decision  in  AK  and  SK  (Christians)
    Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 569 and that whilst it was a case  relating  to
    Christians it also considered other religious minorities in relation to
    threats from the Taleban and blasphemy charges.

51.  The  FttJ  considered  that  paragraphs  229-230   provided   relevant
    background material  which  stated  that  individuals  who  were  being
    serious pursued by armed groups would not generally be safe  in  Punjab
    where the groups are based and may also  be  unsafe  due  to  the  wide
    geographical reach of the groups however the  "nature  of  the  threats
    received, the individuals personal circumstances  and  availability  of
    support from influential connections of all relevant considerations. It
    is not likely that ordinary community members will have  the  resources
    or the inclination to pursue their victims outside the  local  area  to
    those facing harm from localised groups or individuals  will  generally
    be able to relocate to 1 of the many large cities. However,  individual
    subject to criminal prosecution  under  the  blasphemy  laws  were  not
    generally be able to relocate."

52. At paragraphs [185 - 187], the FtTJ applied  those  paragraphs  to  the
    circumstances the appellant and found that relocation would not  be  to
    areas of FATA, Baluchistan and the Khyber or the Punjab but would be to
    Islamabad or Karachi. Nor would he be at risk from the Taleban  or  the
    TPP or its offshoots. As there was no FIR or any prosecution,  internal
    relocation will be viable unless  the  blasphemy  charges  are  serious
    pursued and that FtTJ found  that  those  charges  were  not  seriously
    pursued.

53. In summary, the FTT J directed himself to the appellant's  health,  and
    had particular regard to his religion and  ethnicity  when  considering
    the factors holistically but reached the conclusion  that  it  did  not
    been shown that it will be unduly harsh for the appellant  to  relocate
    to Islamabad or Karachi  or  that  he  would  be  at  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm ( see [187]).

54. I have carefully considered the competing submissions in the  light  of
    the decision of the FtTJ as summarised above. The grounds  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant challenge his assessment of internal relocation
    the judge having found that he would be at risk of  harm  in  his  home
    area. Internal relocation is not an alternative where there is  a  real
    risk that the appellant will suffer persecution or serious harm  within
    the meaning of article 15 of the Directive  (which  includes  treatment
    contrary to article  3  of  the  ECHR),  in  the  area  or  safe  haven
    identified.

55. In this context it is submitted that the FtTJ failed to give weight  or
    take into account his earlier findings made relating  to  insufficiency
    of state protection in the home area.

56. When considering this submission it is important to take account of the
    factual background and the context in which  the  judge  had  made  his
    findings of  fact.  He  accepted  the  appellant's  account  that  when
    residing in his home area (a tribal area in Pakistan), the  appellant's
    home had been raided by Sunni Muslims and was kidnapped in  2007  as  a
    result of his Shia faith and his involvement with the PPP but had  been
    released to Mr S. He rejected the appellant's account  that  there  was
    any blasphemy allegation that had  gone  any  further  than  simply  an
    accusation (see[113]), and that there was no evidence that  the  police
    had sought to locate him or that there  was  any  FTIR  or  proceedings
    against him (see [114 - 116]). The judge also rejected his account that
    he had been threatened with harm from the Taleban or would be  at  risk
    from them and found that he had not been involved in  any  politics  in
    the UK since he had left  and no cogent evidence he would do so again (
    see[182]).

57. At paragraphs 140 - 146 the judge summarised the material  relating  to
    the issue of sufficiency of protection and concluded that  there  would
    not be a sufficiency of protection for the appellant in the  home  area
    on account of his profile there and  the  geographical  area  and  that
    there was evidence before  the  tribunal  that  the  police/courts  was
    subject to influence from religious figures (see  material  at  A1303).
    However, it is plain  from  his  analysis  of  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation that he  did  not  conclude  from  the  appellant's  factual
    account  or  on  the  material  before  him  that  there  would  be  an
    insufficiency of protection outside of his home area, either  based  on
    his religion or his ethnicity. The appellant had not  identified  those
    who attacked him in his home area and referred to in  the  evidence  as
    "Sunni Muslims". At [173] the FtTJ asked himself the  question  whether
    there would be a risk  from  general  Sunni  Muslims  in  the  area  of
    relocation given the appellant's long absence from Pakistan  and  based
    on the appellant's evidence that it is believed that he  was  dead  and
    whether  they  would  have  the  inclination  to  try  and  locate  the
    appellant. On the findings of fact made, it was open to  the  judge  to
    find that the unidentified individuals did not either have the  ability
    or inclination to try and locate the appellant  after  that  length  of
    time, furthermore, he did not face any blasphemy charges and the  judge
    found that he would be able to obtain documentation  (see  [174]).  The
    judge also rejected his claim to be at risk of harm from  the  Taleban.
    On this analysis, there would be no need for  any  protection  of  harm
    from those unidentified individuals from his home area in the place  of
    relocation.

58. In AK and SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT  569  (IAC)  it
    was held that along with Christians, Sunnis, Shi'as, Ahmadis and Hindus
    may all be potentially charged with blasphemy. Those citizens  who  are
    more marginalised and occupy low standing social positions, may be less
    able to deal with the consequences of such  proceedings;  The  risk  of
    becoming a victim of a blasphemy allegation will depend upon  a  number
    of factors and must be assessed on  a  case  by  case  basis.  Relevant
    factors will include the place of residence, whether it is an urban  or
    rural area, and the individual's  level  of  education,  financial  and
    employment status and  level  of  public  religious  activity  such  as
    preaching. These factors are not exhaustive; Non state agents  who  use
    blasphemy laws  against  Christians,  are  often  motivated  by  spite,
    personal or  business  disputes,  arguments  over  land  and  property.
    Certain political events may also trigger such accusations.

59. The decision states that a blasphemy allegation, without more, will not
    generally be enough to make out a claim under the  Refugee  Convention.
    It has to be actively followed either by the authorities in the form of
    charges being brought or by those making the complaint. If  it  is,  or
    will be, actively pursued, then an applicant may be able to establish a
    real risk of harm in the  home  area  and  an  insufficiency  of  state
    protection; Relocation is normally a viable option unless an individual
    is accused of blasphemy which  is  being  seriously  pursued;  in  that
    situation there is, in general,  no  internal  relocation  alternative.
    Thus the assessment made by the  judge  was  in  line  with  the  above
    decision.

60. The FtTJ also considered whether he would be at risk  in  the  area  of
    relocation based on his religion and ethnicity. I can see no  error  as
    Ms Bashow submits in the judge's assessment of  the  country  materials
    and that Shiite Muslims are the largest minority in Pakistan.  Contrary
    to the grounds, the FtTJ  did  accept  that  amongst  attacks  on  Shia
    Muslims those of Hazara ethnicity  were  disproportionately  vulnerable
    due to the visibility. However, it was open to the  judge  to  consider
    the material and the figures for  attacks  on  Shia  Muslims  when  set
    against the population of Pakistan (see paragraphs 179 - 181).  It  was
    also open to the judge to take into account that the  attacks  referred
    to in the expert report were aimed more at groups than individuals, and
    that when  considering  attacks  against  Hazara  Shiite  Muslims,  the
    majority  attacked  are  being  perpetrated  in  Quetta,  which  was  a
    particular area and one which had not been identified as a safe  haven.
    Contrary to the grounds, the judge was not  considering  the  issue  of
    article 15(c) but was simply carrying out an analysis of whether  there
    was a risk of harm in the  area  of  relocation  as  a  result  of  his
    religion and his ethnicity.  Ms  Bashow  accepted  that  there  was  no
    evidence that all Shia Muslims of Hazara ethnicity as a group would  be
    at risk of harm throughout Pakistan. Thus the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider  this  particular  appellant's  factual   circumstances   when
    reaching a conclusion on this issue and in the light of  the  materials
    before him.

61. When considering internal relocation, the question  the  judge  had  to
    consider was whether "taking  account  of  all  relevant  circumstances
    pertaining to the claimant's country of origin, ... it is reasonable to
    expect the claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh  to
    expect him to do so" (see Lord Bingham in Januzi  and  repeated  in  AH
    (Sudan)). This requires consideration of all matters  relevant  to  the
    reasonableness of relocation, none having inherent  priority  over  the
    others (see AH (Sudan) at [13]) and this  is  a  "holistic  assessment"
    (see AH (Sudan) at [47]).

62. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  the  FtTJ  failed  to
    carry out that holistic assessment and points to the finding made as to
    the appellant's ability to access employment. It is submitted that  the
    finding failed to take account  of  his  religion  and  his  ethnicity.
    However, the FtTJ at [161] property took into account the evidence that
    there was a measure of  discrimination  towards  those  who  were  Shia
    Muslims of Hazara ethnicity and that this was  also  in  the  field  of
    employment. But the judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  that
    notwithstanding that material, the appellant had been able to obtain  a
    university  education  and  worked  previously  in  Karachi  which  the
    appellant had described as "very responsible".  The  judge  also  found
    that he  had  worked  in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  cannot  accept  the
    submission made that the FtTJ gave too much weight  to  his  university
    degree and his previous work in Karachi  on  the  basis  that  he  last
    worked there in 2004. It was reasonably  open  to  the  FtTJ  to  place
    weight on the appellant's own evidence in addition to that above  where
    he stated he thought  he  could  obtain  employment  in  Pakistan  (see
    [161]).

63. Furthermore, the issue of employment was not one  taken  in  isolation.
    The FtTJ also took into account a number of  other  factors;  that  the
    appellant is a Pakistani national familiar with customs,  culture,  and
    able to speak English, Pashto and Urdu ([153, 156}, that  he  was  well
    educated compared with much of the population and having worked both in
    Pakistan and in the UK [154], and he lived outside of his home area. In
    addition, the judge took into account the medical evidence  in  respect
    of the appellant, which was summarised in his decision and  noted  that
    it was not challenged that there were adequate  medical  facilities  in
    Pakistan that were in existence. He also found that there  would  be  a
    network of support.

64. As to this last factor, it is submitted that the assessment  of  family
    support available to the appellant was  unfair  and  that  the  judge's
    reference to the medical records related to February 2010 when  it  was
    the appellant's evidence that he last had contact his  family  at  that
    time. I accept the submission made by Ms Petterson that  the  FtTJ  was
    entitled to  take  into  account  in  his  assessment  the  appellant's
    evidence which he found to be lacking in credibility. The FtTJ set  out
    the appellant's evidence at [163] that he had not spoken to his  family
    since 2010. The judge recorded the questions of the appellant asked  in
    cross-examination concerning Mr S, the person who was  able  to  locate
    him even when kidnapped, and why he had not spoken to  him.  The  judge
    recorded that the appellant was not able to give any cogent  answer  to
    those questions and also admitted that he made no attempt to trace  his
    family.

65. As regards the medical records, the judge considered these  at  [164  -
    165] noting that the medical records did not only relate  to  2010  but
    also October  and  November  2016.  Whilst  it  is  argued  that  these
    references were made in medical notes and not in any signed  statement,
    it was open to the judge to place some weight on this evidence  in  his
    assessment alongside  the  appellant's  own  evidence  in  reaching  an
    overall conclusion as to the availability of family support.

66. Overall, I am not persuaded that the  judge  fell  into  error  in  his
    assessment of the issue of  internal  relocation  and  that  a  careful
    consideration of the  decision  demonstrates  that  he  conducted  that
    assessment by reference to the reasonableness of  relocation  for  this
    particular appellant and did so by way of a  holistic  assessment.  The
    judge considered the impact of  the  proposed  relocation  taking  into
    account the relevant circumstances. In considering this appeal  I  have
    also borne in mind the decision of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49 in which
    Sir John Dyson SCJ at paragraph 43 reiterated the remarks  of  Baroness
    Hale in AH (Sudan) v SSHD UKHL [2008] 1  AC  678  in  which  she  urged
    caution  upon  the  part  of  appellate  Tribunals  when  dealing  with
    decisions of the lower courts.  At paragraph 45 Sir John Dyson went on:-



         "The court should not be astute to characterise as an error of  law
         what, in truth, is no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  AIT's
         assessment of the facts.  Moreover, where a relevant point  is  not
         expressly mentioned by the Tribunal, the court  would  be  slow  to
         infer that it had not been taken into account."

67. Consequently it is not been demonstrated that the judge made  an  error
    of law in his decision and thus the decision shall stand.





Notice of Decision

68. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an  error  on  a
    point of law; the decision of the FtTJ shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 22/10/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
