
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05215/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2019                  |On 21 November 2019                  |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     F K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant  or  members  of
his family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge R Hussain ("the judge"), promulgated on 2 September 2019, by
which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
of 8 April 2018, refusing his protection and human rights claims.

In essence, the Appellant's case was that by virtue of his father's claimed
activities in Afghanistan, he himself would be at risk of harm from the
Taliban in his home area within the Laghman Province either by way of
forced recruitment or revenge.  It was also said that internal relocation
to Kabul would be unduly harsh.  The Appellant's appeal had already been
decided by the First-tier Tribunal in 2018.  That initial decision was set
aside following a successful appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the matter
remitted for a complete rehearing.

When that remitted hearing came before the judge, he found that material
aspects of the Appellant's claim was untruthful for reasons set out in
paragraph 12 of his decision.  In summary, these were based on what were
essentially plausibility issues relating to the Appellant's knowledge of
his father's activities and actions and inaction on the particular of the
family and the Taliban. The judge went on to say that even if he had
accepted the Appellant's claim, internal relocation to Kabul would have
been a viable option.  The judge concluded that the humanitarian protection
claim was not made out, nor could the Appellant have succeeded on Article 8
grounds.

There are three grounds of appeal.  The first is that the judge erred in
the credibility findings by failing to have regard to material aspects of
the Appellant's own evidence, oral and written, which responded to adverse
issues taken against him in the reasons for refusal letter.  Ground 2
complains that the judge failed to make specific findings in respect of
risk in the home area both in respect of the Refugee Convention claim and
Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Ground 3 asserts that there
was a lack of adequate analysis in respect of the conclusion on internal
relocation.  Permission to appeal was granted on 11 October 2019 by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison.

Prior to the hearing the Respondent issued a Rule 24 response in which it
was conceded that the judge had erred in respect of his conclusion on the
internal relocation issue.  However, grounds 1 and 2 were resisted.

At the hearing before me Mr Hodson relied on the grounds.  In addressing
the first ground he provided myself and Ms Bassi with a copy of his note of
the oral evidence that had been given at the hearing before the judge.  It
is, I am bound to say, unsatisfactory that this was not provided earlier,
either with the application for permission to appeal or at any time before
the hearing.  Ms Bassi, having been given time to consider the document,
was content to proceed.  I made reference to the judge's Record of
Proceedings on file.  It transpired that there was no Home Office
Presenting Officer's record of the oral evidence.

Mr Hodson submitted that the judge had failed to have regard to particular
aspects of the oral evidence relating to the Appellant's knowledge of what
his father had done and the position held in respect of his membership of
the Afghan police force. He also contended that the judge had failed to
deal with relevant aspects of the written evidence contained within three
witness statements.  In respect of the second ground, Mr Hodson submitted
that there had been no specific finding on the risk in the home area
whether in respect of fear of the Taliban specifically regarding the nature
of the claim put forward by the Appellant or in respect of Article 15(c) of
the Qualification Directive.

Ms Bassi directed my attention to paragraph 11 of the judge's decision, in
which he had stated that he had taken all the evidence into account before
reaching his findings.  Ms Bassi also submitted that it would be open to
the judge to essentially adopt points taken against the Appellant in the
reasons for refusal letter.  In relation to the Article 15(c) point, Ms
Bassi submitted that this matter had not been properly raised before the
judge and he could not be criticised for failing to deal with it in any
detail.

I conclude that the judge has materially erred in law.  In respect of
ground 1, it is right that the judge has stated in terms at paragraph 11
that he had considered all the evidence before him.  There is nothing
objectionable in that approach insofar as it goes.  However, in relation to
the matters held against the Appellant in paragraph 12, many of which are
taken directly from the reasons for refusal letter, in my view, it was
incumbent upon the judge to deal with specific aspects of the Appellant's
evidence that related to the matters of concern.  These included certain
answers given in cross-examination and particular passages from the
Appellant's three witness statements, in particular those dated 10 May 2018
and 12 June 2019.  The written evidence had been adopted and relevant
passages related directly to matters which were clearly of concern to the
judge, including knowledge of the father's position and activities, the
father's claimed death, and other events relating to interactions with the
Taliban over the course of time.  It may of course have been that the judge
was unimpressed with the evidential responses.  Nonetheless, they are not
specifically addressed, nor are reasons provided if they were found to be
insufficient.  This error also relates to the point taken in paragraph 13
of the judge's decision in respect of the judge's expectation that further
avenues could have been pursued in respect of the family tracing issue with
reference to the British Red Cross letter dated 13 February 2019.

The error here is a failure to have specifically addressed material
evidence and/or a failure to have provided adequate reasons for rejecting
such evidence, if rejected it was.

In respect of ground 2, it is right that the judge makes no express finding
on the risk to the Appellant in the home area arising from the Refugee
Convention claim.  It would seem to be implicit in what the judge says at
paragraph 14 in respect of internal relocation that such a risk had been
found to exist; otherwise the issue of internal relocation would never
arise.  Any error may not, therefore, be material.

Mr Hodson also relies on Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and
the judge's failure to have addressed it in any detail.  In my view, this
matter was not properly raised before the judge.  There is no reference to
it in the skeleton argument.  The grounds of appeal to the First-tier
Tribunal are extremely brief and do not mention this particular provision.
There is nothing in the Record of Proceedings or any other indication that
Article 15(c) was either raised or accompanied by any specific submissions.
 The judge cannot properly be criticised for failing to deal with matters
that had not properly been canvassed before him. There is no error here.

Finally, in relation to ground 3, the Respondent has made what I regard to
be a perfectly proper concession in respect of the inadequacy of analysis
on the internal relocation issue.  Paragraph 14 of the judge's decision is
simply too brief, and it is impossible to tell what has been taken into
account, with the risk that relevant matters had been left out of the
consideration.

In light of the above, I set aside the judge's decision.

In terms of disposal, I bear in mind that this matter has already been
remitted on a previous occasion.  In the normal course of events this
appeal would be retained in the Upper Tribunal for a remaking decision in
due course.  Having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement and
the particular circumstances of this case, it is appropriate to remit the
appeal once again on the ground that fact-finding is required.

There shall be no preserved findings.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

I make an anonymity direction



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

    1) This appeal is remitted with no preserved findings;

    2) The remitted hearing shall not be conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge R Hussain;

    3) The remitted hearing shall not be heard before the Upper Tribunal has
       published the new country guidance decision  in  AS  (AA/03491/2015),
       which is being heard on 19-21 November 2019.




Signed   [pic]             Date: 19 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


