
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05025/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 9 January 2020                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     S O
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Peter G Farrell, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT  Judge  Doyle  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 7 August 2019.

 2. The appellant's grounds of appeal are set out in her application  dated
    8 October 2019.  The essence of the grounds is that  the  FtT  did  not
    take  proper  account  of  guidance  in  the  respondent's  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions ("IDI's"), based on  case  law,  on  the  best
    interests of children, and when it is  reasonable  to  expect  them  to
    leave the UK.

 3. Mr Farrell said that the material  questions  were  whether  the  Judge
    should have considered the  IDI's;  whether  he  did  so;  and  whether
    failure to do so was material to  the  outcome.   He  founded  upon  SF
    (Albania) [2017] UKUT 120 (referred to in the grant of  permission)  on
    the relevance of guidance.  He accepted that  the  decision  considered
    some matters mentioned in  the  guidance,  but  he  submitted  that  it
    omitted others - crucially, the children's lives in the UK  up  to  the
    time of decision, and how quickly they might adapt, if at all, to  life
    in Nigeria.  He said that  a  further  decision  was  required,  taking
    account of all relevant matters, either by way of a remit to  the  FtT,
    or  in  the  UT,  and  that  there  had  been  no  material  change  of
    circumstances,  beyond  the  passage  of   time,   but   that   further
    strengthened the children's ties to the UK.

 4. Mr Clark in reply pointed to the extent of the decision in  SF:   "Even
    in the absence of a "not in accordance with the law" ground of  appeal,
    the Tribunal ought to take  the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  into
    account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome  in  the  instant
    case."

 5. He submitted that the  relevant  considerations  had  been  taken  into
    account; the guidance did not point to an outcome "clearly  in  favour"
    of the appellant, but rather to the contrary; it was no  error  not  to
    mention  factors  mentioned  in  the  guidance  which  had   not   been
    specifically founded  on  by  the  appellant;  and  other  factors  not
    mentioned, such as the adaptability of the appellant  and  her  husband
    (who had lived in Italy and Norway) to family removals, tended  against
    the appellant.

 6. I reserved my decision.

 7. The guidance placed before the FtT says - "It may be reasonable  for  a
    qualifying child to leave the UK with the parent or primary carer where
    for example: - followed by a series of  bullet  points,  the  first  of
    which is - "the parent or parents, or child,  are  a  citizen  of  that
    country and so able to enjoy the full rights of being a citizen in that
    country".

 8. Judges are not obliged to cite the respondent's guidance.  They are  of
    course obliged  to  apply  the  law,  including  the  case  law,  which
    underpins the guidance.  The judge was clearly aware of and  took  into
    account the length of residence of the children in the UK.  That was  a
    relevant but not a decisive factor.  The grounds say that the  children
    had "no real connection" with Nigeria, not having lived there; but they
    have been brought up by Nigerian parents.

 9. The appellant's grounds refer to KO [2018]  WLR  5273,  but  that  case
    makes it clear that it is normally reasonable for children to be  where
    the parents are expected to be, which in this case is  Nigeria.   I  am
    unable to follow the purported distinction that the  principle  relates
    to whether the parents' immigration history is taken into  account  and
    not to the application of the guidance.  Once it is  established  where
    the parents are expected to be, that is another important factor  which
    is relevant, although not decisive.

10. The grounds and submissions have not persuaded me that  the  assessment
    of reasonability reached by the FtT at [33] involved the making of  any
    error on a point of law.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity is preserved herein.

      [pic]

      9 January 2020
      UT Judge Macleman
