
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05624/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|DECIDED UNDER RULE 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|                                   |On 21 July 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     AA

                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI2008/269)  an  Anonymity  Order  is  made.  Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court orders otherwise, no report of  any  proceedings  or
      any form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify
      the Appellant.  This  prohibition  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
      parties.


   2. The appellant, a national  of  Iraq  and  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  has
      appealed to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal  promulgated  9.8.19,  dismissing  his  appeal  against   the
      respondent's decision of 31.5.19 rejecting his claim for international
      protection.


   3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal on 6.9.19. However, when the application was renewed  to
      the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Owens granted  permission  on
      27.1.20, being "just  persuaded  that  the  judge  arguably  erred  at
      paragraph [26] in asserting that there was a contradiction between the
      evidence of the witness and of the appellant, when the witness clearly
      referred to the appellant being 'sent off' until he could  work  again
      which was consistent  with  the  appellant's  evidence.  The  negative
      credibility findings are arguably material to  an  assessment  of  the
      risk to the appellant on return to the IKR. Although some of the other
      grounds are weaker all grounds may be argued."


   4. The appeal had been originally listed  for  hearing  in  Edinburgh  on
      30.4.20, a date which had to be vacated as a result  of  the  COVID-19
      pandemic. On 22.4.20, the Upper Tribunal issued  directions  proposing
      that the error of law issue should be decided on the papers without  a
      hearing and providing for further written submissions.


   5. In response to those directions, on 4.5.20 the Upper Tribunal received
      the appellant's 'Note of Argument for the Appellant'. The respondent's
      response to the appellant's grounds, drafted by Mr Tufan, was received
      on 15.5.20. Finally,  on  18.5.20  the  Upper  Tribunal  received  the
      'Appellant's response to home office submissions,' which  objected  to
      admission of the late-submitted submissions of the  respondent.  Given
      that there is no apparent prejudice to the  appellant  and  given  the
      difficulties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, I admit all submissions.


   6. Having had regard to  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals'  Practice
      Direction, Pilot Practice Direction: Contingency Arrangements  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, to the UTIAC  Presidential
      Guidance Note No 1 of 2020, Arrangements during the COVID-19 pandemic,
      and to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      (as amended), and to the views expressed by the  parties,  neither  of
      whom objects to the  error  of  law  issue  being  decided  without  a
      hearing, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to determine the appeal
      on the papers without a hearing  and  on  the  basis  of  the  written
      submissions summarised above. I do so because I am satisfied that  the
      parties have had full opportunity to make full, thorough and  detailed
      submissions on the error of law issue,  all  of  which  enable  me  to
      determine the error of law issue  without  a  hearing.  I,  therefore,
      share the view that a hearing is not necessary. Accordingly,  pursuant
      to Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  I
      proceed to make the relevant decisions without a hearing. In doing so,
      I confirm that I have carefully considered the  impugned  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal in the light of the grounds  and  all  written
      submissions.


   7. The core of the appellant's factual claim is that he will be  at  risk
      on return because he  was  falsely  accused  of  embezzlement  by  his
      employer and threatened  with  death  if  he  failed  to  protect  his
      employer by taking responsibility for a crime he did not commit.


   8. For the reasons set out in the decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  did
      not find the appellant's factual claim plausible or  credible  and  at
      [34] found the late-produced alleged  arrest  warrant  unreliable.  At
      [35] the judge noted that the appellant's representative was not  able
      to identify what  refugee  ground  was  being  relied  on.  The  judge
      concluded that if the appellant feared return to Iraq  because  of  an
      allegation that he had embezzled  money,  this  would  be  a  fear  of
      prosecution, not persecution. However, the judge did not  accept  that
      the appellant left Iraq in the circumstances he claimed; there was  no
      well-founded fear of return for any Convention reason. Neither did the
      judge accept that there was a real risk  of  serious  harm  so  as  to
      qualify for humanitarian protection.


   9. The grounds relied on are as follows:


           a. That the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  assessment  of  the
              evidence generally and in particular the arrest  warrant  and
              supporting witness statements;


           b. Provided inadequate reasons for the finding at [21] that  the
              appellant's  claim  that   he   was   being   monitored   was
              speculation; and for being not satisfied that embezzlement by
              Mr Chalak would reflect badly on the  station  founder,  Hero
              Khan;


           c. Took  an  erroneous  approach  at  [23]  in  criticising  the
              appellant's evidence as to why Mr Chalak would not have taken
              action against him sooner than he did. It  is  asserted  that
              the Tribunal  re-characterised the evidence based on its  own
              perception of reasonability.


  10. There is no merit in the claim that the judge  failed  to  assess  the
      evidence in the round. The  appellant  argues  that  at  [17]  of  the
      decision the judge arrived at the adverse credibility findings  before
      surveying all of the evidence. This ground  is  entirely  misconceived
      and arises  from  either  a  misunderstanding  or  misreading  of  the
      decision. At [16], the judge made  clear  that  all  of  the  evidence
      before the Tribunal, both oral and documentary, had been considered in
      the making of the decision. At [17] it is explained that applying  the
      lower standard of proof the judge was not satisfied that the appellant
      had demonstrated that he has a well-founded fear of persecution for  a
      Convention ground "for the forgoing reasons." It may be that the judge
      would have been better advised to have used  "following"  rather  than
      "forgoing" but  it  is  perfectly  obvious  to  any  reader  that  the
      reasoning supporting the conclusion  is  set  out  in  the  subsequent
      paragraphs of the decision. It cannot be that the judge was  referring
      to reasons previously explained, as [15] of the decision comprised  an
      unchallenged summary of the appellant's evidence.


  11. Neither was there any error in  the  judge  treatment  of  the  arrest
      warrant. It should be borne in mind that the arrest  warrant  appeared
      for the first time in a  supplementary  bundle  presented  immediately
      prior to the hearing. It had been sent by fax after closure of  office
      hours on 24.7.19 for a hearing taking  place  the  following  morning.
      Effectively, the  respondent  was  ambushed  at  the  hearing  by  the
      production  of  the  warrant.  The  judge  adjourned  to   allow   the
      respondent's representative to read the documents and,  if  necessary,
      take instructions.  After  the  short  adjournment,  the  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer returned to court to state that it  would  be  very
      unlikely  that  the  respondent  would  be  able  to  carry  out   any
      verification checks on the arrest warrant and, therefore, did not seek
      an adjournment.


  12.  It  is  clear  from  the  decision  that  the  judge   gave   careful
      consideration to the warrant, noting its limitations. For example,  at
      [29] the judge observed that  the  appellant  did  not  introduce  any
      background evidence as to such documents in Iraq,  so  the  judge  had
      nothing to compare it with. Neither was there any expert  evidence  to
      support the reliability of the document. The Presenting  Officer  made
      clear that he did not accept the genuineness of the warrant. From [31]
      the judge made a series of observations  about  the  document,  noting
      that much of the spaces providing for detail had been left  blank.  It
      was noted at [32] that the document was issued to a  wide  section  of
      society.  The judge  noted  the  country  background  evidence  placed
      before  the  Tribunal  indicated  that  the   effectiveness   of   law
      enforcement in the IKR was higher than south and central Iraq. At [34]
      the judge  was  not  persuaded  that  that  a  jurisdiction  operating
      effective law enforcement would be so considered if it produced arrest
      warrants containing such sparse detail. The  judge  found  this  spare
      detail implausible and concluded it could not be relied on.


  13. The appellant's grounds and submissions are to the effect  that  where
      the respondent has failed to carry out verification checks on  such  a
      document, it may not be impugned. Apart from it being astonishing that
      the respondent should be criticised for not verifying a document  with
      which  it  was  ambushed  at  the  hearing,  the   submission   is   a
      misconstruction of the case law relied  on.  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
      [2015] held at [29] that:


           "... the jurisprudence referred  to  above  does  no  more  than
           indicate  that  the  circumstances  of  particular   cases   may
           exceptionally necessitate an element  of  investigation  by  the
           national authorities, in order to provide  effective  protection
           against mistreatment under article 3 ECHR. It  is  important  to
           stress, however, that this step will frequently not be  feasible
           or it may be unjustified or disproportionate. In  Tanveer  Ahmed
           the court highlighted the cost and logistical difficulties  that
           may be involved, for instance because of the number of documents
           submitted by some asylum claimants. The enquiries  may  put  the
           applicant or his family at  risk,  they  may  be  impossible  to
           undertake because of the prevailing local situation or they  may
           place the United Kingdom authorities in the  difficult  position
           of making covert local enquiries without the permission  of  the
           relevant authorities. Furthermore, given the uncertainties  that
           frequently  remain   following   attempts   to   establish   the
           reliability of documents, if  the  outcome  of  any  enquiry  is
           likely to be inconclusive this is a highly relevant  factor.  As
           the court in Tanveer Ahmed observed,  documents  should  not  be
           viewed in isolation and the evidence needs to be  considered  in
           its entirety."


  14. Simply because a document is potentially  capable  of  being  verified
      does not mean that the respondent has an obligation to take this step.
      Instead, depending on the particular facts of  the  case,  it  may  be
      possible and necessary to make an  enquiry  in  order  to  verify  the
      authenticity and reliability of a document, when it is at  the  centre
      of the request for protection, and when a simple  process  of  enquiry
      will conclusively resolve its authenticity and reliability (see  Singh
      v Belgium [101] - [105]). There is no material difference in  approach
      between the decisions in Tanveer Ahmed and Singh v Belgium, in that in
      the latter case the court simply  addressed  one  of  the  exceptional
      situations when national authorities should  undertake  a  process  of
      verification.


  15. Further, courts are not required to order the Secretary  of  State  to
      investigate particular areas of evidence or otherwise  to  direct  her
      enquiries. Instead, on an appeal from a decision of the  Secretary  of
      State it is for the court to decide whether there was an obligation on
      her to undertake particular enquiries, and if the court concludes this
      requirement existed, it will resolve whether the  Secretary  of  State
      sustainably discharged her obligation (see NA (UT  rule  45:  Singh  V
      Belgium) [2014] UKUT 00205 IAC). If court  finds  there  was  such  an
      obligation and  that  it  was  not  discharged,  it  must  assess  the
      consequences for the case.


  16. I am not satisfied that there was any obligation or requirement on the
      respondent to take steps to verify the  arrest  warrant,  nor  on  the
      Tribunal to require it. It was fairly obvious that seeking  to  verify
      an Iraqi arrest warrant in Iraq was unlikely to be  feasible  and  the
      Presenting Officer's conclusion that  verification  was  unlikely  was
      entirely understandable. Neither was the  respondent  prohibited  from
      impugning the document. Pursuant to Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT  00439,
      the burden was on the appellant to demonstrate that the  document  was
      reliable. The judge gave careful consideration  to  the  document  and
      provided  cogent  reasons  for  finding   the   document,   with   the
      shortcomings noted by the judge, unreliable. No error of  law  arising
      in respect of this ground.


  17. The remaining grounds are in essence  a  trawl  through  the  decision
      looking for minor issues with which to undermine the decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


      In Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412, the Court of Appeal  said  that
      it is necessary to guard against the  temptation  to  characterise  as
      errors of law what are in truth no more than disagreements  about  the
      weight to be given to different factors, particularly if the judge who
      decided the appeal had the advantage of hearing oral evidence.  It  is
      well-established law that the weight to be  given  to  any  particular
      factor in an appeal is a matter for the judge  and  will  rarely  give
      rise to an error of law, see Green (Article 8 -new rules) [2013]  UKUT
      254. Further, In R (Iran) and others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982,  Lord
      Justice Brook held that there was no duty on a judge in giving reasons
      to deal with every argument and that it was  sufficient  if  what  was
      said demonstrated to the parties the basis  on  which  the  judge  had
      acted. This approach was adopted and applied by the Upper Tribunal  in
      Budhathoki (Reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341. For  the  reasons
      already outlined above and those set out below, I  am  satisfied  that
      the impugned decision met the requirements and the findings made  were
      open to the judge on the evidence and for which  cogent  reasons  have
      been provided.


  18. At [26] of the decision, the judge noted what was considered to  be  a
      contradiction between the appellant's evidence and the statement of  a
      witness not called to give  oral  evidence.  The  judge's  observation
      about this witness, alleged to be  a  former  work  colleague  of  the
      appellant, was that he "refers to the  appellant  having  been  sacked
      from his post, which is contrary to  the  appellant's  evidence.  This
      contradiction damages the credibility of the appellant's  claim."  The
      appellant's evidence had been that he had been suspended on  full  pay
      whilst the investigation into missing money  was  temporarily  put  on
      hold because of the Kurdistan election  campaign  in  September  2018.
      What the translated witness statement states is that the  witness  was
      absolutely sure the appellant was asked by Mr  Amjani  "to  leave  his
      position and  sent  him  off  until  he  (Mr  Amjani)  contacted  (the
      appellant) to start work again, but (the appellant) never came back to
      work in Kurdsat Station." The appellant submits that there was no true
      inconsistency. However, the judge's interpretation of being "asked  to
      leave his position" and "sent him off" was that this  was  a  sacking.
      The witness makes no reference to the  appellant  being  suspended  on
      full pay, as claimed by the appellant. On  reflection,  there  may  be
      some difference between the two accounts but I am not  satisfied  that
      the judge was correct to characterise that difference as sufficient to
      damage the appellant's credibility.


  19. However, if this was an error it was but a single and minor factor  in
      the  overall  credibility  findings,  which  entirely   rejected   the
      appellant's factual claim. Even if the error had not been made,  I  am
      satisfied that the appeal would nevertheless have been  dismissed  for
      the  overwhelming  other  reasons  identified   by   the   judge   for
      disbelieving the appellant's factual account.  In the circumstances, I
      am not satisfied that this error alone is sufficiently material to the
      outcome of the appeal to require the decision  to  be  set  aside  for
      error.


  20. The grounds and submissions argue that at [21]  of  the  decision  the
      judge's characterisation of the appellant's claim that  he  was  being
      monitored as speculation amounted to an error  of  law.  He  had  been
      asked in interview to justify the claim that he was being monitored by
      being asked who was monitoring him. He admitted that he did  not  know
      and clearly speculated as to who might be behind  it.  The  submission
      that "it is unclear how the appellant would know  who  was  monitoring
      him" is itself speculation.  The  fact  remains,  that  the  appellant
      presented no evidence or explanation as to how he  knew  that  he  was
      being monitored. If he did not know who was  doing  this  or  who  was
      behind it, the  judge  was  entitled  to  characterise  his  claim  as
      speculation. No error of law arises in this regard.


  21. The submissions also challenge the judge's  finding  at  [25]  of  the
      decision of not being satisfied that embezzlement by Mr  Chalek  would
      reflect badly on Hero Khan, the alleged founder of Kurdsat  TV.  There
      was no evidence to support  the  claim  that  Hero  Khan  founded  the
      station but the point being made by the judge was a common-sense  one,
      that embezzlement would no more damage her reputation than  any  other
      member of staff. I am satisfied that the statement  was  open  to  the
      judge to make. In any event, the judge did not rely on this finding as
      undermining of the appellant's credibility and thus there  can  be  no
      material  error  in  the  ground  claiming  that  the  judge  provided
      inadequate reasons for the finding.


  22. Finally, at [23] the judge found it not plausible that  if  Mr  Chalak
      had embezzled PUK  money  and  felt  sufficiently  threatened  by  the
      appellant's position to be prepared to harm  the  appellant,  that  he
      would not have taken action sooner rather than waiting 3-4 months  and
      until after the appellant had been suspended from his employment.  The
      judge pointed out that the delay risked the  appellant  disclosing  Mr
      Chalak's embezzlement to others. I am satisfied that it  was  open  to
      the judge to make this observation as a matter of logic; it was not  a
      re-characterisation  based  on   the   judge's   own   perception   of
      reasonability. No error of law is disclosed by this ground.


   Decision


  23. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on a
      point of law such as to require the decision to be set aside.


                    I do not set aside the decision.


                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.




                    Signed   DMW Pickup




                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                    Dated 7 July 2020







