
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)       Appeal Numbers: PA/05578/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27th March 2018                           |On 08th May 2018               |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                      AV
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, instructed by Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             Notice of Decision

 1. Rule 40(3) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/2698 as amended) applies to this decision.

 2. The appeal concerns an Asylum claim.  Both parties were agreed that the
    judge fell into error in assessing credibility. The judge took a  wrong
    approach to the medical evidence, not least, when she stated  that  she
    put no weight on the medical evidence,  in  effect  stepping  into  the
    shoes of the expert and failing to acknowledge the diagnosis  of  PTSD.
    The parties were agreed that whilst, for the reasons  set  out  in  the
    grant of permission, adverse credibility  findings  were  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence, it is not possible to know how a proper approach
    to the medical evidence would have  affected  the  judge's  credibility
    conclusions, so that none of the factual findings can stand.

 3.  By consent the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed as follows:

      a) the First-tier Tribunal's decision is affected by error of law.

      b) the First-tier tribunal decision is  set  aside,  with  no  factual
         findings preserved.

      c) the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard  de
         novo by a judge other than Judge Chana.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

