

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05810/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 December 2017                         |On 16 January 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before
                              THE HON. LADY RAE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                     I D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          No representative or appearance
For the Respondent:      Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Ukraine who provided a date of  birth
    of 8 April 1986.  She appeals against the determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beg promulgated on 18 July 2017  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  refusing  her  asylum
    claim and her claim for humanitarian protection.  The appellant was not
    present nor was she represented at the hearing  before  us.   The  last
    contact that we can find on file is a letter written by her  solicitors
    Yemet Solicitors dated 28 July 2017 in which the  solicitors  confirmed
    they were representing the appellant and submitting grounds of  appeal.
    We are satisfied that the appellant and her solicitors were  served  at
    two different addresses on  14  November  2017  by  first  class  post.
    Accordingly we are satisfied that they  have  received  notice  of  the
    hearing and we will proceed in their absence because nothing  has  been
    put before us to suggest that they have not  been  lawfully  served  or
    wish to adjourn the hearing.

 2. The case that was put forward by the appellant was that she refused  to
    be conscripted into the military to  perform  military  service,  as  a
    result of which she had been convicted in a court in  the  Ukraine  and
    sentenced in her absence to three years' imprisonment.  She fears  that
    if she returns to the Ukraine she will be arrested and imprisoned.   It
    is accepted that, were she to suffer a period of imprisonment,  whether
    it is on remand or in order to serve her sentence, those conditions are
    sufficiently serious to amount to a violation of her human rights.  The
    issue, however, before the judge was whether there was a real  risk,  a
    reasonable likelihood, of her being returned to the Ukraine  where  she
    would then be imprisoned as a draft  evader.   There  were  immediately
    difficulties in the  appellant's  case  which  the  appellant  did  not
    resolve adequately in the evidence before the Tribunal.  They are  also
    reflected in the respondent's refusal letter.

 3. The appellant is aged 29 and the respondent noted in  paragraph  27  of
    the refusal letter that the objective information stated that  military
    service was for people  between  20  and  27  years  of  age.   As  the
    appellant was over the age of 29 when the  first  call-up  papers  were
    served, according to her case, that would appear to be contrary to  the
    basis upon which conscription is operated in the Ukraine.

 4. The appellant relied upon three attempts  to  serve  her  with  call-up
    papers.  On the first occasion,  which  was  on  18  August  2015,  she
    provided a document.  This document, indeed all the relevant documents,
    were in photocopy form, which inevitably  raises  difficulties.   Those
    difficulties are compounded by the fact  that  the  original  documents
    were said to be held by her  family  in  the  Ukraine.   The  appellant
    herself said that her sister sent her the documents including the court
    documents, however the only documents the court  saw  were  photocopied
    documents.  The problem in relation to the call-up of 15 August 2015 is
    principally concerned with the fact that the notice did not state  that
    the appellant signed to  confirm  that  she  had  received  it  yet  in
    evidence she said that she did sign for it.  That appears to have  been
    treated by the judge as  an  inconsistency.   Call-up  papers  however,
    which were subsequently served on two successive occasions, one  on  31
    October 2015 and the second on 7 March 2016 were call-up papers  served
    on her home at a time when she was no  longer  living  there  when  she
    certainly could not have signed  them.   Accordingly,  this  raised  an
    issue as to whether or not a Ukrainian  could,  on  the  basis  of  her
    failure to comply with the call-up, rely upon call-up  documents  which
    had not been served.

 5. The Ukrainian conviction was called into  question  by  the  fact  that
    there was no evidence about it, save from the appellant's mother who it
    is said was present during the criminal hearing and is  able  therefore
    to give direct evidence of it.  However, no attempt was made  to  apply
    to the court for a record of the conviction, nor to seek the help of  a
    Ukrainian lawyer who might have approached the court to verify that  he
    had applied and  obtained  an  original  copy  of  the  certificate  of
    conviction sufficient to satisfy the Tribunal that there was in fact  a
    conviction. Inter-solicitor correspondence directed by an  appellant's
    solicitor is of greater weight  than  correspondence  directed  by  the
    appellant.

 6. The judge went through the nature of claims made by an  individual  who
    is seeking to avoid military conscription.   The  appellant  is  not  a
    conscientious objector and  the  general  principle  is  that  military
    service is a lawful operation on the part of a sovereign government for
    whom it takes responsibility.  An objection to military conscription is
    not sufficient to establish a  claim.   The  case-law  that  the  judge
    relied upon was very much on the basis of the risk faced by  those  who
    are under the obligation to submit to the draft.  Of course  the  judge
    had already noted that the appellant herself was beyond the draft  age.
    In paragraph 6 of the determination the judge refers to VB and  Another
    (draft evaders and prison condition) Ukraine CG [2017]  UKUT  79  where
    she noted that the Upper Tribunal heard evidence that  very  few  draft
    evaders have today been subjected to any criminal proceedings let alone
    convicted of any criminal offence or sent to prison.

 7. She referred to paragraph 55 of the determination in which the Tribunal
    held that those who may have been convicted in absentia would  probably
    be entitled to a retrial in accordance with Article 412 of the criminal
    procedure code of the Ukraine.  There was also no evidence that a draft
    evader  avoiding  conscription  or  mobilisation  would  on  a  retrial
    ultimately be sentenced to serve a period of imprisonment  which  is  a
    very rare occurrence.  Accordingly the judge was entitled  to  conclude
    that the appellant would be able to return to the Ukraine, on the basis
    that her claim that she was at risk of military  conscription  had  not
    been made out and that the documents could not be relied upon, as  well
    as that the evidence did not support the conviction, which it  is  said
    she had already been subjected to by a court in the Ukraine.

 8. Finally, the judge did not accept that there is a real likelihood  that
    she would be sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  for  evading  the
    draft, partly for those reasons but also because the  country  guidance
    relating to draft evasion does not suggest there is a  real  likelihood
    of her being imprisoned.  Accordingly, the only slight window  for  her
    to be at risk would be that if she  had  indeed  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of three years for draft evasion  she  would  be
    held on remand and not on bail on return to the Ukraine and that during
    that period of remand, however long that period might be, she would  be
    subjected to the conditions in prison which  would  violate  her  human
    rights.  It could not be said  that  thereafter  she  would  suffer  an
    infringement of her rights because  on  a  retrial  she  would  not  be
    sentenced to immediate imprisonment.  However, that opportunity, as  it
    were, for her to be subjected to a period in remand was not on the face
    of it  established  by  reason  of  the  evidence  that  she  provided.
    Accordingly it makes no difference that the judge found in paragraph 25
    that even were she to be subjected to a short  period  on  remand  that
    would not be sufficient to infringe her rights.  For these  reasons  we
    dismiss the appeal.

DECISION

    The Judge made no error on a point of law and the original
    determination of the appeal shall stand.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                       Date: 12 January 2018
