
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05952/2018
                                                               PA/05954/2018
                                                               PA/05956/2018
                                                               PA/05958/2018
                                                               PA/05961/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th November 2018                |On 6th December 2018                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  WAQAS [P]
                                  FAIZA [P]
                                   [A W1]
                                    [Z W]
                                   [A W2]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss N Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by Knightbridge
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr. A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellants have been given permission to appeal the decision of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge O R Williams who dismissed the appeal
         against the respondent's refusal of their protection and human
         rights appeals. The present appeal takes no issue with the finding
         that the asylum claim made was a fabrication.

      2. The 1st and 2nd appellants are husband and wife and the remaining
         appellants are their children, [AW1], born in May 2011, [ZW], born
         in July 2014 and [AW2], born in December 2017. All are nationals of
         Pakistan.

      3. The 1st appellant came to the United Kingdom in August 2010 to
         study. His wife joined him with leave as a dependent in January
         2011. They were granted various leaves until November 2016. Their
         claim for protection was made shortly after this expired. The claim
         was then withdrawn by the respondent in May 2017 because the 1st
         appellant had failed to attend for interviews. Further
         representations were made and finally in July 2017 an interview did
         take place. Subsequently, Alayna was born. The decision refusing
         the applications was issued in April 2018.

The First tier Tribunal

      4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Williams in considering the article 8
         claim started by considering the relevant immigration rules. At
         paragraph 32 the judge noted that the first appellant could not
         satisfy the partner parent route because his wife was not British
         nor settled and the parent route did not assist him because he
         lives as part of a family unit with the children. The judge then
         turned to private life under paragraph 276 ADE (iv) and (vi). The
         1st subsection is directed towards his eldest child having lived in
         the United Kingdom for 7 years. The judge found he was a qualifying
         child and the issue under the rules was whether it would not be
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. The 2nd
         subsection is directed towards the appellant and whether there
         would be very significant obstacles to his integration back into
         life in Pakistan.

      5. The judge referred to PD and Others (Article 8: conjoined family
         claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 which guided decision makers to
         1st apply the immigration rules to each individual applicant and,
         if appropriate, consider matters outside the rules. Such an
         exercise would typically involve considering all of the claims
         jointly. The judge referred to considering the possible future
         scenario for all of the applicants and concluded that the only
         realistic scenario was for all the appeals to either be allowed or
         dismissed and there was no issue of separating the family. The
         central consideration was whether family return to Pakistan was
         reasonable.

      6. The judge then took guidance from the decision of EV (Philippines)
         and others [2014] EWCA 874b in determining the best interests of
         the children. In line with that the judge adopted a checklist
         approach. The judge also referred to the respondent's Guidance,
         applying the version published in February 2018. This stated that
         the longer a child has resided in the United Kingdom and the older
         the age at which they have done so, the more the balance will shift
         towards it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave. The
         guidance said that and strong reasons will be required to refuse a
         case where the outcome will be the removal of the child with
         continuous UK residence of 7 years or more.

The Upper Tribunal

      7. The application for permission referred to the decision of NT and
         ET (child's best interests; extempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT
         00088.That decision referred to MA (Pakistan) and Others v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705
         where section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 was considered . The Court of Appeal held that in
         determining what was reasonable, the issue is not solely to be
         looked at from the child's perspective but requires a balancing
         exercise between what was in the public interest and what was in
         the interests of the child. At paragraph 46 Elias LJ referred to
         the August 2015 Immigration Directorate Instructions which stated
         once the seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there
         need to be 'strong reasons' for refusing leave (para 11.2.4). At
         paragraph 49 Elias LJ said:

             "... the fact that the child has been in the UK for seven
             years would need to be given significant weight in the
             proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first,
             because of its relevance to determining the nature and
             strength of the child's best interests; and second, because it
             establishes as a starting point that leave should be granted
             unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary."

      8. The present application submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Williams had listed reasons why the family should return to
         Pakistan but it was contended those reasons did not constitute
         strong or powerful reasons. Permission was granted on the basis
         that arguably none of the factors listed by the judge at paragraph
         38 to 43 where capable, individually or cumulatively, of amounting
         to powerful reasons which would render it reasonable to expect the
         3rd appellant to leave the United Kingdom. The permission pointed
         out the 1st appellant had lawful status between 15 August 20010 to
         30 November 2016.

      9. At hearing, Miss N Wilkins relied upon the points made in the
         application for permission, arguing that the judge failed to
         identify strong reasons as opposed to simply giving reasons. She
         also submitted the judge, whilst referring to the best interests of
         the children, does not specifically identify where those interests
         lie. She also submitted the judge in stating he was looking at
         everything in the round misdirected himself and that the 1st point
         for the judge to determine absent the issue of proportionality was
         the best interests of the children.

     10. In response, Mr. McVeety said that the judgements referred to now
         had to be read in light of the decision of the Supreme Court in KO
         Nigeria [2018] UKSC 53. Whilst this had not been promulgated at the
         time of the First-tier Tribunal in considering if the impugned
         decision errs in the law the evaluation is against the law as now
         understood. Both representatives made the point that KO Nigeria is
         a recent decision and the jurisprudence on its application has yet
         to develop. However, Mr McVeety contended that the present decision
         accords with that decision which is now directed to include
         consideration of wider matters.

     11. In this regard, paragraph 18 of the decision in KO Nigeria is
         significant. The court approves the HO Guidance in relation to
         section 117B(6) and paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iv). Paragraph 11 of the
         decision refers to an additional paragraph to the HO Guidance which
         reiterates that the consideration of the child's best interest must
         not be affected by the conduct or immigration history of the
         parent. However, such factors will be relevant to the assessment of
         the public interest and whether it outweighs the child's best
         interests. Paragraph 18 repeats this by stating that it is
         inevitably relevant to consider where the parents are expected to
         be since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with
         them.

     12. In the present appeal both parents are from Pakistan and have not
         been here a particularly long time. No obstacles to their
         integration back into life in Pakistan were identified. Their leave
         has now expired and, as Mr McVeety pointed out, they had no
         established right to be here and so the intention was that they be
         returned to Pakistan. It follows therefore that the children would
         accompany them. Paragraph 18 poses the question at this stage
         whether it would be reasonable for the child to leave.

     13. It is in this final context of reasonableness that the pros and
         cons listed by the judge are relevant. It is my conclusion these
         were matters for the judge and I see nothing about the factors
         listed which would be outside the realm reasonably open to the
         judge. The distinction between a reason and a strong reason is a
         matter of degree but I do not find any material error in the judge
         placing emphasis on the factors set out from paragraph 38 onwards.
         I find this accords with what was said in EV Philippines at
         paragraph 58: that an assessment of the best interests of the
         children must be made on the basis of the facts as they are in the
         real world. Related to this is that if neither parent has a right
         to remain, this is the background against which the assessment is
         conducted. The ultimate question will be whether it is reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent.

     14. At paragraph 45 the judge acknowledges that the primary
         consideration is the best interests of the 3 children. The judge
         concluded at paragraph 53 that their best interests would be to be
         with their parents and to return to Pakistan. The judge has
         addressed the necessary question and I can find no material error
         of law established. Reasons for the decision have been given which
         are sustainable.

Decision

    No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge OR Williams. Consequently, that decision dismissing
    the appeals shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge             Date 3 December 2018

