
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05758/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2020                     |On 25 March 2020                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     EGG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Woolley promulgated on the 28 October  2019  in  which
       the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born  on  2  October  1979  whose
       claim for international protection was rejected by the  Secretary  of
       State.

    3. Having considered the documentary and written evidence the Judge sets
       out his findings of fact from [36] of the decision under challenge.

    4.  The  appellant,  not  being  satisfied  with  the  outcome,   sought
       permission to appeal which was  granted  by  a  judge  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal on a renewed application on 28 January 2020,  the  operative
       part of the grant being in the following terms: Although  it  may  be
       that ultimately the strengths of  the  adverse  credibility  findings
       overall is such as to make the point immaterial, it is arguable  that
       the fact that it seems the experts response was sent to the  Tribunal
       before the promulgation gives rise to an arguable  error  of  law  in
       that decision.

Error of law

    5. At [26] of the decision under challenge the Judge writes:

           "26.   At the hearing an issue arose about the identity and date
                of the  document  (search  warrant)  which  the  expert  had
                commented on in his verification report. I directed  that  a
                clarifying statement should be obtained from the expert  and
                served on the tribunal and respondent within 5 working  days
                of the hearing. In the event that  no  clarifying  statement
                was produced within the timescale I indicated that  I  would
                proceed to decide the appeal on the evidence before  me.  As
                it happened no clarifying statement was  received  from  the
                expert even though I waited for 9  working  days  after  the
                hearing before promulgation (having checked first  with  the
                Tribunal to ensure that no statement had been received)."

    6. The appellant in his application for permission to appeal wrote:

           "In reaching his decision the IJ found against the appellant  on
           credibility grounds. The IJ did not accept  that  the  appellant
           was Mungiki in particular that a warrant had been issued against
           him. At para 26 and 52 the  IJ  recounts  that  there  had  been
           identified at the hearing a discrepancy in relation to the  date
           of the warrant. He allowed for 5 working days post  hearing  for
           the matter to be  clarified.  This  meant  that  by  the  Friday
           18.10.19. Unfortunately the response from  the  expert  was  not
           received until after the weekend, the Monday  21.10.19.  It  was
           faxed the same day to the tribunal. The appellant attaches proof
           of faxing to these grounds.  The  IJ  states  that  despite  the
           passing of the initial 5 working days, he  waited  a  further  9
           working  days  and  even  checked  with  the  tribunal.  It   is
           respectfully submitted that the appellant  having  provided  the
           clarification, albeit too late, was still within  the  timeframe
           that the IJ  was  willing  to  consider  it.  The  tribunal  was
           therefore seized of the additional evidence as of the  21.10.19.
           It  is  submitted  that  it  is  an  error  of  law   that   the
           clarification report  was  not  placed  before  the  IJ  by  the
           Tribunal service, it is submitted that the  appellant  had  used
           reasonable diligence in providing it  (Ladd  v  Marshall  [1954]
           EWCA Civ 1).

    7. At [52] the Judge writes:

           "52.   In a supplementary  report  he  comments  on  the  arrest
                warrant faced by the appellant.  His  comments  are  however
                placed in doubt by his repeated  references  to  the  arrest
                warrant "dated January 2014" when the arrest warrant  itself
                is said to date from 2005. He also refer to the appellant in
                the feminine at one point. I allowed the appellant 5 working
                days from the  date  of  hearing  to  provide  a  clarifying
                statement from the expert. No such statement was received by
                me or the  tribunal  within  the  specified  period,  and  I
                therefore waited for 9 working days after the  hearing  date
                for such a report before I  had  to  promulgate  within  the
                required timescales. The expert concludes  that  the  arrest
                warrant is an authentic document and is  in  proper  format.
                The appellant is more likely than not to be subjected to the
                risks  of  harm.  He  does  not  describe  any  features  of
                suspicion. He concludes that it is genuine. I  consider  the
                overall weight I can attached to the warrant and this report
                below, taking into account the discrepancies  I  have  noted
                above."

    8. The reference by the Judge to  the  need  to  promulgate  a  decision
       within the required timescales is a reference to the fact  judges  of
       the First-Tier Tribunal are  required  by  that  Tribunals  procedure
       rules to promulgate a decision within 10 days of a hearing.

    9. The chronology shows the appeal was  heard  on  11  October  2019,  a
       Friday. Five working days from this date is Friday, 18 October  2019.
       The date of the decision, being the date the Judge sent the same  for
       promulgation, is 20 October 2019 which is 9 actual days from the date
       of the hearing rather  than  9  working  days.  The  Judge  therefore
       allowed the 5 days that he had  directed  for  the  documents  to  be
       produced before promulgation, yet the  additional  material  had  not
       been provided.

   10. The Judge is a fee paid Judge who has no permanent  presence  at  the
       Newport hearing centre but who will attend a centre when he is booked
       to undertake judicial duties there. It is  clear  the  Judge  checked
       with  the  administration  at  Newport  to  ascertain   whether   the
       additional  report  had  been  received  before  he  promulgated  his
       decision. The comment by the Judge that by the  20  October  2019  no
       further report had been received is factually correct. The additional
       report was sent to Newport on 21 October 2019 at 16:33 hours by fax.

   11. The five-day period beyond the date of the hearing is to be found  in
       a specific direction by Judge Woolley who also makes it clear that in
       the event that no such statement was produced within the timescale he
       would proceed  to  determine  the  appeal  on  the  evidence  he  had
       available to him.  This is clearly stated at [26].

   12. Mr Dieu did not attempt to suggest that there had been an attempt  to
       file the additional evidence earlier.

   13. Mr Dieu was asked when those instructing him made  it  known  to  the
       expert the Judge granted the dispensation of additional time, but  he
       was unaware of this information.

   14. Mr Dieu was asked whether  with  the  additional  report,  which  the
       appellant's representatives would have been aware was  filed  outside
       the time limit permitted by the Judge, an  application  was  made  to
       adduce the evidence late. The sanction contained within the direction
       given by the Judge at the hearing is clearly that unless the  further
       report was filed by 18 October 2019 no further time will be permitted
       and the Judge will decide the merits on the  basis  of  the  evidence
       that was available, which is precisely what  the  Judge  did.  It  is
       arguable that the report filed on 21 October 2019 would not have been
       taken into account by the Judge without  an  application  for  relief
       from sanctions which had  been  granted.  Such  an  application  will
       explain the reason for the delay and seek permission for the same  to
       be taken into  account.  An  application  could  have  been  made  by
       correspondence prior to the expiration of the time limit or,  at  the
       latest, on 18 October 2019 explaining that the report may be late. No
       such application or request for an extension was made.

   15. The decision was promulgated after the  time  limit  allowed  by  the
       Judge had passed and no arguable legal error arises as  a  result  of
       the  same.  The  appellant  fails   to   establish   any   procedural
       irregularity amounting to legal error  on  the  basis  of  procedural
       fairness in the Judge proceeding as he did.

   16. Mr Dieu when asked to comment on the materiality  of  the  additional
       report. He indicated that if the inconsistency had not been there the
       Judge may have arrived at a different conclusion. I do not find  such
       assertion made out.

   17. This is a carefully written and considered determination of the  type
       regularly  produced  by  Judge  Woolley  when  sitting.   The   Judge
       specifically considers the appellant's claim to be at risk on  return
       to Kenya as a result of his being subject to an arrest warrant  which
       the Judge specifically states at [52] was  considered  later  in  the
       decision. This specifically appears at [67 -  68]  in  the  following
       terms:

           "67.   The appellant has  produced  a  warrant  claiming  to  be
                issued by the Kenyan authorities and dated 14th  of  January
                2005. The appellant was asked in an interview how he came by
                a copy of this warrant and he responded  that  it  had  been
                faxed to his representatives by his mother while he  was  in
                detention in 2012. As the  respondent  pointed  out  at  the
                hearing, this explanation is at odds with his Bio-data  form
                of 2002 which stated that his mother had died in 1994.  When
                this was put to him at the hearing the appellant  blamed  it
                on poor interpretation. The responses to other questions are
                however clear and consistent,  and  it  is  unclear  why  an
                interpreter would have said that his mother had died in 1994
                and had been born in 1956 unless this information  had  come
                from  the  appellant  himself.  I  find  that  that  is  the
                information he did give in 2002.

           68.    The expert has considered that this warrant is consistent
                with the usual forms in Kenya. His report is vitiated  by  a
                persistent reference to the warrant as being dated  "January
                2014", when no warrant of this date  has  been  produced  to
                this tribunal. It is uncertain, I find, that the expert  had
                been considering the correct warrant. The  case  of  Tanveer
                Ahmed IAT [2002] UKAIT 00439 provides guidance on whether  a
                document produced can be relied on. It is for the individual
                claimant to show that a  document  can  be  relied  on.  The
                decision maker should consider whether a document is one  on
                which reliance should properly be placed  after  looking  at
                all the evidence in the round. The warrant itself is  a  one
                page,  type  written  pro  forma  with  a  stamp  of  "Chief
                magistrate Nairobi". The warrant itself was only produced in
                2012 while the appellant was in detention. Its providence is
                uncertain. The appellant says that it was sent to him by his
                mother but this is contradicted by the Bio  data  form  from
                2002 which says she died in 1994. It is uncertain when  this
                was sent from Kenya or by whom. Whenever  it  was  sent  the
                appellant  only  produced  it  in  2012  while  he  was   in
                detention. While it may be in the correct form  no  original
                has been produced for  the  Home  Office  and  there  is  no
                apparent security features such as a watermark. I have found
                that the appellant not to be credible in his assertion  that
                he returned to Kenya in 2004 and therefore a warrant against
                him in that  period  must  be  regarded  with  a  degree  of
                circumspection. On all the evidence I find that the  warrant
                of arrest he has produced can have little reliance placed on
                it."

   18. The Judge applied the correct test to ascertain what weight could  be
       placed upon  the  documentary  evidence  in  light  of  the  evidence
       considered as a whole. The Judge gives ample reasons for  why  little
       weight could be placed  upon  the  arrest  warrant,  apart  from  the
       discrepancy  in  the  experts  report.  Indeed   whilst   the   issue
       surrounding the date may be relevant to the  weight  the  Judge  felt
       able to place upon the experts report regarding the validity  of  the
       arrest warrant any such opinion was clearly undermined by  the  other
       issues noted by the Judge and referred to at [68] above.

   19. It is also important to consider the Judges global conclusions on the
       evidence set out at [71 - 72] of the decision under  challenge  which
       are in the following terms:

           "71    I have accepted that the appellant was a Kenyan national.
                I have not accepted that he has shown  any  relationship  to
                Kamani Ruo.  As his evidence is that he  was  introduced  to
                the Mungiki by his uncle Kimani Ruo this part of  his  claim
                is in doubt. He has said that he was arrested  and  tortured
                by  the  Kenyan  authorities  from  October  2000.  As   the
                respondent points out the Mungiki were only banned in  2002.
                The appellant addresses this in  his  witness  statement  by
                saying that it was only the meetings  of  the  Mungiki  that
                were banned and not the Mungiki themselves: he was  arrested
                for not being a Mungiki but for attending a meeting. Mr Dieu
                did  not  bring  my  attention  to  any  reference  to  this
                discrimination in the country  information,  and  as  prayer
                meetings were integral to the Mungiki belief system  I  find
                that it has not been  explained  how  the  meetings  of  the
                Mungiki could be banned  but  not  the  Mungiki  themselves.
                There  is  no  reference  in   the   appellant's   extensive
                interviews about this distinction and I find that it has not
                been established by  the  appellant  that  meetings  of  the
                Mungiki were banned in 2000. The  appellant's  account  that
                the police before 2002 asked him to renounce his  membership
                of the Mungiki, when the  Mungiki  were  not  banned,  lacks
                credibility. I have noted the  appellant's  account  of  his
                activities as a coordinator and have found this to be vague.
                I have noted the injuries remarked by Dr Shellens  but  have
                found that they could have been caused  in  other  plausible
                ways which are not explored. I have  not  accepted  that  Dr
                Shellens was in a position to make any formal  diagnosis  of
                PTSD, but even if he did suffer from PTSD from  his  history
                in the UK (as Dr Shellens herself remarked on when she  said
                that his PTSD could have been exasperated by his experiences
                in the UK). I have found that the appellant was not credible
                in his claim that he entered Kenya in  2004,  and  have  not
                accepted the warrant produced from Kenya as  a  document  on
                which  reliance  can  be  placed.  I  have  found  that  the
                appellant's credibility has been damaged  by  factors  under
                the 2004 Act, and that his  whole  account  of  torture  and
                detention in Kenya  is  thereby  undermined.  While  I  have
                classed him as  a  vulnerable  appellant  I  find  that  the
                inconsistencies and lack of credibility in  his  account  go
                beyond the confusion and incoherency that may be expected to
                arise from such a vulnerability.

           72.    The appellant repeatedly blames  interpretation  problems
                for the inconsistencies in his account, but on assessment of
                all the interviews (where he accepts that he has  understood
                the interpreter) I find that he has responded clearly to the
                questions asked of him and  that  any  inconsistencies  have
                arisen from the account  which  he  himself  has  given.  He
                similarly  blames  the  Interviewing  Officers   for   being
                oppressive but there is no complaint of this at the time and
                the record of the questioning does not support such a claim.
                His representatives had the  opportunity  to  correct  these
                interviews (and did so) and  cannot  be  blamed  for  making
                incomplete   corrections   since   they   were   acting   on
                instructions from the appellant himself. Any allegation that
                they have been incompetent has not  been  supported  by  the
                necessary procedural steps  outlined  in  MM  (out  of  time
                appeals) Burundi [2004] UKAIT 00182.  On  an  assessment  of
                all the evidence I find that he is not established  that  he
                was ever a member of the Mungiki or at risk from the  Kenyan
                State. As he was never a member of the  Mungiki  is  not  at
                risk from the Mungiki as a claimed deserter. I find  instead
                that he is an economic migrant as he  himself  described  in
                his 2007 application. He is not at risk  of  persecution  on
                return to Kenya."

   20. The Judge was entitled to dismiss the appeal on  protection  grounds.
       The finding the appellant as a civilian returning to Kenya  will  not
       face serious or individual threat to his life or person by reason  of
       indiscriminate violence in a situation of internal armed conflict, as
       there is no conflict in Kenya, that the appellant was  therefore  not
       entitled to a grant of Humanitarian Protection is  one  open  to  the
       Judge on the evidence as is the dismissal of the claims  pursuant  to
       articles 2 and 3 ECHR, in line.

   21. The Judge considers human rights aspects from [79]  by  reference  to
       paragraph 276 ADE, section 55 in light of the  presence  of  a  child
       born on 20 January 2009 who is a British citizen through his  mother,
       the appellant had not seen the child since 2014, and Appendix FM. The
       Judge considers article 8 from [85] adopting a structured approach to
       assessing the proportionality of the decision by reference to Razgar.
       The Judge sets out points both for and  against  the  appellant  from
       [93] resulting in the conclusion at [94] that the appellant  had  not
       produced a very strong or compelling case sufficient to outweigh  the
       public interest in his removal.

   22. As stated above, this is a  very  carefully  considered  and  written
       determination in  which  the  Judges  conclusions  are  supported  by
       adequate findings. The weight to be  given  to  the  evidence  was  a
       matter for the Judge. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the outcome
       and seeks a more favourable outcome to enable him to  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom the grounds fail to  establish  arguable  legal  error
       material to the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient to  warrant
       the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

   23. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   24. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16 March 2020
