
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  appeal number: PA/05267/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st March 2019                   |On 02nd April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

            Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT & UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    N B O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision reached without a hearing  by  FtT
    Judge Woolf on 4 and promulgated on 18 June 2018.

 2. There has been considerable administrative confusion, before and  after
    the FtT  made  its  decision.   The  appellant,  through  her  previous
    representatives, is not free of all blame, and the  grounds  of  appeal
    prepared by those representatives do little to dispel the confusion.

 3. However, on investigation before us, it eventually  became  clear  that
    the appellant (as an assisted person) was not liable  to  the  tribunal
    for a fee; the FtT should not have written to her insisting that a  fee
    was payable; she asked for an oral hearing by a letter of 16 May  2018;
    the FtT should not have allocated her case on 4 June 2018 for  decision
    "on the papers"; and Judge Woolf  should  not  have  decided  the  case
    without a hearing.

 4. Parties agreed that the outcome should be as follows.

 5. The decision of the FtT is set aside. The nature of the  case  is  such
    that it is appropriate under section 12 of  the  2007  Act,  and  under
    Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to  the  FtT  for  an  entirely  fresh
    hearing.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are  not
    to include Judge Woolf.

 6. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity is maintained at this stage.


      [pic]

      Dated 1 April 2019
      UT Judge Macleman


