
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05944/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 January 2018                     |On 17 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                  XING LIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Price, Latta & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  David  Clapham  promulgated  on  16  August  2017,
    dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent  made  on  9
    June 2017, refusing his protection and human rights claim on the  basis
    that was not a refugee.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of China born in 1983. His case is  that  he
    is a practitioner of Falun Gong, and had encouraged others  to  do  the
    same. His father was a practitioner of Falug Gong, and  he  had  helped
    his father to distribute leaflets about Falun Gong.  He had been  doing
    so in July 2015 when he had been stopped by  officials  who  threatened
    him and told him that he should not be doing so.

 3. Not long after this incident the appellant's father was  detained,  the
    appellant finding out only some time later from  one  of  his  father's
    friends who also practised Falun Gong that this had happened.

 4. In May 2016, officials came to look for him at his home, but he was not
    there. On learning of that,  the  appellant  made  arrangements  to  be
    smuggled out of China, arriving in  the  United  Kingdom  in  September
    2016. He claimed asylum in December 2016.

 5. It is not in dispute that Falun Gong was tolerated  in  China  until  a
    severe crackdown from July 1999 onwards.

 6. The respondent did not accept that the appellant practised Falun  Gong,
    nor that he had come to the adverse interest of the Chinese police as a
    result. The reasons for those conclusions are set out  in  the  refusal
    letter dated 9 June 2017.

 7. On appeal, the judge found that:

      i) It  was  significant  that  he  had  delayed  in  claiming  asylum,
         rejecting the explanation for the delay [44];

     ii) The appellant had been inconsistent as to why he had been attracted
         to Falun Gong [45];

    iii) It was reasonable to expect someone who had practised Falun Gong to
         have conducted research and that it was extroadrinargy that someone
         delivering leaflets would not have a detailed knowledge of what  it
         said, or where he had been distributing them,  given  the  risk  of
         imprisonment through his activities [46]; and, that it was  unclear
         why he would continue with the Falun Gong given the  risk  when  it
         was the appellant's evidence he did not practise very often.

     iv) There was no evidence that the police came to the appellant's  home
         due to him practising Falun Gong [47];

      v) He agreed with the respondent's submissions that the appellant  was
         not credible [48]; and, even were he a Falun Gong practitioner,  he
         would not be at risk, occasionally practising Falun  Gong  at  home
         not be likely to bring him to the attention of the authorities.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) in commencing at [44]his assessment of the appellant's  credibility
         with  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
         Claimants, etc) Act  2004,  contrary  to  SM  (Section  8:  judge's
         process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 116;

     ii) in assessing credibility in that he:

          a)  found  incorrectly   [45]  that  the   appellant   had   been
             inconsistent in his explanation for being attracted  to  Falun
             Gong;




          b) failed  [46] to take into account the appellant's  explanation
             for continuing to practise Falun  Gong  despite  the  risk  of
             imprisonment;




          c)  failed  properly  to  take  into  account   the   appellant's
             explanation for not researching elements of Falun Gong when at
             [46] drawing an adverse inference for not so doing;

    iii) In failing to have regard to  the  respondent's  guidance  and  the
         principles set out in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 in  assessing
         why the appellant was not at  risk  if  practising  Falun  Gong  in
         private.

 9. On 3 November 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  granted
    permission on all grounds.

10.  I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives,  and  reserved  my
    decision.

11. I address the grounds in turn.

    Ground 1

12. Despite Mr Price's submissions I do not accept  that  the  judge  acted
    unlawfully in  considering  the  appellant's  delay  An  assessment  of
    credibility has to begin somewhere, and this is not a  case  where  the
    judge  held,  as  would  not  be  permissible,  that  credibility   was
    significantly undermined by this matter alone.  On  the  contrary,  the
    judge stated only that it was significant. That  is  an  indication  of
    weight being attached, and was a matter open to the judge. Further,  as
    I observed during the hearing, while section 8 of the 2004 Act requires
    a judge to take  certain  matters  into  account,  the  judge  had  not
    referred to it. There is nothing in SM (Iran) indicating that the judge
    was not entitled to draw inferences adverse from delay.  As was held at
    [10]

         It is the task of the fact-finder, whether official  or  judge,  to
         look at all the evidence in the round, to try and  grasp  it  as  a
         whole and to see how it fits together and whether it is  sufficient
         to discharge the burden of proof. Some aspects of the evidence  may
         themselves contain the seeds of doubt. Some aspects of the evidence
         may cause doubt to be cast on other parts  of  the  evidence.  Some
         aspects of the evidence may be matters to which section 8  applies.
         Some parts of the evidence may shine with the light of credibility.
         The fact-finder must  consider  all  these  points  together;  and,
         despite section 8, and although some matters  may  go  against  and
         some matters count in favour of credibility, it is  for  the  fact-
         finder to decide which are the important, and which  are  the  less
         important features of the evidence, and to  reach  his  view  as  a
         whole on the evidence as a whole.

13. It is not averred in the  grounds  that  the  judge  rejection  of  the
    explanation for the delay was unlawful. On the contrary, I am satisfied
    that the judge's rejection of the reasons for delay is  adequately  and
    sustainably reasoned. It is also evident from the decision at [48]  and
    from the preceding paragraphs that the judge had looked at  matters  in
    the round.

    Ground 2

14. Mr Price took me through the appellant's evidence as  set  out  in  his
    statement off 28 March 2017, his asylum interview on 18  May  2015  and
    his witness statement dated 13 July 2017 which in part responds to  the
    refusal letter.

15. As regards the appellant's reasons for  becoming  involved  with  Falun
    Gong, the initial statement says simply that  the  appellant  had  been
    taught by his father [5], but that he was not as devoted to it.   Asked
    at Q.31 why he had decided to practise  he  said  it  was  because  his
    father was a Falun Gong practitioner "he sometimes  taught  me  I  just
    follow him and I follow his belief. At Q32, asked why attracted him  to
    it, he said:

         "I cannot remember because my father is a Falun  Gong  practitioner
         we often attended a meeting together that's what attracted me."

16. It must, however, be noted that the appellant does say it would be good
    to your health and he felt better after practising (Q.38) and  he  felt
    energetic.

17. In the additions to the substantive interview, adding to  his  response
    as to why his father was devout, the appellant does add that his father
    had recovered from a severe illness after practising Falun Gong.

18. It is in the witness statement  of  11  July  2017  at  [15]  that  the
    appellant states:

         My father used Falun Gong due to his ill health  and  the  positive
         effect of the exercises on him. I saw that work in  practice.  That
         is why I was interested in Falun Gong as it caused no harm and  was
         good for the health. It was not about the  written  theory  or  any
         books for me; it was all about the health effects...

19. I do not accept Mr Price's submission that this is simply an expansion.
    There is a clear change in the appellant's  evidence.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that there was an inconsistency, particularly  as  the
    appellant now emphasises the health  effects  as  being  the  principal
    reason he was attracted to Falun Gong which is not what he said before;
    his statements about health are vague.  The judge was thus entitled  to
    draw adverse inferences and he gave adequate  and  sustainable  reasons
    for so doing.

20. Turning to the appellant's explanation for continuing to practise Falun
    Gong despite the risk it is again relevant to consider the  appellant's
    evidence.  He does not say that he  continued  to  practice  after  his
    arrest in July 2015.   In interview in response to Qs  41  to  44,  the
    appellant was asked how often he practised,  he said not so very often,
    and for example when he had a day off work, maybe  he  would  practise,
    not as much as one day a week. He said he could not practise at work.

21. Asked about what he did after he left the police station [Q.97] he said
    he did  practise  sometimes,  but  not  often,  but  would  sit  to  do
    meditation, and that he did so because  his  belief  and  his  father's
    belief is Falun Gong. There is no mention here of any health  benefits.
    In his witness statement of 13 July 2017, the appellant said [32]  that
    he did not think it was fair for the  police  to  expect  him  to  stop
    practising Falun Gong, ignored the warning and  "continued  to  do  the
    exercises and movements...I did not stop as it was important to me."

22. Given that the  judge  had  reasonably  not  accepted  the  appellant's
    explanation that  he  had  practised  Falun  Gong  due  to  the  health
    benefits,  and  given  the  evidence  that  the   appellant   practised
    infrequently, and only sometimes when he had a break from work, it  was
    open to him to conclude that it was unclear why he had  continued.   It
    is not at all clear why the father's continuing to distribute  leaflets
    is relevant to the  question  of  why  the  appellant's  continuing  to
    practise is relevant. The observation that he practised infrequently is
    sustainable.

23. It is of note that the appellant's account is that he  and  his  father
    practised Falun Gong, and distributed leaflets about Falun Gong  for  a
    significant number of years. On his own account (interview, Q.29  -  Q.
    30) he was 8 or 10 when his father started which means he began,  given
    the appellants age, in around 1993.  His explanation for not conducting
    researched was that his father was a member of  Falun  Gong  (Q.33  and
    that he had not more education (Q.34).

24. It is, however, unclear as to when the leaflets were  distributed,  the
    appellant saying [Q.56] when asked about distributing leaflets (Qs  52-
    55) that  at the time Falun Gong was not barred in China, but  that  he
    did not know when it had been barred. The first answer  would  indicate
    distribution prior to July 1999 when the  appellant  was  approximately
    16. It is, however, surprising in the context of the appellant's father
    being, on his account, a devout follower of Falun Gong that he did  not
    know when, even roughly, it was barred, given that the father's  arrest
    was some 16 years later, and that he only found out it was  barred  (Q.
    58) when he was arrested.

25. In this context, and given what is said in the refusal letter  at  [22]
    which is fairly incorporated into the decision at [46], it was open  to
    the judge to conclude that given  the  length  of  time  the  appellant
    claimed to have been involved with Falun Gong that he would have  found
    out more  about  it.   The  explanation  the  appellant  gives  in  his
    statement of 13 July is at [14] -  [15]  states  that  he  had  learned
    enough from his father, which does not answer the question, and at [15]
    explains  the  health  effects.   The  judge  had  properly   and   for
    sustainable reasons rejected that earlier.

26. Accordingly, for these reasons, there is no merit in ground 2

    Ground 3

27. As the judge has found the appellant is not  a  practitioner  of  Falun
    Gong and was not credible, and his reasons for so finding are  adequate
    and sustainable,  this ground does not identify any material  error  as
    the finding that  the  appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  if  were  a
    practitioner was made in the alternative.

    Conclusion

28. In conclusion, for  the  reasons  given  above,  I  consider  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold it.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed                                  Date 10 January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

