
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/05622/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6th February 2018                       |On 5th March 2018                |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     AQ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Javed, Solicitor, Reiss Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Jones made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 9th January 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  18th  August  1990.   He
    claimed asylum on 16th December 2015 following arrest.  He was  refused
    on 20th May 2016.

 3. The appellant claimed that he would be at risk on return to Iran on the
    basis that he had committed adultery.   At  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Jones he confirmed that the earlier adultery claim is a  falsehood  but
    said that he would be at risk because he was a homosexual.

 4. The judge wrote as follows:

         "In the absence of consent from the Secretary of State to allow new
         grounds of appeal to be heard I am  unable  to  hear  them.   I  am
         satisfied that the appellant has confirmed his original  claim  was
         false, it is unfortunate he has maintained it  through  the  asylum
         interview - when there would have been no one there to overhear him
         he might fear and put forward then the basis of claim  he  mentions
         now.  I can understand why any suggestion he be allowed to withdraw
         his appeal would be opposed.

         It is clear the appellant has had the  opportunity  to  pursue  the
         original claim or resile from it.  He has said on two occasions the
         original claim is false and there is no basis of claim now.  I made
         it clear that I could not give  him  advice  as  I  had  to  remain
         independent.  He was clear the original claim was a falsehood.

         I find there would be no breach of the UK's obligations  under  the
         1951 and 1950 Conventions as claimed (Articles 2 and 3) or  Article
         8 (on the claim as put to the respondent)  if  the  appellant  were
         returned to his home country at this time.  If the appellant wishes
         to pursue his claim concerning homosexuality, his relationship with
         a man in the UK and risk on return to Iran relevant to the 1951 and
         1950 Conventions, this will be a matter for him to pursue this as a
         new claim for consideration by the Secretary of State".

 5. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that  he  was
    not advised properly by solicitors and his asylum claim had never  even
    been considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  He needs  a  new  Tribunal
    hearing so he can present factual information and  grounds  which  have
    not been considered.

 7. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  who  said  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    appellant, who was unrepresented, maintained  the  appeal  against  the
    refusal of his protection claim, and this required determination.

 8. The respondent set out a Rule 24 reply citing Section 85(5) and (6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended.   She
    argued that no consent had been sought by the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider a new matter and therefore the judge had  no  jurisdiction  to
    determine the matter as advanced at the date of the hearing.   However,
    at the hearing Mrs Pettersen did not resist the remittal of this appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.




Findings and Conclusions

 9. Section 85 of the 2002 Act states:

         "(v) But the Tribunal must not consider a  new  matter  unless  the
             Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.

         (vi) A matter is a new matter if -

             (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind  listed  in
                  Section 84, and

             (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered  the
                  matter in the context of -

                  (i)  the decision mentioned in Section 82(1), or

                  (ii) a statement made by the appellant under Section 120".

10. In this case the appellant continued to rely  on  the  same  Ground  of
    Appeal, namely that he sought protection from the UK on asylum grounds,
    albeit that he now wished to rely on different content in  relation  to
    that claim.  Accordingly the matter before the  judge  was  not  a  new
    matter but  a  continuation  of  the  claim  which  he  had  originally
    advanced, namely that he would be at risk of persecution on a return to
    Iran.

11. The judge's decision is set aside.

12. It is remitted to be heard by a judge other than  Judge  Jones  at  the
    Tribunal in Bradford.

13. An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]
Signed                              Date 24 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

