
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05729/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 May 2020                       |On 22 May 2020                       |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


                                   Between

                                    JMNN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Cameroon  and  was  born  in  1982.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 6 June 2019 refusing him international  protection.  The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  19  November  2019,
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds but dismissed  the  appeal
    on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

 2. In April 2020, I issued directions indicating that  I  considered  that
    the matter of error of law could be determined  without  a  hearing.  I
    directed the parties to respond. The appellant's  representatives  have
    made no response but the Secretary of State has stated  her  view  that
    the judge failed sufficiently to engage with medical evidence  (adduced
    following dismissal of an earlier appeal in  the  First-tier  Tribunal)
    dealing with the possibility that  the  appellant  would  self-harm  on
    return to Cameroon. The Secretary of State considers that the  decision
    in respect of asylum and Article 3 ECHR should be set aside.

 3. I agree. Accordingly, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The finding as regards  Article  8  ECHR  is  preserved.  All
    findings as regards asylum and Article 3 ECHR are set aside. The appeal
    is returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake  the
    decision as regards asylum and Article 3 ECHR at or following a hearing
    on a date to be fixed.

 4. I make this decision under Rule 34  and  without  having  received  any
    submissions from the appellant's representatives. However, it the light
    of outcome of the appeal, I consider that I have dealt with the  appeal
    fairly.




    C.N.Lane

    Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 Lane
                 Dated: 21 May 2020

