

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05145/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 30th November 2017              |On: 1st December 2017                 |
|                                    |                                      |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                Md Rohul Amen
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           no attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  in  1994.   He  appeals
    with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  P.
    Rowlands) to dismiss his human rights & protection appeals.


 2.  The  Appellant  asserted  that  he  had   a   well-founded   fear   of
    persecution/serious harm in Bangladesh because he had received  threats
    from his stepbrother, who wanted to get rid of the Appellant so that he
    could inherit all of the family land. The Appellant asserted that  this
    stepbrother is very influential within the BNP and is very violent.  Of
    this account the First-tier Tribunal made the following findings:

              i) The Appellant was not  a  credible  witness;  at  times  he
                 appeared to be making up his story as he went along;


             ii) The land  in  dispute  is  a  very  small  parcel  and  the
                 Appellant has not demonstrating any interest in farming;

            iii) He had produced no corroborative evidence;

             iv) It would remain open to him to go and live in another  part
                 of Bangladesh if the account is true;

              v) Section 8 issue arose. The Appellant had lived  and  worked
                 illegally in the United  Kingdom  for  eight  years  before
                 coming  to  the  attention  of  the   authorities   in   an
                 enforcement raid. He only claimed asylum at that point;

             vi) There is clearly no family or private life claim.

    Having considered those matters, the Tribunal dismissed the  appeal  on
    both asylum and human rights grounds


 3. The Appellant is unrepresented and drafted his own grounds  of  appeal.
    In considering those unparticularised grounds First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Keane very fairly made his own assessment of the determination. In  his
    decision dated 10th August 2017 Judge Keane found  it  to  be  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in the following  material
    respects:


              i)  Failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for   the   negative
                 credibility findings;


             ii) Impermissibly requiring an asylum claim to be supported  by
                 corroborative evidence;

            iii) In making the section 8 findings the Judge appears to  have
                 overlooked, and thereby failed to consider, the  undisputed
                 fact that when the Appellant entered the United Kingdom  he
                 was only 13 years old;

             iv) Making only a cursory human rights assessment  and  failing
                 to follow the framework in Razgar [2004] INLR 349 HL.





    The Hearing


 4. The notice of hearing was served to the Appellant's last known  address
    on the 6th October 2017. The Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing.
    Investigation into the case  history  showed  that  the  Appellant  had
    lodged his grounds of appeal on the 2nd August 2017 from where  he  was
    being detained in Harmondsworth. On the 8th August 2017 he was  granted
    bail by a First-tier Tribunal Judge, sitting in Birmingham. The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge set a condition that the Appellant was to report to
    an Immigration Officer in Liverpool on the 17th September 2017, and  to
    attend  any  reporting  appointment  thereafter  that  the  Immigration
    Officer might make.   The  Home  Office  records  show  an  Immigration
    Officer in Liverpool set, on the 17th September 2017, weekly  reporting
    requirements for the Appellant. As far as Mr Harrison  was  aware,  the
    Appellant has not attended a single appointment; nor did he  report  on
    the 17th September 2017 as he had been required to do by the Judge.


 5. At 11.30am there had  been  no  attendance  by  the  Appellant  and  no
    correspondence from him to indicate that he might be delayed or  wished
    the matter to be adjourned. Having regard to  the  chronology  set  out
    above I considered it to be unlikely that adjourning the  matter  would
    result in his attendance at a later date and mindful of the  overriding
    objective for the expeditious and fair disposal of appeals,  I  decided
    to proceed in the Appellant's absence.

 6. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24 response and invited  me  to  dismiss
    the appeal.



    Discussion and Findings

 7. Having regard to the arguable errors identified by Judge  Keane,  I  do
    not consider it necessary to deal in any detail with points  (i)-(iii),
    which are concerned with the protection claim. I need not say very much
    about those matters since this is an appeal that would fail on internal
    protection grounds even if the Appellant could make out  his  claim  on
    the facts to the lower standard. Even if his stepbrother is in the BNP,
    and has some local power, the facts fall  well  short  of  establishing
    that he would be able, or even interested, in  pursuing  the  appellant
    wherever he lived in Bangladesh. The point is that he wants  the  land.
    If the Appellant is not in the home area, he has the land.  It  matters
    not to him whether the Appellant is dead, in the UK  or  on  the  other
    side of the country. The Appellant is a 23 year-old man.  There  is  no
    evidence before me to indicate that he has any kind of health  problems
    or other impairments to establishing himself in Bangladesh. He lived in
    that country until he was 13. He understands the culture and speaks the
    language.   I cannot see that there was any basis upon which the First-
    tier Tribunal could have concluded that internal  flight  would  be  an
    unreasonable alternative to international protection.


 8. As to the human rights decision Judge Keane was correct to describe the
    human rights assessment as cursory. It is arguable  that  the  Tribunal
    should have expended a little more energy on  examining  the  potential
    interference with a private life of some ten years  standing,  much  of
    which was developed whilst the Appellant was a child. I agree  that  no
    reference has been made to the Razgar framework.  I am  however  unable
    to find those omissions to be material errors. The Appellant  had  only
    ever lived in the United Kingdom unlawfully and as such  little  weight
    could be attached to his private life.  Even if weight could  be  added
    (or rather the weight to be attached to the  public  interest  reduced)
    because for at least four of those years  he  was  a  child,  there  is
    nothing in this case to indicate that his removal might  constitute  an
    interference with his human rights as protected by Article 8.

 9. The appeal therefore fails on both grounds before me.  I note that  the
    Appellant did, in seeking permission, rely on some new material.  Since
    I have found no error of law I have expressly  excluded  that  material
    from my consideration.




    Decisions

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and it is upheld.


11. There no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          30th November 2017


