
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/05370/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 6 December 2018                    |on 17 December 2018                |
|                                      |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            NOWREEN HOSSAIN ASHA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i)  The  respondent's  decision  dated  9  April  2018,  refusing  the
         appellant's protection claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Agnew, promulgated on 1 June 2018.

     iv) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT, 1 - 4, stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal date 18 June 2018.

      v) The decision  of  FtT  Judge  Hollingworth,  dated  12  July  2018,
         extending time and granting permission.

     vi) The respondent's rule 24 response, dated 20 September 2018, to  the
         grant of permission.

 2. Ms Loughran  (who  was  not  personally  the  author  of  the  grounds)
    acknowledged that ground 1 is garbled and  misleading.   It  gives  the
    impression that the judge overlooked evidence from Dr Siddiqi, being an
    expert witness for the appellant.  In fact, the excerpt quoted is taken
    from SA Bangladesh CG [2011] UKUT 00254,  which  is  the  guidance  the
    judge cited and applied.  The  appellant  did  not  produce  an  expert
    report on her case.

 3. The last sentence  of  this  ground  repeats  assertions  made  by  the
    appellant to the FtT, which are at odds with the findings of the judge,
    without showing that anything might be wrong with those findings.

 4. Ground 2  complains  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  "objective
    evidence" taken from the respondent's Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note (CIPIN), version 2.0, dated January  2018.   This  paragraph  also
    runs its quotations together in a  way  which  makes  it  difficult  to
    follow.

 5. The copy CIPIN relied upon by the appellant in the FtT was  incomplete.
    Mr Govan produced the full version,  including  the  policy  which  the
    respondent derives from it, broadly to the effect that country guidance
    does not require to be changed in light of more recent evidence.

 6. This ground is no more than  insistence  that  the  judge  should  have
    decided that the evidence required a more generous interpretation.   It
    does not show that the nature of the evidence had changed significantly
    since the guidance was settled.

 7. Ground 3 says  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    explanation why she  referred  to  her  partner  as  her  husband  when
    registering at a medical practice.

 8. The judge recorded but  did  not  revisit  this  passage  of  evidence.
    However, there is no indication that he  rejected  what  the  appellant
    said, and the issue had little if anything to do with the outcome.   At
    most, this ground shows that an irrelevant point was left unresolved.

 9. Ground 4, complaining that the appellant was not given  the  chance  to
    address a point, is hopeless.  The paragraph challenged  says,  "Having
    noted the discrepancies in evidence, in fairness  I  put  this  to  the
    appellant."

10. While replying to the  submissions  for  the  respondent,  Ms  Loughran
    observed that although it was not a point taken  in  the  grounds,  the
    appellant did appear to have raised her concerns  by  letter  with  the
    Home Office in 2015, at an earlier stage that had been  appreciated  at
    the FtT hearing, and both sides omitted to produce copies to  the  FtT.
    However, even if she did, that shows no error by the FtT  on  the  case
    before it.

11. The grounds, once disentangled, are mostly irrelevant, and the rest  is
    only insistence and disagreement.  They do not show that the making  of
    the decision of the FtT involved the making of any error on a point  of
    law.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            7 December 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
