
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/05891/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 September 2018                    | On 01 October 2018                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                  Ms J C O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, Counsel instructed by Templeton Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 4 September  1977.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal  of
    the respondent dated 28 April 2018 of her  protection  claim.   In  her
    decision promulgated on 3 July 2018, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    NMK Lawrence dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:

    Ground 1

    Failure to consider material evidence in relation to the nature of non-
    state actors;

    Ground 2

    Failure to consider material evidence in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
    protection;

    Ground 3

    Failure to consider material factors in respect of the  best  interests
    of the child and Article 8.

Error of Law Discussion

 3. Mr Pipi relied  on  his  grounds  of  permission  and  on  the  witness
    statement of the appellant. including at page  16  of  the  appellant's
    bundle which set  out  her  two  grounds:  the  first  being  that  the
    appellant claimed she had undergone  Female  Genital  Mutilation  (FGM)
    when she was 15 and secondly, when she was 18, had met a  man  who  had
    looked after her and found her a job  but  her  manager  had  paid  her
    unwanted sexual attentions and she feared  persecution  at  his  hands.
    The appellant has a daughter by her current partner and she feared  her
    daughter would be subject to FGM  should  the  family  unit  return  to
    Nigeria.  The judge summarised the appellant's case at [10] and [11] of
    the decision and reasons.

 4. The first ground argued that the  judge  failed  to  grapple  with  the
    threat of persecution by the community in respect of FGM and  the  risk
    to the appellant's daughter.  In relation to the second ground both the
    written grounds and Mr Pipi relied on Horvath [2000] UKHL 37  in  terms
    of sufficiency of protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  the
    principles of Horvath at [19].   Mr  Pipi  drew  my  attention  to  the
    appellant's bundle including at page 116 and  at  paragraph  2.3.3,  in
    respect to the high prevalence of FGM in  various  regions  of  Nigeria
    including in the south and west of the country,  the  appellant's  home
    state of Imo State  being  in  the  south  east.   Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    confirmed it was not disputed that the appellant was from Imo State and
    such was set out in the appellant's interview  at  paragraph  46  which
    confirmed that she was from the Igbo Tribe.

 5. It was Mr Pipi's submission that the judge's conclusions at [21]  first
    of all did not make sense and secondly were inadequate  in  respect  of
    sufficiency of protection.  Mr Pipi further submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to adequately assess  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    child, in light of the background information, and he  referred  me  to
    paragraph 2.3.6 at page 117 of the appellant's bundle including  as  to
    the prevalence of  FGM  amongst  extended  family  and  that  this  may
    increase  or  reduce  the  relevant  risk  which  may  arise  from  the
    prevalence of the practice among members of the ethnic group.

 6. Paragraph 2.3.6 of the Respondent's COI Report, sets out the factors to
    be taken into account by decision makers when  assessing  the  risk  of
    FGM.  Mr Pipi submitted that it had been  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, at [4], that  the  appellant  had  undergone  FGM;  this  was
    relevant to the assessment and he  asserted  that  the  judge  did  not
    grapple with this issue.

 7. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted, in relation to [4] of the  decision  and
    reasons, where the judge stated that the appeal could be progressed  on
    the basis that  the  appellant  had  had  FGM  performed,  this  was  a
    hypothetical finding.  It was incorrect to state that this  meant  that
    FGM would happen to  the  appellant's  daughter.   Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    submitted that the judge set out the relevant issues and,  contrary  to
    ground 1, the judge was clearly  aware  that  one  of  the  issues  was
    whether the appellant's daughter would be at risk of FGM as  identified
    at [11].  Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied on EA  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  10.   At
    paragraph 27 EA states as follows:

         "27. Decisions of Tribunals should not become formulaic and  rarely
             benefit from copious citation of authorities.  Arguments  that
             reduce to the proposition that the FTT has failed  to  mention
             dicta from a series  of  cases  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  or
             elsewhere will rarely prosper.   Similarly,  as  Lord  Hoffman
             said in  Paglowska  v  Paglowski  [1999]  1  WLR  1360,  1372,
             'reasons should be read on the assumption that unless  he  has
             demonstrated to the contrary, the judge  knew  how  he  should
             perform his functions in which matters  he  should  take  into
             account'.  He added that "an Appellate court should resist the
             temptation to subvert  the  principle  that  they  should  not
             substitute their own discretion for that of  the  judge  by  a
             narrow textural analysis which enables them to claim  that  he
             misdirected himself'...."

 8. It was her submission that the decision indicated the  judge  had  made
    adequate findings that there was  sufficiency  of  protection  and  the
    judge had correctly reminded himself that it was  not  100%  protection
    [21].  The judge properly directed himself to the problems  with  state
    protection in Nigeria, at [12] and [13].  In respect  of  the  argument
    that the judge had not adequately engaged with the  appellant's  claims
    that she feared her own clan and FGM being performed on  her  daughter,
    the Presenting Officer submitted that the judge did adequately  address
    this in his findings in relation to  non-state  actors.   Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe further submitted that in respect of the report relied on by Mr
    Pipi in relation to the prevalence of FGM she, that  report  cited  the
    2013 UNICEF Report in relation to the percentage  of  FGM  whereas  the
    judge was dealing with 2015 legislation, the Violence  Against  Persons
    (Prohibition) Act 2015 and the judge noted at [12] that it is a federal
    offence and that FGM and other "harmful traditional practices" had been
    outlawed.

 9. In respect of the child's best interests, she submitted these  must  be
    considered in light of the judge's findings that he  had  already  made
    that there was a sufficiency of protection for the  appellant  and  her
    daughter in Nigeria and that the judge need not repeat these  findings.
    In the appellant's interview,  including  at  question  136  where  the
    appellant had stated that her parents did not support FGM at 155  where
    she stated that no one had approached her  regarding  circumcision  and
    questions 205 and 206 where the appellant stated that her  partner  did
    not support  circumcision  and  did  not  want  their  daughter  to  be
    circumcised, Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that  this  was  a  relevant
    factor which the judge would have had in mind in finding that there was
    sufficiency of protection.

10. Mr Pipi in reply submitted out that although the 2017  COIR  report  at
    page 116 of the appellant's bundle referred to the 2013  UNICEF  Report
    this was in the 2017 respondent's report which the Home  Office  relied
    on which suggested that there was no change of circumstances.  Although
    it was true that the family did not support FGM, this had  not  stopped
    the appellant suffering FGM.  Mr Pipi further submitted that the  judge
    did not deal  with  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  and  did  not
    adequately address the appellant's arguments in respect of difficulties
    she could face on return in respect of her daughter which is  supported
    by the objective evidence which the judge did not engage with.

Error of Law Conclusions

11. I am satisfied that the judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    reaching the conclusions he did and failed to make adequate findings on
    the relevant issues.  In respect of  ground  one,  although  the  judge
    makes limited findings in relation to the appellant's fear  of  Mr  AM,
    including that 'she cannot explain how those will be able to  find  her
    on her return to Nigeria, even if her account is to  be  believed'  and
    that the appellant's account is 'too  fanciful'  to  be  believed,  the
    judge has failed to make  any  adequate  findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's claim that her daughter will be subjected to FGM on  return
    to Nigeria.

12. The judge, at [4], accepted that the 'appellant could be progressed  on
    the basis that the appellant had  had  FGM  performed'.   Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe submitted that this was a hypothetical finding.   Although  the
    wording of [4] might suggest that was intended to be the approach,  the
    judge failed to make any further adequate findings on  the  appellant's
    claims as to her history of FGM, other than a reference, at [22],  that
    the appellant 'claims she has had FGM performed when she was  15  years
    of age' in the context of a claimed risk of a 'second FGM'.

13. The appellant states at paragraph 11 of her witness statement that  she
    was forced to undergo female genital mutilation at the age of 15 "as my
    parents were not keen to do so due to  the  dreadful  experience  young
    girls went through and the fact many girls also died as a result of the
    practice".  She went on to state that "pressure mounted on  my  parents
    but I had no choice but to be circumcised as well, and for this  reason
    I was circumcised with six  other  girls  whose  parents  were  equally
    adamant for their daughters to go through that dreadful process."

14. Without further findings it is unclear  what  the  judge's  conclusions
    were in respect  of  the  appellant's  claimed  history.   Although  he
    regards the claim in relation to Mr AM to be 'fanciful'  there  are  no
    other negative credibility findings and no reasoning  to  indicate  why
    the appellant's claimed history is rejected,  if  indeed  that  is  the
    case.

15. In that context, there is merit in the first ground as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal fails to make adequate findings both  as  to  the  appellant's
    claims of past persecution and her fears in respect of her daughter and
    FGM.  Although the judge addresses sufficiency of  protection  at  [16]
    and following and these findings purport to address  'FGM  &  Non-State
    Actor', it is not  sufficiently  clear  on  what  factual  basis  these
    findings are being reached:  the judge has failed to make  findings  of
    fact as to what parts of  the  appellant's  evidence  are  accepted  or
    rejected in respect of both her own  account  and  her  fear  that  the
    Mgibidi clan would impose FGM on her child on return.

16. In respect of the second ground, similarly although the  judge  devotes
    much of his findings to sufficiency of protection,  such  findings  are
    inadequate without the findings of fact which  ought  to  underpin  the
    consideration  of  sufficiency  of  protection.   Although  it  is  not
    disputed that Nigerian authorities enacted new legislation in 2015, the
    judge himself points out the inadequacies in this legislation, at  [12]
    and [13].  Although  the  judge  is  correct  in  his  conclusion  that
    sufficiency of protection need not be 'complete'  protection,  that  in
    itself is not adequate, without more, to resolve  a  protection  claim.
    The judge fails to give any adequate reasons why 'it  appears'  to  him
    that the system put in place by the Nigerian authorities  will  provide
    sufficient protection, particularly in light of the stated difficulties
    with the 2015 legislation which the references at [12] and [13] and the
    appellant's own claimed history of FGM.

17. There are no findings as to the impact, if any, of the factors relevant
    in assessing risk of FGM, including as set out in the respondent's COIR
    (page 117 of the appellant's bundle)  including,  in  addition  to  her
    claimed history  of  FGM,  the  relevance  of  the  appellant's  ethnic
    background, where she had lived in Nigeria before she left, her age and
    her and her parents' education, the practice of the extended family and
    the views of the family towards FGM.  Although, as  noted  above,  both
    the appellant and her partner are opposed to FGM, there is  a  lack  of
    any adequate findings as to the relevance of these views  including  in
    the context of the appellant's claim that her own parents opposed  FGM.
    In this context the judge erred  in  his  approach  to  sufficiency  of
    protection in the appellant's home area.

18. The materiality of that error is compounded by the lack of any adequate
    findings  in  relation  to  internal  relocation.   The  judge's   only
    reference to relocation, at [14], that the  appellant  'cannot  explain
    how those will be able to find her on her return to  Nigeria,  even  if
    her account is to be believed' is made in the context  of  the  judge's
    discussion of the appellant's claimed fear of  the  individual  Mr  AM.
    The respondent in the Reasons for Refusal letter dated 20  April  2018,
    although it was not accepted  that  the  appellant  had  undergone  FGM
    (paragraph 32) considered the claimed risk to  the  appellant  and  her
    family.  This included a consideration at paragraphs 61  and  following
    of internal relocation, given that the appellant  asserted  she  feared
    returning to Lagos and Ihala.  Although the appellant asserted that her
    fear in relation to FGM covered the whole of Nigeria, the  judge  fails
    to make any adequate findings as to whether this claim was accepted and
    if not, whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant  to
    relocate.  The judge's reference, at [21]  to  a  system  of  'national
    protection' is, in the absence of factual findings and in  the  context
    of the appellant's claims and the background information, insufficient.
     I am satisfied therefore that the judge's findings on  sufficiency  of
    protection materially err, such that  the  decision  falls  to  be  set
    aside.

19. Equally, in respect of ground 3, in the context of  the  inadequacy  of
    the  findings,  particularly  in  the  context  of  FGM,  the   judge's
    subsequent findings on Article 8 which  although  on  the  face  of  it
    appear to be comprehensive, do not address the  issue  of  the  claimed
    risk of FGM to the appellant's daughter (and the relevance to the  best
    interests assessment of any requirement  for  the  family  to  relocate
    internally).

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contain an error of law and  is
    set aside.  No findings of fact are  preserved.   The  nature  of  fact
    finding required is such that the decision is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, other than judge NMK Lawrence, for a hearing de novo.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Signed                                  Date 26 September 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




