
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05988/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 November 2019              |               On 14 January 2020|
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                    M P M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fitzsimons of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is an Iraqi national who was born on 20 April  1998.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in May 2013 and returned  voluntarily  to
    Iraq on 10 December 2013.  He returned again to the United  Kingdom  on
    20 November 2017 and on 25 November claimed asylum, which  was  refused
    on 11 June 2019.

2.   When the appellant claimed asylum in  2017,  he  initially  claimed  to
    have been a member of the PKK and to  have  fought  against  ISIL.   He
    subsequently accepted that this claim was false and sought to advance a
    claim which was based on his relationship with  a  young  woman  called
    Shema  and  the  consequences  of  her  family's  disapproval  of  that
    relationship.

3.   The respondent refused this claim  on  11  June  2019.   The  appellant
    appealed against that refusal and his appeal was heard by Judge Davison
    on 24 July 2019.  In the reserved decision which he issued on 27 August
    2019, the judge dismissed the appeal.  He did not accept on  the  lower
    standard anything which the appellant had said.  He considered that the
    appellant could return to his family in the IKR as he had done in 2013.

4.   The first ground of appeal against that decision  is  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in refusing to adjourn the hearing in order for the
    appellant's representatives  to  obtain  a  medico-legal  report.   The
    report  was  sought  principally  to  address  a  suggestion  that  the
    appellant  suffered  from  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  ("PTSD").
    According  to  the  grounds  of  appeal,  counsel  had   received   the
    appellant's GP notes on the afternoon before the  hearing.   The  notes
    contained a number of entries, the first of which is dated 17 July 2019
    and says that the problem is PTSD.

5.   The records then give a history which appears to be based on  what  the
    appellant has told the doctor and the history  includes  flashbacks,  a
    failure to be able to sleep, waking up constantly throughout the night,
    poor appetite, angry outbursts,  very  heavy  alcohol  consumption  and
    thinking about suicide  on  a  weekly  basis.   It  is  said  that  the
    appellant spends his days thinking about what happened in Iraq and  his
    Home Office case.  It is noted that he is  thin,  maintained  good  eye
    contact but had large well-healed scars on his arms from  self-harming.
    The doctor's comment was that he discussed looking online for charities
    which might be able to offer support and there is a discussion of  IAPT
    (in full, "Improved Access to Psychological Therapies"), which  we  are
    told is an arm of the NHS.  There was a discussion about trying to  cut
    down on alcohol and a plan to see the appellant again  in  one  to  two
    weeks but it is stated that he was not  started  on  medication  as  he
    would benefit from psychological intervention most given  his  age  and
    the moderate risk that medication might actually worsen his mood.

6.   Based on  this  information,  Counsel  sought  an  adjournment  of  the
    hearing in order to obtain a full medico-legal report based on  the  GP
    notes showing this diagnosis of PTSD, self-harm and suicidal  ideation.
    The First-tier Tribunal refused to  grant  the  adjournment.   This  is
    dealt with as a preliminary issue in the determination.  In paragraph 2
    to 5 the matter is set out as follows:

         "[2] The appellant's representative sought to adjourn  the  appeal.
             It was stated that the GP records had only very recently  been
             received.  There is an entry dated 17 July 2019 i.e. one  week
             before the hearing, stating that the 'problem' is PTSD.  There
             is no mention of a mental health issues  (sic)  in  the  notes
             prior  to  this  one  entry.   In  the   appellant's   witness
             statement, signed two days after  the  visit  to  the  GP  the
             appellant has provided a full account of his  claim  and  then
             stated 'I wish to state that my GP has referred me  to  mental
             health services'.  The appellant's instructed  solicitors  did
             not seek to adjourn the appeal,  no  written  application  was
             made prior to the oral application on the day of hearing.   As
             Counsel correctly identified the GP note is 'brief'.  It  also
             appears that the GP has made the diagnosis of PTSD.  The  GP's
             comment at the end of the note  for  17  July  was  'discussed
             looking onling (sic) for charities which may be able to  offer
             support'.

         [3]  The respondent opposed the application but noted that  it  was
             possible that the evidence may turn out to be relevant.

         [4]  The appellant had been able to give  a  full  history  of  his
             claim to his instructed solicitors, he did this  in  a  manner
             that caused him no concern as no application for a report  was
             needed at this stage.  The GP note is scant in detail and  the
             GP has not immediately referred the appellant to mental health
             services in the UK but rather referred him to a charity.   The
             note concluded that he was not  given  medication  as  it  was
             hoped the 'psychological intervention' no  doubt  provided  by
             the charity, would be of assistance.

         [5]  Having considered all of the issues raised in the  application
             I found it was fair to continue with the hearing.  Essentially
             the hearing was for the appellant to give his evidence and  to
             be cross-examined upon the same.  I found  that  it  would  be
             fair for this to happen.  If it  became  apparent  during  the
             hearing that issues were arising then  this  preliminary  view
             could have been reviewed.  As it transpired the appellant  had
             no apparent difficulty in understanding the questions put.   I
             explained  each  part  of  the  hearing  process  to  him,  he
             understood  the  same  and  answered  appropriately   to   the
             questions and issues raised.  At the end of all the  questions
             he was I asked (sic)  I  commented  that  he  seemed  to  have
             understood all the questions asked of him and he  stated  that
             he had."

7.   Before us today Ms Fitzsimons argued that the  question  was  a  simple
    one.  There was evidence of PTSD and it would have been appropriate  to
    adjourn the hearing to obtain a medico-legal report, which  could  have
    been material in two ways.  It would have informed the Tribunal  as  to
    whether or not the appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness  which  would
    perhaps have affected the assessment of his evidence and potentially go
    to any questions of credibility.  It would also of course have had  the
    effect that perhaps special measures might have been  required  in  the
    case.

8.   As far as the question of adjournment was concerned reference was  made
    to the leading authority of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC).  It was only
    fair that an applicant should be able to put his case and the  question
    was ultimately one of fairness.  While the application was made on  the
    day of the hearing and it should have been made well in  advance,  that
    had not been possible.  The appellant had changed solicitors.   Counsel
    had only recently been instructed and had only seen this  GP  note  the
    day before.  There was a  suggestion  in  the  determination  that  the
    appellant had not been referred to mental health services but the  IAPT
    is such an organisation.  We were told that funding was available for a
    report to be obtained.

9.   In response Mr Melvin relied on his Rule 24 response.  The  application
    for an adjournment  was  very  late  and  had  not  been  made  by  the
    solicitors but by Counsel.  The solicitors had seen the  appellant  for
    some time and if they had felt there was any difficulty with his giving
    oral evidence or with the contents of his statement,  that  could  have
    been flagged up much earlier.  At one point it was  suggested  that  it
    could have been flagged up  months  in  advance  but  in  fairness  the
    hearing was only six weeks after the decision  and  there  had  been  a
    change in agency.

10.  There had been an earlier decision dealing with  the  claim  which  was
    completely false  so  the  appellant  had  had  the  benefit  of  legal
    representation of one count or another for quite  some  time.   He  had
    been here since 2017 and there had been ample opportunity  to  consider
    any  mental  health  requirement.   Counsel  had  put   forward   their
    adjournment request without backing from the solicitors and the  First-
    tier Tribunal was correct.  The appellant did not tell the GP the  full
    story of his history as far as immigration was concerned.  It  was  not
    clear if any medical evidence had been received since.

11.  In response, Ms Fitzsimons helpfully clarified that  funding  had  been
    in place for a medico-legal report to be obtained for  use  before  the
    FtT but that these funds were not available following the dismissal  of
    the appeal. Were the decision of the FtT to be set aside,  funding  for
    the report would once again be in place.

12.  We have considered  the  submissions  carefully  and  have  taken  into
    account the jurisprudence including Nwaigwe.  The FtT undoubtedly has a
    wide  discretion  when  considering  whether  to  grant  or  refuse  an
    adjournment but its decision is subject to appeal on point of  law  and
    fundamental question is one of fairness:  Kabir [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1162
    and AM (Somalia) [2019]  4  All  ER  714  refer.   In  our  opinion,  a
    perfectly adequate  explanation  has  been  given  by  Counsel  why  no
    previous  application  for  an  adjournment  was  made.   Counsel   has
    indicated that having seen the  medical  evidence  shortly  before  the
    hearing,  she  was  of  the  view  that  a  medico-legal  report  would
    potentially be  of  assistance,  both  in  assisting  the  Tribunal  in
    deciding whether to make allowance for  the  appellant's  vulnerability
    and in providing some support for his account.

13.  It seems to us that while there has been  a  lengthy  history  in  this
    case the decision under appeal was one which was only taken  six  weeks
    before the  hearing.   There  would  have  been  no  prejudice  to  the
    respondent were an adjournment granted.  On the other hand  it  strikes
    us that there is potential unfairness in not allowing the applicant  to
    put his full case before the Tribunal.   As  Ms  Fitzsimons  submitted,
    funding was in place for a medico-legal  report  and  any  such  report
    could have assisted the FtT in  carrying  out  its  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility  in  accordance  with  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note of 2 of 2010, the importance of which was underscored  by
    the Senior President of Tribunals in AM (Afghanistan) [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1123; [2018] 4 WLR 78. In the circumstances we are quite satisfied that
    the judge should have allowed the adjournment despite the  lateness  of
    it and the brevity of the note from the GP.  We consider  that  it  was
    unfair,  in  all  the  circumstances,   to   refuse   the   adjournment
    application.   For  those  reasons,  we  find  that  the  judge   erred
    materially in law and we set aside this decision.

14.  We do not intend to hear any  argument  on  the  remaining  grounds  of
    appeal since the whole decision will be set aside in any event and  the
    matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



Decision

The decision of the FtT was vitiated by legal error and cannot stand.   That
decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted to  the  FtT  for  a  fresh
hearing before a different judge.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                        Date: 8 January 2020
