
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: pA/05688/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 January 2018               |On 7 February 2018              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [R K]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Lewis, counsel instructed on a public access
                    basis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is  a  national
of India, of Tamil origin, born on [ ] 1974.  He  last  entered  the  UK  on
23.10.12 and claimed asylum the following day, on the basis that  he  helped
the LTTE from 2000-2008, as a consequence of which he had been arrested  and
detained in 2003 and from 2008 to 2012 during which time  he  was  tortured.
He was released from detention in September 2012 and fled  to  the  UK.  His
asylum application was refused  on  16.5.13  and  his  appeal  against  that
decision was dismissed on 17.7.13 and  he  became  appeal  rights  exhausted
shortly after. On 28.2.14 the Claimant lodged further submissions  supported
by medical evidence from Dr Turvill  and  Dr  Singh  and  a  country  expert
report from Chris Smith.

2.    The appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Boyes for hearing  on
13.9.17. In a decision promulgated on 26.9.17, the  appeal  was  allowed  on
the basis that the new evidence relied upon by  the  Claimant  cast  serious
doubt on the previous findings of the Tribunal and applying Devaseelan,  the
Judge found that the Claimant had been tortured and persecuted in  the  past
and had a well-founded fear of persecution if returned to India.

3.    The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, in  time,  against
this decision, on the basis that the First tier  Tribunal  Judge  criticised
the findings of the previous judge, when it was not open to him  to  do  so,
no arguable error of  law  having  been  found  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
refusing permission to appeal against that decision.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First tier Tribunal  Judge  Holmes
in a decision dated 17.11.17 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
judge's approach to the decision of the Tribunal of 17.7.13 was  flawed  and
it was not open to the judge to adopt the approach he did.

Hearing

5.    At the hearing before me,  Mr  Bramble  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
appeal. He submitted that the Judge was clearly aware of  the  circumstances
in which the appeal came before him and that it was on the basis of  further
submissions, the previous asylum claim having been refused by the  Secretary
of State in May 2013, his appeal dismissed by the  First  tier  Tribunal  in
July 2013 and permission to appeal refused to the Upper Tribunal  in  August
2013.

6.    The Judge set out at  [18]  findings  from  the  previous  First  tier
Tribunal decision and  the  Secretary  of  State  contends  that  the  Judge
materially erred at [28] where criticism is levied at the previous judge  on
the basis that his  assessment  of  causation  of  the  Claimant's  injuries
descended into speculation and the hypothetical.  There  was  no  basis  for
finding fault in the original Tribunal decision because the appeal had  been
examined on two separate occasions with grounds to  overturn  it  and  these
had been clearly shown to have no merit because  permission  to  appeal  had
been refused. Thus the findings of the previous judge  must  stand  and  the
starting point  for  the  judge  coming  to  an  alternative  conclusion  is
materially flawed.

7.    In his submission, Mr Lewis submitted that the  judge's  decision  was
entirely lawful. He approached the evidence in  an  appropriate  and  lawful
way and correctly used the original judge's decision as a starting point  as
required by Devaseelan. Mr Lewis submitted  that  it  is  not  controversial
that fresh evidence in the form of expert and medical  evidence  is  clearly
capable of persuading a subsequent judge  to  reach  a  different  decision.
Judge  Baldwin  heard  the  appeal  in  201,  when  an  application  for  an
adjournment was refused and the judge proceeded to dismiss  the  appeal,  in
part due to the absence of any medical evidence and  the  judge  found  that
the  evidence  of  scarring  consistent  with  mistreatment   was   due   to
occupational injuries [29].

8.    Mr Lewis submitted that it was entirely open to the judge to  approach
the first determination as a  starting  point  but  find  that  it  was  not
binding. A  fresh  claim  had  been  made  and  evidence  from  the  Medical
Foundation  had  been  provided,  confirming  the   presence   of   scarring
consistent with the claim of torture. That evidence was  considered  by  the
Secretary of State and whilst the claim  was  refused,  at  page  8  of  the
refusal  letter  2dated  5.5.17,  the  Secretary  of  State  considered  the
evidence  from  the  Medical  Foundation  and  stated   "it   is   therefore
acknowledged that you have faced  ill-treatment  but  the  report  does  not
confirm that injuries caused by mistreatment  by  the  Indian  authorities."
He submitted that this is a departure from  the  previous  decision  as  the
Secretary of State accepted that  his  scarring  was  due  to  ill-treatment
rather than occupational injuries. Thus the  medical  evidence  was  clearly
accepted by the Secretary of State and was not  challenged  at  the  hearing
before Judge Boyes.

9.    With regard to the expert report of Chris  Smith,  he  considered  the
account given by the Claimant and concluded that the claim made by  him  was
entirely consistent with  his  expert  knowledge.  This  evidence  was  also
unchallenged by the Secretary of  State.  Notably,  the  objective  evidence
before Judge Baldwin concerned Sri Lanka rather than India. It was  entirely
plausible that the Claimant's account was one that was credible and  it  was
open to the judge to rely upon that to conclude that the Claimant  had  been
a victim of persecution. Mr Lewis submitted that this is not  a  case  where
the judge could properly be criticized for departing  from  the  conclusions
of previous  Judge  cf.  LD  (Algeria)  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  804.  He  further
submitted that the criticisms that have been made are not made  out  on  the
evidence before this judge, as compared to the evidence before the  previous
judge, particularly the fact that there had  been  no  country  evidence  in
relation to India. He asked that the decision be upheld.

10.   There was no reply by Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State.

Findings

11.   The challenge by the Secretary of State  hinges  on  the  decision  in
Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1, which was endorsed by the Court of Appeal in  LD
(Algeria) [2004] EWCA Civ 804, which provides as follows at [30]:

    "30.   Perhaps the most important feature of the guidance is  that  the
    fundamental obligation of every special  adjudicator  independently  to
    decide each new application on its own individual merits was preserved.
    The guidance was expressly subject to this overriding principle.

         "The first adjudicator's determination is not binding on the second
         adjudicator; but, on the other hand, the second adjudicator is  not
         hearing an appeal against it. As an assessment of the matters  that
         were before the first Adjudicator it should simply be  regarded  as
         unquestioned. It may be built upon, and, as a result,  the  outcome
         of the hearing before the second adjudicator may be quite different
         from what might have been expected from  a  reading  of  the  first
         determination only.   The  second  adjudicator  must,  however,  be
         careful to recognise that the issue before him  is  not  the  issue
         before the first adjudicator. In particular, time has  passed;  and
         the situation at the time of the second adjudicator's determination
         may  be  shown  to  be  different  from  that  which  was  obtained
         previously. Appellants may want to ask the  second  adjudicator  to
         consider arguments on issues that were - or could not be  -  raised
         before the first adjudicator; or evidence that was not -  or  could
         not have been - presented to the first adjudicator."

It is further clear from the decision in Devaseelan that:

    "39.   In our view the second Adjudicator should treat such matters  in
    the following way.

         (1)      The first Adjudicator's determination should always be the
         starting-point.  It  is  the  authoritative   assessment   of   the
         Appellant's status at the time it was made...'

Thus it is clear that a previous decision of a judge is the  starting  point
for  consideration  of  an  appeal  by  a  second  judge,  but  a  different
conclusion can be reached by that judge if the arguments or evidence at  the
time of the second appeal are different.

12.   The challenge in this particular case is to the  judge's  analysis  at
[28] of the decision, which provides as follows:

    "Taking the previous judgment as the starting point I note  that  there
    were numerous applications for the matter to be adjourned in  order  to
    instruct an expert about the injuries upon the appellant. Prior to  the
    hearing and at the hearing this was refused. The  report  was  actually
    obtained  the  day  prior  to  the  appellant  becoming  appeal  rights
    exhausted. Criticism is  levelled  at  the  appellant  in  the  report,
    particularly at paragraph 29, about the causation of the injuries. I am
    afraid that the examination of the causation of  the  injuries  by  the
    judge descended into speculation and the hypothetical. I  have  reached
    the conclusion that the criticism of the  appellant  in  terms  of  the
    injuries cannot remain and I can place  no  sensible  reliance  on  the
    conclusions of the judge."

The reference to criticism being levelled at the appellant  in  this  report
is a reference to [29] of the decision of Judge Baldwin where he held  inter
alia:

    "The Appellant has been inconsistent in his evidence about when his leg
    scar was caused... Having left the Tribunal unclear whether the  injury
    occurred in c.2003 or between 2008 and 2012 and no  clarity  whatsoever
    as to precisely how this grievous injury was occasioned one is bound to
    consider other possibilities. One does not need to be  a  farmer  or  a
    fisherman to be aware that the risk of serious injury or death in these
    occupations is high. The Appellant is on his own evidence one who lived
    on a farm and had also engaged in commercial fishing ... Given the lack
    of clarity on the "when" and "how" it would seem more likely  than  not
    that this Appellant's leg scarring was occasioned  by  an  occupational
    injury."

In respect  of  the  context  of  this  finding,  an  adjournment  had  been
requested both prior to and at the outset of the hearing in order to  obtain
a report from the Medical Foundation and then given the length of time  that
would have taken,  from  a  different  expert.  Judge  Baldwin  refused  the
adjournment request and proceeded in the absence of any  supporting  medical
evidence in respect of the Appellant's scarring.

13.   The appeal came before Judge Boyes consequent to representations  made
on 17.2.14, which appended and relied upon a Medical Foundation report  from
Dr. Phyliis Turvill dated 10.1.14. The Secretary of State saw fit  to  treat
this evidence as a fresh claim but refused it, with the right of appeal.

14.   Dr Turvill's report at [50] found that the  Appellant's  scar  on  his
left thigh and the scars on  his  soles  were  highly  consistent  with  his
account and other scars were consistent with  his  account  of  having  been
beaten.

15.   Thus Judge Boyes had the benefit of  this  further  medical  evidence,
not before Judge Baldwin, which he summarised at [29] of his decision:

    [29]   ... The evidence of Dr Turvill shows that the  most  serious  of
    the appellant's injuries; the scar on the left thigh and  the  injuries
    to the soles of the feet  are  highly  consistent  of  the  appellant's
    account."

It was on this basis that the Judge preferred the evidence of Dr Turvill  to
the findings by Judge Baldwin as to the cause of the  Appellant's  scarring,
particularly the scar on his left thigh.

16.   Judge Boyes also had the benefit of a psychiatric report from Dr  Mala
Singh dated 14.1.14, in which she concluded that the Appellant suffers  from
PTSD and severe depression with psychotic symptoms and she found  at  [12.1]
that he will not be able to give a coherent and logical account of  himself.
At [35] of his decision Judge Boyes expressly  accepted  this  evidence  and
accorded it weight, finding:

    "The previous tribunal in my  view  was  too  quick  to  denigrate  the
    appellant which is apparent by what we now know to  be  the  case  with
    regards to his mental health."

17.   Judge Boyes further had regard to a  report  by  the  country  expert,
Chris Smith at [32] and [33] of the decision and accepted his evidence  that
the imprisonment of the Appellant for four years was entirely plausible  and
that he would still be of interest to the Indian authorities. This  evidence
was also not before Judge Baldwin.

18.   I have concluded that, whilst the criticisms of the findings of  Judge
Baldwin could have been more felicitously phrased, Judge  Boyes  gave  clear
and sustainable reasons for departing from the findings  of  Judge  Baldwin,
in light of different and compelling medical and country expert evidence.  I
find that Judge Boyes'  approach  and  findings  are  not  contrary  to  the
guidance set out in Devaseelan and the subsequent jurisprudence.

Decision

19.   For the reasons set out above, I find no material  errors  of  law  in
the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Boyes and I uphold that decision.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

2 February 2018
