
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05626/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2020                  |On 9 April 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     HAH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Gobir, Counsel instructed by Albany Solicitors
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia of Oromo ethnicity.  So much is
    accepted on both sides.  She came to the United Kingdom in January 2019
    and, having been served with illegal entry papers, claimed asylum.  Her
    claim was refused.  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Her
    appeal was heard by Judge Page in a hearing which  took  place  on  two
    days, but the hearing had  to  be  terminated  on  the  first  occasion
    because the appellant was unwell during the course of giving  evidence.
    It was therefore adjourned and the final part of the hearing took place
    on 14 October 2019.  Judge Page gave his decision on  28  October  2019
    dismissing her appeal.

 2. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal to  this
    Tribunal.  The basis of the appellant's claim is that she  is  at  risk
    because of her ethnicity and because of a suspicion, which she says  in
    her case would be a well-founded suspicion, that she has been active on
    behalf of the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF).  Expert  evidence  provided
    in support of her case was to the effect which is, as I understand  it,
    accepted by Mr Howell for the purposes of today's hearing, that despite
    recent changes in Ethiopia  she  would  indeed  still  be  at  risk  of
    persecution if she had been a supporter of the OLF.  But as Mr Gobir on
    the appellant's behalf very frankly accepts the question is not whether
    people with certain profiles are at risk but whether the appellant is a
    person with such  a  profile.   Thus,  the  matter  before  Judge  Page
    depended on whether the appellant's story is reasonably  likely  to  be
    the truth.

 3. The judge set the appellant's history on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    derived from her.  She was asked questions on a number of occasions  by
    the Home Office in written form and a substantive  interview,  and  she
    also provided a witness statement for the purposes of her appeal.

 4. In summary her account is as follows.  She herself came from an  OLF  -
    supporting family and she married a man in 2009 of the same  ethnicity.
    She began to support the OLF in a secret and  informal  way,  providing
    food and so on in 2012.  Her husband was a member of the  OLF  but  she
    did not know that; although the members  of  the  OLF  knew  about  her
    support and so her husband must have known about that too.  She  had  a
    child with her husband and they lived together in  Ethiopia.   At  some
    point the following events happened.  Her husband's land was  taken  by
    the government on the basis that it was tainted by OLF activities.  Her
    husband's shop, in which she worked, was taken by the government on the
    basis that it was tainted by OLF activities.  She received news of  her
    husband's death.  She attended demonstrations.  She was arrested twice.
     She left Ethiopia in 2015.  I shall have to look in a little bit  more
    detail at those events.

 5. However, after she left Ethiopia, it is reasonably clear what happened.
     She engaged in a tour of Europe, first visiting Sudan for twenty  days
    and Egypt for about a month but then travelling to Europe and  visiting
    at various stages Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Belgium and France,
    before coming to the United Kingdom.  She was in Norway for about three
    years.  She made an asylum claim  there  which  was  refused.   In  the
    course of this present claim she has decided to give no  indication  at
    all of the basis or the reason for its  refusal.   There  has  been  no
    challenge to the Norwegian decision other than by making another  claim
    in the United Kingdom.

 6. The judge considered that there were  too  many  discrepancies  in  her
    various accounts of what had happened in Ethiopia for her account to be
    the truth.  He set out the reasons for his views on that issue  between
    paragraphs 50 and 57 of his decision.  At paragraphs 35 and 36  he  had
    already indicated that her story appeared to have inconsistencies.   At
    paragraph 35 he notes an inconsistency about her own belief in relation
    to the reason for her husband's asserted death.   At  paragraph  36  he
    notes an inconsistency about the process by which  she  discovered  her
    husband's death, that is to say who gave her the news.  At paragraph 51
    the judge notes that at one stage she had said  that  her  two  arrests
    both occurred at demonstrations but on another occasion  she  had  said
    that she was arrested once at a demonstration and once not in  relation
    to any demonstration.  At paragraphs 53 to 54 the judge noted that from
    her account of her own family life in Ethiopia  it  was  impossible  to
    reconcile the various accounts that had been given.  In particular, she
    said that in 2019 her child that she had with her husband  in  Ethiopia
    was 5 years old; but she also said that her husband had been killed  in
    2012; and she also said she lived in Ethiopia  as  a  family  with  her
    husband and child.  At paragraph 55 the judge said  that  her  evidence
    about her activities with the OLF was, as he described it,  "vague  and
    vacuous".  He also pointed out that the letter  purporting  to  provide
    further evidence of those activities was written in the same  words  as
    she had provided herself.  At paragraph 57 the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had failed to claim asylum in  many  of  the  safe  countries
    which she had visited and that she had arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
    and claimed asylum, having as he put it, been determined to  arrive  in
    this country after her asylum claim was refused in Norway.

 7. None of those observations or findings is challenged in the  appeal  to
    this Tribunal.  The one point that is challenged is as follows.  In the
    appellant's original statement she had said that her land was taken  in
    2012 and her shop taken in 2015.  Those are events to which I  referred
    without dates a few moments ago.  In the witness statement prepared for
    the hearing before the judge she made no reference to those events.

 8. In considering the material before him in writing  his  decision  after
    the second part of the hearing the judge evidently noted  the  omission
    of the confiscation of the land and of the shop  from  the  appellant's
    witness statement.  Evidently he thought  that  that  omission  was  of
    importance and in paragraph 52 he describes the omission as  "glaring".
    He says that if the  appellant's  land  and  shop  had  genuinely  been
    confiscated by the government those events would not have been  omitted
    from the witness statement.  The judge speculates  that  the  appellant
    was lying when she mentioned those events in her asylum  interview  and
    had forgotten to put them in her witness statement.

 9. I asked both Mr Gobir and Mr Howells whether that omission had been the
    subject of any mention at the hearing and I am perfectly satisfied that
    it was not.  Mr Howells had a typed note from the  Presenting  Officer.
    Mr Gobir was at the hearing I have looked at the judge's note  and  can
    see no mention of it there either.

10. The ground of appeal is that there was an explanation for  the  absence
    of those events from the  witness  statement.   The  witness  statement
    clearly begins by saying that it is not intended to  repeat  everything
    that has been said to the government  already  but  merely  to  provide
    amplification of matters which  had  been  taken  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter of which this was not  one.   I  accept  therefore  that
    there was an explanation which, if the matter had been canvassed at the
    hearing, would probably have been  provided.   If  that  is  right  the
    judge's reason for concluding that the shop and the land had  not  been
    confiscated at all is  a  reason  without  substance.   That  error  is
    therefore made out and, as Mr Howells accepts, the judge was  therefore
    in error in taking it against the appellant.

11. Mr Gobir's position on behalf of the appellant is that the error is one
    which is highly material.  It played, in his words, a huge role in  the
    judge's reasoning.  I accept that it  played  a  role  in  the  judge's
    reasoning.  I do not accept that it played a huge role in  the  judge's
    reasoning.  As I have indicated both before and after dealing with that
    issue  the  judge  made  a  number  of  other   entirely   unchallenged
    conclusions about the appellant's credibility on other aspects  of  her
    story.  Further, if her account of the seizure of  her  husband's  land
    and shop is accepted in the terms in which she gave it  in  her  asylum
    interview further doubt arises about other aspects of her story.

12.  As Mr Gobir very frankly accepted when I put the matter to him, on the
    evidence available to the judge there is no explanation for the further
    question which arises which is this - the appellant's consistent  story
    has been that until her husband's death she did not know that he was at
    all involved with the OLF (although she herself was involved  with  the
    OLF and he  knew  about  her  involvement).   Indeed,  in  her  witness
    statement she indicates that she suspected that  he  might  be  on  the
    other side.  She says "if he knew about my activities he might turn his
    back on me and report me to the authorities".

13. As the judge concluded, and as it is  not  contested,  the  appellant's
    husband was alive after 2012.  He would have to  be  alive  after  2012
    given the appellant's account of  the  life  with  the  now  5-year-old
    daughter and her husband in Ethiopia.  It follows that the husband  was
    alive after the land had been confiscated, if the  appellant's  account
    of the confiscation  of  the  land  is  true.   But  if  the  land  was
    confiscated in 2012 when the husband was still there, and the land  was
    confiscated because of suspicion of it being tainted by OLF  activities
    as the appellant says, then there is absolutely no explanation  of  how
    it can be the case that she did not think that he was involved  in  the
    OLF in, at least, the final months of his life.

14. Looking at the matter as a whole as I do, as I have said, I accept that
    the judge's reasoning in relation to the omission of the  two  accounts
    of confiscation from the witness statement  was  not  entitled  to  the
    value he gave it.  But firstly, if he had not taken that point he would
    nevertheless clearly not have believed the appellant's story or all the
    other substantial and unchallenged reasons that he gave;  secondly,  if
    one accepts what the judge refused  to  accept  in  paragraph  52  then
    further questions  arise  which  themselves  raise  further  points  of
    credibility.

15. For those reasons I conclude that the error made in  paragraph  52  was
    wholly  immaterial  to  the  judge's  final  conclusion   which   would
    inevitably, and in my judgement properly have been to the same  effect,
    that is to say, that the appellant's story lacks credibility.

16. For those reasons,  I  decline  to  set  aside  his  decision  which  I
    therefore order shall stand and this appeal is dismissed.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 24 March 2020
