
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05143/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2020                   |On 2 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     BA
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Smyth, Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL


1.    The Appellant is a national of Iraq who is of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and
    who was born in Kirkuk. It has never been suggested that he was born or
    spent any time in the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR).  He  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 17 September 2015  and  applied  for  asylum,  as  an
    unaccompanied minor, on 25 September 2015. In his screening  interview,
    on that same day, he stated that he feared persecution in Iraq by ISIL,
    that his father had died and that  there  was  no-one  to  support  him
    there.


2.   In his substantive asylum interview on 15  March  2016,  the  Appellant
    explained that his father had been fighting as a Peshmerga when he  was
    killed.  He also said that he had one maternal uncle in Iraq who he had
    met once and who used to live in the village of Awaee Manzor  but  that
    he did not know where he was currently. He added that, after his father
    was killed, he became homeless and that one  of  his  father's  friends
    assisted him to leave Iraq.


3.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused on 18 May  2017.  It
    was noted that he did not fear persecution on the basis of his  imputed
    political opinion, as the son of a Peshmerga fighter, but  rather  that
    he had a fear of ISIL and the general situation in Iraq. The Respondent
    did accept that the Appellant was an Iraqi national  from  Rahimawa  in
    Kirkuk.  She also accepted that he was Kurdish and that he was 17 years
    and 9 months old at the date of the  decision.  However,  she  did  not
    accept that the Appellant's father had been killed or that he had  been
    a Peshmerga fighter or that there was now  a  risk  that  he  would  be
    persecuted by ISIL.


4.   The Respondent also found that the situation in Kirkuk had changed  and
    that the Appellant's return would not give rise to a breach of 15(c) of
    the Qualification Directive.


5.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Greasley dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated on 6 July
    2017.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen   granted   the   Appellant
    permission to appeal this decision to the Upper Tribunal on  the  basis
    that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  had  not  given  sufficient
    justification or reasons for departing from the country guidance in  AA
    (Article 15C) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC). In a decision, promulgated
    on 1 May 2018, the Honourable Mr. Justice Edis and Upper Tribunal Judge
    Reeds then found that there  had  been  errors  of  law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley's decision promulgated on 1 May 2018. They  set
    aside First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley's decision but  preserved  his
    findings of fact in relation to the Appellant's personal  circumstances
    in Kirkuk. They then remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


6.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Woolf  who  dismissed
    it in a decision promulgated on 21 June 2019.  The  Appellant  appealed
    against this decision and First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes refused  him
    permission to appeal on 9 August 2019. However,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker granted him permission on the basis that it was arguable that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge should not have departed from the CG and  had
    failed to have adequate regard to and/or make  adequate  findings  with
    regard to obtaining a CSID in the context of CG caselaw.


7.   The error of law  hearing  was  heard  on  7  October  2019  and  in  a
    decision, promulgated on 28 October 2019,  I  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal and set aside First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolf's decision in  its
    entirety.  I also retained the appeal in the Upper Tribunal for  a  re-
    hearing.


HEARING


8.   The Appellant's solicitors were directed to file and serve  a  skeleton
    argument and any additional evidence by 16 January 2020 but due  to  an
    oversight on their part, these directions were not complied  with.  The
    Appellant's solicitors filed and served a Second  Supplementary  Bundle
    on 24 January 2010 and a skeleton argument on 28 January 2020. The Home
    Office Presenting Officer had received copies of  these  documents  and
    did not object to my extending time at the hearing. I  did  so  on  the
    basis that it was in the interests of justice for the Tribunal to  have
    a detailed appreciation of the case being put forward on behalf of  the
    Appellant.


9.   The Appellant was called to  give  evidence  and  adopted  his  witness
    statement, dated 11  May  2019.  He  stated  that  his  only  remaining
    relatives in Iraq were his maternal aunt and uncle. They used  to  live
    in Manzor but he did not know where they were now and had not seen them
    since he visited them when he was ten or  eleven  years  old.  He  also
    explained that he had no telephone number for  them  and  that  he  had
    never had any contact with his paternal relatives who used to  live  in
    Mosul. When cross-examined he confirmed  that  both  his  parents  were
    dead; his mother had died when he was still at school  and  his  father
    had been killed whilst fighting as a peshmerga. He also referred to  an
    email from the  Red  Cross,  dated  20  March  2019,  and  an  attached
    screenshot from the International Committee of the Red Cross' Trace the
    Face service.


10.  The Appellant also confirmed that he was in  a  relationship  with  his
    girlfriend, S.B. When she was also living in Canterbury, he  said  that
    he saw her every  day  but,  now  that  she  had  been  transferred  to
    Birmingham, he was only able to see her  occasionally.   He  said  that
    they planned to live together there when  his  immigration  status  had
    been regularised. I found the Appellant to be a  witness  of  truth  in
    relation to his activities in the United Kingdom and  his  attempts  to
    trace relatives in Iraq. His evidence was consistent and was  supported
    by that of S.B., the Red Cross and Kent County Council. In addition, he
    gave his  evidence  carefully  and  did  not  seek  to  exaggerate  his
    situation (In relation to  his  account  of  events  in  Iraq,  I  have
    addressed the effect of the earlier  findings  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Greasley in my findings below).


11.  S.B. then gave evidence and adopted her  witness  statement,  dated  11
    May 2019. She confirmed that she had met the Appellant in 2016 and that
    he had stayed at her home  or  she  had  stayed  at  his  accommodation
    throughout the next three years. She also said that, during this  time,
    the Appellant had never had any contact with any of his family members.
    S.B. also explained that she had joined the British Army to train as  a
    nurse and had been posted to Birmingham in  September  2019.  She  said
    that, once the Appellant had regularised  his  immigration  status,  he
    would be able to move to Birmingham and that they would be able to live
    together  in  quarters  provided  by  the  Army.  She  also   described
    accompanying the Appellant to see the Red Cross in the Summer  of  2019
    and remembered him being told that the organisation had not  been  able
    to locate the village where is maternal aunt and uncle  used  to  live.
    She gave her evidence with care and confidence and I found her to be  a
    truthful and cogent witness on whom I could rely.


12.  I have taken this evidence  and  the  oral  submissions  made  by  both
    representatives into account when reaching my decision below.


DECISION


13.  It was not disputed by the Respondent that the Appellant  was  born  in
    Kirkuk and is of Kurdish ethnicity or that he was only sixteen when  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom and applied for asylum.


14.  The Appellant had previously  relied  upon  Article  15(c)  of  Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC on minimum standards  for  the  qualification  and
    status of third-country nationals or stateless  persons,  which  states
    that a person will qualify for subsidiary  protection  if  he  will  be
    subjected to serious harm on return to  his  country  of  origin  which
    amounts to a "serious and individual threat to [his] life or person  by
    reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or
    internal armed conflict".


15.  However, in the light of the country guidance decision in  SMO,  KSP  &
    IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400  (IAC)
    the Appellant now accepts that the Kirkuk Governorate in  its  entirety
    is now longer a "contested area" and that:


         "There continues to be an internal armed conflict in certain  parts
         of Iraq, involving  government  forces,  various  militia  and  the
         remnants of ISIL. Following the military defeat of ISIL at the  end
         of 2017 and  the  resulting  reduction  in  levels  of  direct  and
         indirect violence, however, the intensity of that conflict  is  not
         such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds  for
         believing that any civilian returned to Iraq, solely on account  of
         his presence there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to
         indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within the  scope
         of Article 15(c) QD".


16.  Instead, it is submitted that he faces a breach of  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights  on  the  basis  that  there  is  a
    serious risk that he will not be able to  obtain  a  replacement  Civil
    Status Identity Document ("CSID") or an Iraqi  National  Identity  Card
    ("INID") in Iraq before his circumstances give rise to a  situation  of
    inhuman and degrading treatment.


ARTICLE 3 OF THE ECHR AND STANDARD OF PROOF


17.  Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  states  that  "No
    one  shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or   degrading
    treatment".


18.  In paragraph 74 of Chahal v. United Kingdom (Application No.  22414/93)
    the European Court of Human Rights found that "it  is  well-established
    in the case-law of the Court that expulsion by a Contracting State  may
    give  rise  to  an  issue  under  Article  3,  and  hence  engage   the
    responsibility of that State under the  Convention,  where  substantial
    grounds have been shown for believing that the person in  question,  if
    expelled, would face a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  treatment
    contrary to Article 3 in the receiving country. In these circumstances,
    Article 3 implies the obligation not to expel the person in question to
    that country".


RETURN TO IRAQ


19.  At the hearing, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    there was new internal guidance which indicated that it was possible to
    return an Iraqi Kurd to the IKR if his return was not under escort.  He
    did not produce a copy of this internal guidance and informed  me  that
    it was non-disclosable.


20.  However, in paragraph 52 of the decision under appeal,  the  Respondent
    stated that "based on your individual circumstances, it  is  considered
    that you can be returned to Kirkuk via Baghdad, as Kirkuk is outside of
    the Iraqi Kurdish Region administration". The record of proceedings for
    the appeal hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Woolf  on  13  May
    2019, confirms  that  the  Respondent  continued  to  assert  that  the
    Appellant would be returned to Kirkuk via Baghdad. At the error of  law
    hearing before me on 7 October 2019, it was not submitted that it would
    be possible to return to the Appellant directly to the IKR and  he  has
    not been notified of any  intention  to  do  so  since  that  date.  In
    addition, at paragraph 4 of SMO, the Upper Tribunal found that  "return
    of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will  be  to  the
    IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad". Therefore, I must proceed
    on the basis that the Respondent intends to  return  the  Appellant  to
    Kirkuk via Baghdad.


21.  Paragraph 4 also notes that "the Iraqi authorities will allow an  Iraqi
    national (P) in the United Kingdom to  enter  Iraq  only  if  P  is  in
    possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P,  or  a
    Laissez Passer" and paragraph 5 states that "no Iraqi national will  be
    returnable to Baghdad if not in possession of one of these documents".


22.  In paragraph 53 of the Respondent's refusal letter, she noted that  the
    Appellant had not provided his passport or an expired passport  to  the
    Home Office. The Appellant's screening interview also confirms that  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom illegally on 17 September 2015  and  that
    when his screening interview was conducted on  25  September  2015,  he
    told the interviewer that he had no Iraqi passport and had not used one
    on his journey to the United Kingdom. This assertion was not challenged
    by the Respondent and no passport was found on him when he  was  served
    with notice of illegal entry.


23.  The Appellant did not assert that  he  was  entitled  to  international
    protection merely because he was not in  possession  of  a  current  or
    expired Iraqi passport and it was found in paragraph 7 of SMO  that  an
    Appellant "will be at no risk of serious harm at the  point  of  return
    [to Iraq] by reason of not having a current passport". Instead,  it  is
    his case that, even if he were able to obtain an Iraqi passport or  the
    Respondent issued him with a laissez passer, he would be subject to ill
    treatment which amounted to a breach  of  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights if removed to Baghdad.


24.  The Appellant relied on the fact that in paragraph 8 of SMO  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that:


         "The CSID is being replaced with a  new  biometric  Iraqi  National
         Identity Card - the INID. As a general matter, it is necessary  for
         an individual to have one of these two documents in order  to  live
         and travel within Iraq without encountering treatment or conditions
         which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR. Many of  the  checkpoints  in
         the country are manned by Shia militia who are  not  controlled  by
         the [Government of Iraq] and are unlikely to permit  an  individual
         without a CSID or an INID to pass.  A valid Iraqi passport  is  not
         recognised as acceptable proof of identity for internal travel.


         9.   A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of  a
         CSID or an INID, it is confiscated upon arrival and is not, in  any
         event,  a  recognised  identity  document.  There  is  insufficient
         evidence to show that returnees are issued  with  a  'certification
         letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any such document would
         be recognised internally as acceptable proof of identity".


25.  On the basis of these findings, I find that the  Appellant  would  need
    to be in possession of a CSID or INID before he started on any  journey
    from Baghdad to Kirkuk. In addition, I have taken into account that the
    Upper Tribunal found in paragraph 11 of SMO:


         "Once in Iraq, it remains the case that an individual  is  expected
         to attend their local CSA office in order to obtain  a  replacement
         document. All CSA offices have now re-opened, although  the  extent
         of which records have been destroyed by the conflict with  ISIL  is
         unclear and is likely to vary significantly depending on the extent
         and intensity of the conflict in the area in question".


26.  The Upper Tribunal also confirmed in paragraph 12 that:


         "An individual who is not from Baghdad is not likely to be able  to
         obtain a replacement document there, and  certainly  not  within  a
         reasonable time. Neither the Central  Archive  nor  the  assistance
         facilities for [Internally Displaced Persons] are likely to  render
         documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee."


27.  Therefore, I find that the Appellant would have to travel from  Baghdad
    to Kirkuk in order to obtain a CSID in person, but  such  travel  would
    amount to a breach of Article 3  without  a  CSID  on  account  of  the
    control of checkpoints by members of the Shia militia.


OBTAINING A CSID THROUGH CONSULAR SERVICES


28.  However, in paragraph 10 of SMO the Upper Tribunal did find that:


         "Notwithstanding the phased transition to  the  INID  within  Iraq,
         replacement  CSIDs  remain   available   through   Iraqi   Consular
         facilities.  Whether  an  individual  will  be  able  to  obtain  a
         replacement  CSID  whilst  in  the  UK  depends  on  the  documents
         available and, critically, the availability of the volume and  page
         reference of the entry in the Family Book  in  Iraq,  which  system
         continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity process. Given  the
         importance of that information most Iraqi citizens will recall  it.
         That information may also be obtained from family members, although
         it is necessary to consider  whether  such  relatives  are  on  the
         father's or the mother's side because the  registration  system  is
         patrilineal".


29.  Therefore, the first question which arose  was  whether  the  Appellant
    was able to recall the volume and page reference  for  his  patrilineal
    family's entry in the Family Book in Iraq. In her decision letter,  the
    Respondent did not  consider  this  question.  Neither  did  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley, in his decision promulgated on  6  July  2017,
    and which I must take as my starting  point  in  relation  to  my  fact
    finding following Devaseelan (Second Appeals,  ECHR,  Extra-Territorial
    Effect) [2002] UKIAT 000702*.


30.  In paragraph 46 of his decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley
    went no further than to find that:


         "Although paragraph  53  of  the  refusal  decision  describes  the
         appellants return as  not  being  currently  feasible  due  to  the
         absence of supporting documentation, this does not  mean  that  the
         appellant cannot or will not provide sufficient information to  the
         Iraqi Embassy so as to enable him to be issued with a  passport  or
         laissez passer. He does not dispute that he is an Iraqi citizen and
         this had not been disputed by the respondent".


31.  Therefore, I must look at the evidence relating to this issue  that  is
    before me.  I have taken into account that in paragraph 391 of SMO  the
    Upper Tribunal noted that:


         "It is impossible to overstate the importance  of  an  individual's
         volume and page reference in  the  civil  register.  These  details
         appear on numerous official documents, including an Iraqi passport,
         wedding certificate and birth certificate, as well as the CSID",


32.  However, in paragraph 392, it also noted that "there will of course  be
    those who can plausibly claim not to know these details. Those who left
    Iraq at a particularly young age, those who are  mentally  unwell...may
    ...be able to make such a claim plausibly...".


33.  It is not disputed that the Appellant was just sixteen years  old  when
    he entered the United Kingdom and that he did not have a passport  with
    him when he did so. It is also not disputed that his fingerprints  were
    first taken as an undocumented minor asylum seeker on 7 August 2015  in
    Greece, when he was fifteen years old. There is also no  evidence  that
    he  was  ever  in  possession  of  an  Iraqi  passport  or  a  marriage
    certificate.


34.   His medical records also confirm that on 3 May 2018 he  had  told  his
    GP that he was suffering from insomnia and that he did not feel able to
    talk about the stress caused by past events. On 24  July  2018  it  was
    recorded that he was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder  and
    waking up in a panic. On 6 November  2018  he  was  still  recorded  as
    having post-traumatic stress disorder and the GP was following up on  a
    referral to a counselling service,  Think  Action.  There  was  also  a
    letter from this organisation, dated 11  March  2019,  which  confirmed
    that an assessment had indicated that he  was  suffering  from  extreme
    symptoms of depression and anxiety and had moderate to severe levels of
    psychological distress.  In addition,  in  his  witness  statement  the
    Appellant said that he had been struggling with his mental health for a
    number of years.  Both he and S.B. also confirmed that, due to his post-
    traumatic stress disorder, he avoided recalling  details  of  his  past
    history and past events in order to attempt to control the symptoms  of
    this disorder.


35.  In addition, the Appellant did not deny that he  had  had  an  identity
    card but said in his witness statement that he "once  had  a  'nasname'
    which is an ID card which lots of people in Iraq have. My  father  kept
    the document so I only remember seeing it when I was young. Apart  from
    my name and photo, I can't remember any details on it. I remember  that
    it was white with some green writing". It  is  my  view  that,  if  the
    Appellant had intended to deceive the authorities about  his  knowledge
    of the volume and page number of his patrilineal family's entry in  the
    Family Book, he would not have admitted knowledge of  his  ID  card  or
    provided details of his family and his family home.


36.  Taking this together with age when he fled from Iraq and  the  evidence
    which confirms that he is suffering from severe mental  ill-health  and
    post-traumatic stress disorder, I find, on the requisite lower standard
    of proof, that the Appellant does not know the volume and  page  number
    of his patrilineal family's entry in the Family  Book  which  he  would
    need in order to obtain a CSID through Iraqi consular facilities.





OBTAINING A CSID THROUGH MALE RELATIVES


37.  However, I must also consider whether the Appellant has  any  remaining
    male relatives in Iraq who may be able to assist him to obtain a  CSID.
    In paragraph 46 of his decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley
    found that the Appellant's father was still alive and, by  implication,
    he found that his father was still living in Kirkuk. He based  this  on
    the evidence given by the Appellant about his contact with  his  father
    before he left Iraq in 2015, nearly five years ago.


38.  As found in  paragraph  39  of  Devaseelan  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Greasley's findings must be my "starting point". However,  as  said  in
    that paragraph they are an "authoritative assessment of the Appellant's
    status at the time it was made", which was in this case  6  July  2017,
    nearly three years ago. I am not precluded  from  taking  into  account
    facts which relate to events which have happened  after  that  date  or
    facts which were not relevant to First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley's
    findings, but which were in existence before his decision.  In relation
    to the latter, I note that the issue before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Greasley was whether the Appellant  was  entitled  to  protection  from
    ISIL. He did not make any findings about any Article 3 risk which arose
    from not being in possession of a CSID or INID.


39.  It is my view that the objective evidence relating to the situation  in
    Kirkuk from the time at which the Appellant left Iraq is relevant to an
    assessment of whether the Appellant is in touch with his father  and/or
    any other male relative and whether they can be  located  in  order  to
    assist him to obtain a CSID.


40.  The European Asylum Support Group in its Country of Origin  Information
    Report on Iraq: Security Situation, March 2019 noted that:


         "[The] International Crisis Group described Kirkuk as  one  of  the
         areas of the disputed territories that has experienced  'the  worst
         turbulence' in recent years. When ISIL launched its 2014  offensive
         in northern Iraq, the Iraqi army collapsed and ISIL took  over  the
         region around Hawija City,  in  south-western  Kirkuk  governorate,
         with a local population of  about  100,000  who  lived  under  ISIL
         control. ISIL took over and administered areas of  Hawija  district
         since June 2014, controlling the countryside  and  rural  areas  of
         Kirkuk until it  was  pushed  out  in  October  2017.  From  Hawija
         district, ISIL carried out attacks against Kirkuk governorate  from
         2014.


         In the wake of the Iraqi army's collapse fighting ISIL in Kirkuk in
         2014, Pesmergas moved in and replaced  the  district  forces,  with
         Kirkuk city remaining  for  three  years  under  the  rule  of  the
         Patriotic Union of Kurdistan...the  second  largest  party  in  the
         Kurdistan Region of Iraq. For three years, Peshmergas and ISIL were
         at a standoff in Kirkuk, with 'repeated clashes' along the southern
         and western parts  of  the  city,  although  the  city  itself  was
         'tightly controlled'".


41.  Paragraph 9.4.2. of the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Iraq:
    Security and humanitarian situation Version  4.0,  March  2017,  states
    that IOM data indicated  that  in  February  2017  there  were  164,662
    displaced persons in Kirkuk Governorate out of a population of 227,154,
    that is 72% of the population.


42.  The Country of Origin Information report  on  Northern  Iraq:  Security
    situation and the situation for internally displaced persons (IDPs)  in
    the disputed areas, incl. possibility to enter and access the Kurdistan
    Region of Iraq (KRI), November 2018, states in  its  executive  summary
    that:


         "Iraqis who were internally displaced due to the conflict with ISIS
         must go through heavy clearance procedures in order to reach  their
         area of origin.  Other  obstacles  for  return  are  the  sectarian
         division of the [Popular Mobilisation  Units],  conflict  remnants,
         the lack of demining and reconstruction in the areas of  origin  of
         the IDPs, lack of civil administration, property conflicts, lack of
         basic services, and lack of ID cards".


43.  In paragraph 1.1.2 of the report it was also noted  that  "the  general
    situation in Kirkuk Governorate is characterised as  both  fragile  and
    complex...The PMUs are controlling the suburbs and surrounding villages
    outside Kirkuk city, ...They conduct their own security screening, thus
    deciding  who  is  allowed  entry  to  the  city".   The  UNHCR  report
    International Protection Considerations with Regard to  People  Fleeing
    the Republic of Iraq, May 2019 also stated at page 48 that "as a result
    of conflict, displacement and confiscation of documents, many  IDPs  do
    not hold critical documentation, restricting access to basic  services,
    limiting freedom of movement, and  increasing  the  risk  of  arbitrary
    arrest".


44.  It is the Appellant's evidence, which has not been challenged, that  he
    used to live with  his  father  in  rented  accommodation  in  Rahimawa
    district of Kirkuk city and he was able to provide the Respondent  with
    details of the location of his home and the secondary school which  her
    attended. At the hearing, he continued to say that he had not seen  his
    father since he left to fight as  a  peshmerga  and  both  Kent  County
    Council and S.B. stated that they had never had any  knowledge  of  any
    contact between the Appellant and any relative whilst he  had  been  in
    the United Kingdom. In addition, the fact that he said that he  was  an
    only child has also not been challenged. In his oral evidence  he  also
    said that he believed that he had some paternal relatives in Mosul  but
    that he had never met them and had had no contact with them.  This  was
    not challenged at the hearing.


45.  In the context  of  the  Appellant's  unchallenged  evidence  and  this
    objective evidence, I find that on the requisite low standard of  proof
    that the Appellant is not in contact with any male  relative  which  he
    may have had in Iraq when he left in 2015 and that, even  if  they  are
    still  alive,  they  may  well  have  been  displaced  and   themselves
    dispossessed.


FAMILY TRACING


46.  The relatives which the Appellant did refer to in his asylum  interview
    and which he has asked  the  International  Red  Cross  to  trace  were
    maternal relatives, who would not be able to assist  the  Appellant  in
    obtaining a CSID.  However,  the  fact  that  the  Red  Cross  are  now
    assisting the Appellant is, in my view, of more broader relevance.


47.  Firstly, it is relevant to the credibility of  the  Appellant's  stated
    wish to contact remaining relatives in Iraq.  The  evidence  before  me
    confirmed that he has consistently sought the  assistance  of  the  Red
    cross in order to trace his maternal uncle and aunt, who he asserts are
    the only relatives he has had any contact within the past. He mentioned
    these relatives in his asylum interview in 2015  and  Wayne  Wright,  a
    member of the 18 Plus Team at Kent County Council, in a  letter,  dated
    22 January 2020, confirmed that the Appellant  had  contacted  the  Red
    Cross in 2019 and that the process was on-going.  There  was  an  email
    from the Red Cross itself, dated 20 March 2019, which confirmed that it
    was following up a family tracing request. S.B. also gave oral evidence
    before me and confirmed that she had accompanied him to a meeting  with
    the Red Cross in the Summer of 2019.


48.  Perhaps more importantly the attachment  to  the  email  from  the  Red
    Cross identifies its current family tracing  methodology.  Having  told
    the Appellant and S.B. that it  had  not  been  able  to  identify  the
    location of his maternal  aunt  and  uncle's  village,  it  placed  his
    photograph on its Trace a Face pages. These  are  available  throughout
    Iraq via the internet and would enable the Appellant's  father  or  his
    paternal relatives, if still alive, to contact him via the  Red  Cross.
    However, no one has identified themselves as  one  of  the  Appellant's
    relatives.


49.  For all of the above  reasons,  I  find  that,  on  the  requisite  low
    standard of proof, the Appellant has  taken  all  reasonable  steps  to
    trace any male relatives in Iraq who could assist him  in  obtaining  a
    CSID.


OBTAINING A CSID BY PROXY


50.  It still remains possible for an individual to obtain a CSID  by  proxy
    in some parts of Iraq. However, in paragraph 28 of AAH (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212 Dr. Fatah confirmed  that  "the
    key piece of information that the individual (proxy) would have to have
    would be his family's volume and page reference  number  in  the  civil
    register". Therefore, as I have found that the Appellant does not  have
    this information and that he had not been able to contact any relatives
    who may be able to access this information, he  will  not  be  able  to
    obtain a CSID by obtaining a proxy or giving someone power of attorney.




OBTAINING AN INID


51.  In paragraph 11 of the headnote to SMO the Upper Tribunal found that:


         "The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by the
         use of a proxy, whether from the UK  or  on  return  to  Iraq,  has
         reduced due to the introduction of the INID system.   In  order  to
         obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local CSA office in
         person to enrol their biometrics, including fingerprints  and  iris
         scans.  The CSA offices in which INID terminals have been installed
         are unlikely - as a result of the phased replacement  of  the  CSID
         system - to issue a CSID, whether to an individual in person or  to
         a proxy.   The  reducing  number  of  CSA  offices  in  which  INID
         terminals have not been installed will continue to issue  CSIDs  to
         individuals and their proxies  upon  production  of  the  necessary
         information".


52.  For the reasons given above, as the Appellant does not have a  CSID  or
    INID, any attempt by him to travel from Baghdad to Kirkuk to obtain  an
    INID, which could only be obtained in person, would give rise to a risk
    of a breach of his Article 3 rights.


53.  In addition,  the  fact  that  he  is  from  Kirkuk  is  of  particular
    relevance, as in paragraph 431 of SMO, it was noted that:


         "In any event, as we have noted, matters have moved on as the  CSID
         is being phased out and replaced by the INID. If, as appears to  be
         the case, the judge in the FtT concluded that the  appellant  would
         be able to use a proxy to obtain a replacement CSID  from  the  CSA
         office in Kirkuk, we  cannot  be  sure  that  this  represents  the
         position in 2019. It is likely, to our mind, that the CSA office in
         Kirkuk has an INID terminal and that it would  not  be  willing  to
         issue a CSID to the appellant through a proxy...In the  event  that
         he does not have access to an existing CSID card and is  unable  to
         obtain a replacement whilst he is in the UK, we think  that  it  is
         likely that his return to Iraq would be  in  breach  of  Article  3
         ECHR...".


54.  The Upper Tribunal also  considered  the  circumstances  of  a  Kurdish
    individual who was returned to Baghdad but who had no CSID or  INID  to
    travel on to his place of birth. It found that:


         "Baghdad is generally safe for ordinary civilians but whether it is
         safe for a particular  returnee  is  a  question  of  fact  in  the
         individual case.  There are no  on-entry  sponsorship  requirements
         for Baghdad but there are sponsorship requirements  for  residency.
         A documented individual of working age is  likely  to  be  able  to
         satisfy those requirements.  Relocation to Baghdad is likely to  be
         reasonable for Arab Shia and  Sunni  single,  able-bodied  men  and
         married  couples  of  working  age  without  children  and  without
         specific vulnerabilities.  Other individuals are likely to  require
         external support, ie a support network of members  of  his  or  her
         family, extended family or tribe,  who  are  willing  and  able  to
         provide  genuine  support.   Whether  such  a  support  network  is
         available is to be considered with reference  to  the  collectivist
         nature of Iraqi society, as considered in AAH (Iraq)".


55.  The Appellant is not an  Arab  Shia  or  Sunni  man  and  the  evidence
    relating  to  his  mental  ill-health  indicates  that,  although   not
    suffering from any physical impairment,  his  ability  to  obtain  work
    would be compromised. He has been dependent upon the  support  of  Kent
    County Council whilst in the United Kingdom and this support  would  be
    terminated when he left the country. In addition, for the reasons given
    above I have found that he is not in touch with any relatives  who  may
    be able to provide him with financial or other support.


56.  For all of these reasons, I also find that expecting him to  remain  in
    Baghdad for an indefinite period of time with no ability  to  obtain  a
    CSID or INID would also amount  to  a  breach  of  Article  3o  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.



    DECISION


(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 11 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


