

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/05479/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Tribunal                            |                                      |
|on 11 May 2017                      |On 24 May 2017                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                                     GB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Bradshaw instructed by Bankfield Heath Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Row ('the Judge') promulgated on the 2 November 2016 in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on both protection and human
        rights grounds.
     2. The appellant is a national of Iran born in 1978 who claims to have
        entered the United Kingdom in November 2015. The appellant  claimed
        asylum which was refused on 13 May 2016 as it was not  accepted  by
        the Secretary of State that the appellant will face a real risk  of
        persecution or harm if returned to Iran. The application for  leave
        under the European Convention of Human Rights was  also  considered
        and refused.



Background


     3. The Judge sets out the correct self-direction in  relation  to  the
        burden and standard of proof at [4] - [6]  before  summarising  the
        appellant's and respondent's cases. In relation to the  appellant's
        case the Judge records at [8] - [12]:


         8.   The appellant says that he is  an  Iranian  national.  He  was
             employed as a mechanical engineer in the oil industry. In  the
             past he has been an amateur boxer of  some  repute  and  after
             retiring worked as a boxing coach in Iran.


         9.   He is an atheist. On a date which  he  initially  said  was  1
             November 2015 but now says was 31 October 2015  he  gave  some
             leaflets concerning his atheistic views to some of his  boxing
             pupils. This attracted the attention of  the  security  police
             who next day came to  the  gym,  took  away  his  locker,  and
             subsequently raided his home. The appellant was  working  away
             at the time.


         10.  Hearing the news the next day 2 November 2015 he  arranged  to
             travel to the United Kingdom by land via  Turkey  arriving  in
             the United Kingdom on 14 November 2015.


         11.  He fears that if he returns to Iran he  would  be  persecuted.
             The appellant says that he has expressed some of his views  on
             Facebook  and  has  received  a  warning  from   the   Iranian
             authorities.


         12.  If the appellant returned to Iran he would do so as  a  failed
             asylum seeker. Two matters would bring him to the attention of
             the authorities at the airport. Firstly the fact that  he  has
             come to the adverse attention of the  Iranian  authorities  in
             Iran. The second is that his Facebook  entries  purporting  to
             criticise Islam and the Iranian authorities would  also  bring
             him to their attention. He is  thus  at  risk  of  arrest  and
             mistreatment on return.


     4. The respondent accepted the appellant is Iranian  and  has  been  a
        boxing coach but nothing more. The respondent's case  is  that  the
        appellant travelled to the United Kingdom as  an  economic  migrant
        which is said to be evidenced by the fact he failed to claim asylum
        in any of the countries he travelled through  on  his  way  to  the
        United Kingdom. The Judge noted the respondent did not dispute that
        if  the  appellant  had  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
        authorities  whilst  he  was  in  Iran  and  due  to  his  Facebook
        activities for anti-Islamic and anti-state views he will be at risk
        of persecution and harm on return.
     5. The Judge noted at [14] that the issue is whether the appellant  is
        telling the truth about his activities or whether  they  have  been
        fabricated to establish an asylum claim.
     6. In relation to the credibility of the accounts, the Judge sets  out
        his findings at [15] to [37] inclusive which can be  summarised  in
        the following terms:

             a.    There  are  matters   which   affect   the   appellant's
                  credibility. There are minor matters concerning  the  date
                  when he says that the authorities came  to  his  gym.  The
                  appellant  explains  this  by  saying  he  was  using  two
                  different calendars. The discrepancy is not significant as
                  a mistake could easily have been made about the date [15].


             b.   Issues concerning the Facebook entries and warnings  said
                  to  have  been  sent  by  the  Iranian  authorities  raise
                  significant issues [16].


             c.   The appellant claims to have posted a number  of  entries
                  on his Facebook account  criticising  the  government  and
                  Islam and to  have  been  sent  warnings  by  the  Iranian
                  authorities, the first of which was  sent  on  9  December
                  2015. The appellant claimed at the hearing  to  have  been
                  sent another warning 15 days later which he deleted as  he
                  did not think it was of any significance. [17 - 18].


             d.   The Facebook entries cover a period from  early  2014  to
                  the end of 2015. The appellant gave  evidence  there  were
                  additional entries relating to 2016 which did not  have  a
                  year on them, which the Judge  accepted  to  be  the  case
                  [19].


             e.    The  appellant  was  interviewed  by   the   immigration
                  authorities in the United Kingdom on  two  occasions,  the
                  first on 18 November 2015 for the screening interview when
                  he was asked why he could not return to  Iran.  His  reply
                  makes no mention of a real risk arising  from  entries  on
                  his Facebook account. The only  explanation  provided  was
                  that the appellant had given his pupil some  leaflets  and
                  that the  authorities  had  become  involved.  The  second
                  interview on 22nd of April 2016, after the  appellant  had
                  had the opportunity to  take  legal  advice,  contains  no
                  mention of any Facebook entries  and  no  mention  of  the
                  appellant having  received  a  warning  from  the  Iranian
                  authorities. Again, the appellant only mentioned  leaflets
                  he had given to his pupils. When asked specifically if  he
                  had any evidence that the authorities were  interested  in
                  him the appellant is stated to have  replied  "no"  [20  -
                  21].


             f.   The failure to mention Facebook entries is a  significant
             omission [22].


             g.   The appellant's explanation  that  he  never  thought  he
                  could use the Facebook entries  and  related  warnings  in
                  support  of  his  asylum  claim  was  not  believed.   The
                  appellant was represented by solicitors who  are  said  to
                  have prepared his case  meticulously,  including  pointing
                  out corrections after the  interview  of  27  April  2016.
                  [24].


             h.   The appellant's solicitors were not aware of any Facebook
                  entries or any warning from the Iranian authorities  which
                  would  have  been  of  fundamental   importance   to   the
                  appellant's claim [24].


             i.   The first time these documents were disclosed to the Home
                  Office was when the appellant's bundle was submitted on  6
                  October 2016 for which  translations  were  not  submitted
                  until 20 October 2016 [24].


             j.   The Judge did not accept the appellant's explanation. The
                  documents  arrived  late.  The  Judge  finds  "the   clear
                  implication of the fact that they were  not  disclosed  in
                  April 2016 is that they did not come into existence  until
                  after  that  date.  Otherwise  the  appellant  would  have
                  mentioned them. He is an intelligent man. He has a  degree
                  in mechanical engineering. He would have been fully  aware
                  of the importance of those documents" [25].


             k.   The appellant has not shown that the documents  are  what
                  he claims them to be [26].


             l.   The appellant claimed at the hearing that he has Facebook
                  entries revealing his religious and political views  which
                  were  posted  whilst  he  was  in  Iran,  dated  from  the
                  beginning of 2014, almost two years before he  left  Iran.
                  [27].


             m.   The appellant claims to have received a warning sent on 9
                  December 2015 [27] but no warning was sent to  him  whilst
                  he was in Iran; his  claim  was  that  despite  expressing
                  adverse views openly for two years he  had  not  attracted
                  the adverse attention or  warnings  from  the  authorities
                  [28].


             n.   The Judge found it difficult to  see  why  the  authority
                  should  show  the  alleged  interest  in  the   appellant,
                  evidenced by the warning sent within three  weeks  of  his
                  arrival in the United Kingdom, if they had not  shown  any
                  interest in him whilst he was in Iran [28].


             o.   The appellant claimed he had been an atheist for at least
                  the last 15 years and having remained quiet on the subject
                  the Judge questioned why it is that he  should  decide  to
                  distribute leaflets to a group of  young  men  in  October
                  2015 and put himself at risk with the Iranian  authorities
                  [29].


             p.   The appellant is specific about who came to the gym, that
                  they were plain-clothed officers but the Judge  questioned
                  how he would know this if he was  not  present  and  found
                  that if the authorities knew where his gym was  and  where
                  he lived it is likely  they  would  have  known  where  he
                  worked as well and sought to arrest him there,  but  there
                  is no evidence that they did [30].


             q.   Since coming to the United Kingdom, and although claiming
                  to be an atheist, the Judge finds the appellant has  shown
                  a sudden interest in Christianity. It was noted  that  the
                  Appellant does not claim  that  he  is  Christian  convert
                  [31].


             r.   The appellant has not produced any evidence from his wife
                  who is said to have been present when the police came  and
                  who was arrested although then released and who the  Judge
                  assumed would be  willing  to  provide  a  statement.  The
                  appellant is in contact with his wife [32].


             s.   It is argued the  appellant  is  not  a  typical  Iranian
                  asylum seeker as he is married with a child, comes from  a
                  middle-class background and was relatively wealthy in that
                  country although the Judge finds he  has  produced  little
                  evidence of this. Two contracts of employment  dated  2010
                  and 2011 had been disclosed but nothing more to prove  his
                  family circumstances in Iran [33].


             t.   The appellant claims to have handed out leaflets on  31st
                  October, been sought by the authorities on 1 November, and
                  to have left Iran on 2 November 2016, meaning  inside  two
                  days he managed to leave Iran illegally  having  contacted
                  those who would know how to do this and arrange for  money
                  to be paid to them. The appellant claims that his  brother
                  paid the money [34].


             u.   The appellant travelled to Turkey. He travelled by  land.
                  He passed through  possibly  half  a  dozen  countries  in
                  Europe in any of which he could have claimed asylum.   The
                  appellant's claim that he did not know which countries  he
                  was in was not believed by the  Judge  as  he  would  have
                  known where he was travelling to and what  countries.  The
                  appellant claimed to have  travelled  alone  but  when  he
                  arrived in the United Kingdom there were four  people  who
                  travelled with him some of whom  would  have  known  where
                  they were going [35].


             v.   The circumstances of the appellant's journey  were  found
                  to indicate that  it  was  a  planned  journey.  Timescale
                  indicates it would have been planned for some time and not
                  done on the spur of the moment. If the sole intention  was
                  to find somewhere safe the appellant could have done  this
                  by travelling to a nearby country at less expense and less
                  risk that travelling to the United Kingdom involved  [36].
                  This is not the conduct of somebody fleeing his  safety  -
                  it is the conduct of  someone  travelling  to  the  United
                  Kingdom for economic purposes [37].


   7. The Judge concludes at [38] - [45], having taken the lower standard of
      proof into account, that he did not believe what the  appellant  says.
      The Judge does not find that the Facebook entries have been  shown  to
      be genuine, did not find the  warning  which  had  been  exhibited  is
      genuine, and that the appellant had not shown that it is what he  says
      it is [38].
   8. The Judge found the appellant would have disclosed  the  existence  of
      the documents in his asylum interview had they existed  at  that  time
      [39].
   9. The Judge did not find the appellant  had  ever  expressed  any  views
      about atheism that even if he is an atheist he had never expressed any
      views about this and certainly not expressed them either  on  Facebook
      or in leaflets. The Judge found the account is fabricated and did  not
      find the authorities came to arrest the appellant or  that  they  took
      away his locker or that his wife was arrested or his  house  searched.
      The account was found to be a fabrication [40].
  10. The Judge found the appellant came to United Kingdom for  economic  or
      for other purposes not associated with any fear of persecution or harm
      in Iran [41] and did not find  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution or harm because of anti-Islamic or anti-state views as  he
      has never expressed any such views and has not  come  to  the  adverse
      attention of the Iranian authorities [42].
  11. The Judge, having dismissed the credibility of the  claim,  considered
      risk on return at the airport as a failed  asylum  seeker.  The  Judge
      found that on the appellant's evidence as he has a  passport  that  he
      left in Iran and that as he is in contact with his wife  she  will  be
      able to send it to him. The Judge concluded  that  the  appellant  had
      never been and is not likely to come to the adverse attention  of  the
      authorities in Iran.




Grounds and submissions



    12. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
        asserting (i)  that  the  Judge  made  inadequate  or  inconsistent
        findings on material matters relating to the  Judge's  findings  on
        the appellant's Facebook posts, claiming the Judge has not examined
        the posts themselves, including such  factors  as  the  appellant's
        name being on each one, his photograph appearing in the top  corner
        of each post and the appellant appearing in a different  photograph
        within one post shown in the supplementary bundle. It  is  asserted
        the Judge's approach to the evidence is inconsistent and  confusing
        (ii) that the Judge failed  to  have  regard  to  material  matters
        namely the appellant's claim he was only allowed out of the lorries
        he was travelling in at night  when  it  was  dark  and  could  not
        recognise areas or identify where  he  was.   The  Judge  does  not
        explain why he rejects the evidence in reaching  his  finding  that
        the timescale indicates that the journey must have been planned for
        some time, (iii) that the Judge failed to have regard  to  material
        evidence referring to the ability of the appellant to  contact  his
        wife when it was known the Iranian  authorities  monitor  telephone
        conversations and Internet communications  and  open  mail  without
        Court  authorisation,  indicating  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
        whether  the  appellant  contacting  his  wife  to  obtain  further
        evidence was a realistic course of action.



Error of law


    13. The criticism  of  the  Judge  for  adopting  an  inconsistent  and
        confused approach to the evidence has no arguable merit. The  Judge
        was aware of the issues he was being asked to consider and  clearly
        considered the evidence made available with the required degree  of
        anxious scrutiny.
    14. The primary challenge is to the Judge's findings in relation to the
        Facebook account. In granting permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison stated:


             "It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected himself by  (a)
             failing to consider (i) the Facebook posts to  show  that  not
             only had the Appellant opened a Facebook account in  2012  but
             had posted many pages before he left Iran, (ii)  the  postings
             he has made since his arrival and (iii) whether he would be at
             risk on return  as  a  result.  The  case  of  AB  and  others
             (Internet activity - state of evidence)  [2015]  UKUT  257  is
             relied upon for its terms; (b) the amount of weight  given  to
             the Appellant's journey in assessing his credibility  and  (c)
             by failing in light of the aforesaid to consider  whether  the
             Iranians  authorities  will  be  monitoring   the   Appellants
             telephone conversation or Internet communications or  mail  if
             the  Appellant  were  to  approach  his  wife  for  supporting
             evidence or his passport. As  such  these  considerations  may
             have made a material difference to the outcome or fairness  of
             proceedings.


    15. On behalf of the appellant Mr Bradshaw argues the Judge's  findings
        that the Facebook entries had been manufactured had not been put to
        the appellant.  To support the reliability of the Facebook entries,
        it was submitted that when someone responded to a post made by  the
        appellant, the date would be shown as the headline for the post.
    16. Mr Bradshaw was asked about the date appearing on Facebook  entries
        that do not appear to be  in  the  appellant's  name  to  which  he
        claimed they were in the appellant's brother's name, PB,  which  he
        had adopted, as his brother had died when he was much  younger.  It
        is accepted that all the Facebook posts are  in  this  other  name,
        although  this  topic  was  not  explored  before  the   First-tier
        Tribunal.
    17. We take judicial  notice  of  the  fact  that  Facebook  is  not  a
        communication tool designed to require an understanding of  complex
        IT principles to operate  but  rather  a  social  network  used  to
        connect with others. Facebook has stated in news releases that  its
        mission  is  to  make  the  world  "more  open  and  connected"  by
        connecting people and facilitating communication between them.  The
        systems employed to create a Facebook account  and  to  upload  and
        communicate   messages   reflects   this   desire   to   facilitate
        communication.
    18. When opening a Facebook account, the appellant would have created a
        personal profile. He claims to have opened his Facebook account  in
        2012. It is known the Iranian authorities monitor social media  and
        that a number have been arrested and subjected to ill-treatment for
        messages posted on their Facebook and other accounts  at  times  of
        civil unrest in Iran or if  they  have  published  articles  deemed
        contrary to the interests of the Iranian state.  It  is  known  the
        Iranian authorities have denied access to individuals who have used
        social  media  in  an  "unacceptable"  manner,  as  judged  by  the
        standards of the Iranian authorities, and blocked access  to  other
        Internet sites. There is however no  suggestion  before  the  Judge
        that the Iranian authorities have imposed  a  'denial  of  service'
        upon this appellant in relation to his Facebook account.
    19. It is also known  that  Facebook  users  can  add  other  users  as
        "Facebook friends" and share information with them  in  many  ways.
        This is normally achieved after signing up and  adding  friends  by
        sending private, semi-private or public messages. Messages can take
        the form of a "status update" (also called  a  "post"),  a  private
        Facebook message, a comment about a friend's post or status,  or  a
        quick click of the "like" button to show  support  for  a  friend's
        update or a company's Facebook page. It is also possible to  upload
        information onto an individual's Facebook account that is seen only
        by the registered user of the account in question  and  not  shared
        with any third party.
    20. When opening a Facebook account an applicant ordinarily gives their
        real first and  last  name  along  with  their  email  address  and
        completes a form, although the evidence in this appeal  shows  that
        the appellant did not use  his  real  name  to  open  his  Facebook
        account. Once completed an individual will click  the  green  "sign
        up" button at the bottom after which Facebook will send  a  message
        to the email address provided with a link asking the  applicant  to
        confirm their mail address.
    21. Facebook uses specific technology such as calling its profile  area
        your Timeline because it arranges your life in chronological  order
        and displays a running list of your  activities  on  Facebook.  The
        Timeline page is also  where  you  can  upload  basic  biographical
        information about yourself such as your education,  work,  hobbies,
        interests. This Timeline/profile area is where other people will go
        to see information about you on Facebook and is also where  a  user
        can go to check out his or her friends because each of them  has  a
        Timeline/profile page.
    22. "Status update" is what Facebook calls a message that is posted via
        the publishing box.  People use status updates to communicate their
        activities or share entries.
    23. It is possible with Facebook to send  Internal  Messages.  Messages
        are private notes a user can send any  friend  they  are  connected
        with on Facebook.  Such private messages are viewable only  by  the
        person to whom they are sent and do not go into the  news  feed  or
        other places which would enable them  to  be  viewed  by  a  user's
        network of friends.  Such messages go into the recipient's Facebook
        inbox which  functions  like  a  private  email  address.  Facebook
        privacy controls let a user select who can see each item posted.
    24. It is not therefore a case that any item posted to an  individual's
        Facebook account is automatically viewable by the world in general,
        as recognised in the case law of the Upper  Tribunal  referring  to
        requests by the Iranians authorities on return  for  those  with  a
        Facebook account, in whom  there  may  be  interest  or  desire  to
        question, to furnish  their  passwords  to  permit  access  to  the
        content of that account. This supports the commonly known  position
        that Facebook lets each user control who  can  see  their  personal
        information and content they post to their account.
    25. The fact there were Facebook  entries  provided  to  the  Judge  is
        therefore not determinative of the appellant's claim. The appellant
        was required not only to establish a credible aspect of  his  claim
        that gives rise to a real risk, such as  an  adverse  political  or
        religious  opinion  which  genuinely  represents  an   individual's
        fundamental  belief,  but  also  to   demonstrate   that   material
        reflecting such  a  fundamental  belief  (actual  or  that  may  be
        imputed) is reflected on the Facebook account, and to establish the
        nature of the posts i.e. whether only uploaded for the  appellant's
        own information, whether shared with a limited number of others  as
        a private message or whether posted without active privacy setting,
        and in all cases as those who access such messages are recorded  on
        the Facebook account, evidence of who may have seen such messages.
    26. There appears to have been no credible evidence before the Judge to
        show that those entries appearing on the Facebook account were  not
        either posted to the appellant's account for his  private  viewing,
        were not subject to privacy settings, or had been viewed by  others
        outside his chosen audience. There also appears to be the fact  the
        entries the appellant is seeking to rely upon are not in  his  name
        but in the name of another with insufficient  evidence  before  the
        Judge to establish that a connection would be  made  between  those
        articles and the appellant as the  author  of  the  same.   In  the
        absence of such evidence,  the  findings  by  the  Judge  that  the
        appellant is an economic migrant and this  is  a  fraudulent  claim
        created to secure asylum in the United Kingdom, suggest   they  did
        not represent a genuinely held view but rather have been created as
        a means to enhance a very weak claim for international protection.
    27. The argument of arguable legal error as the disingenuous nature  of
        the Facebook entries had been not been put to the appellant has  no
        merit. Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal  are  adversarial  by
        nature. The appellant was represented and  attended  to  give  oral
        evidence which was considered by the Judge. The obligation upon the
        Judge was to properly consider the material provided and to  arrive
        at  appropriate  findings  supported  by  adequate   reasons.   The
        existence of a right  of  appeal  provides  an  appellant  with  an
        effective remedy against errors made by a judge  having  undertaken
        the proper process. There is  no  legal  obligation  upon  a  judge
        considering evidence, with a view to producing a written  decision,
        being required to reconvene  a  hearing  to  discuss  each  adverse
        conclusion made to provide the appellant with  an  opportunity  for
        further comment either orally, via representative  submissions,  or
        in writing. The matters considered by the  Judge  are  those  based
        upon the evidence provided by the appellant himself. It  is  not  a
        matter of the Judge considering material of which the appellant has
        had no reasonable notice which may, in some circumstances,  amounts
        to procedural unfairness.
    28. It is also the case, where it has not been shown that entries on  a
        Facebook account  represent  a  fundamental  held  view,  that  the
        judgment of the Supreme Court in HJ  (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31  must  be
        properly considered. The Judge assessed risk on return in light  of
        the appellants accepted profile. The Judge was correct to do so for
        even if the Facebook entries are not genuine this does not  prevent
        a potential persecutor  who  sees  the  same  imputing  an  adverse
        profile upon the person on whose Facebook account they  are,  which
        may lead to ill-treatment or persecution. It  was  accepted  in  HJ
        (Iran) that an individual  cannot  be  expected  to  lie  to  avoid
        persecution  if  what  they  are  lying  about  is  something  that
        represents a fundamentally held belief or aspect of their  personal
        identity, such as religion, sexual orientation, political  opinion.
        It was recognised in HJ (Iran) that  such  a  principle  will  only
        apply if the material in question does represent a credible genuine
        fundamentally held belief that forms part of a person's  individual
        identity. Something created to enhance a bogus claim that  has  not
        been shown to represent a credibly held belief is not afforded  the
        same weight.  The  Judge  was  clearly  of  the  opinion  that  the
        appellants claim to have expressed views on Facebook for  which  he
        had received  a  warning  from  the  Iranian  authorities  was  not
        credible and was without foundation. As the views expressed do  not
        form part of an expression of a fundamentally held belief there  is
        no legal restriction upon the appellant in denying the existence of
        any such entries or in expecting any entries that  may  potentially
        cause  him  difficulties  being  deleted.  The  appellant  had  not
        provided any evidence to  show  the  Iranian  authorities  had  the
        ability to establish the  nature  of  information  deleted  from  a
        Facebook account in this way.
    29. This is not a case similar to that relating to Zimbabwe  where,  at
        times, a failure to express an opinion in the positive may lead  to
        persecution. In that  country  it  was  found  that  a  failure  to
        positively demonstrate support for Zanu-PF could give rise to  ill-
        treatment especially at times of elections.
    30. The Upper Tribunal received submissions from Mr Bates,  a  Facebook
        user, about the ease in which posts  entered  by  others  could  be
        manipulated to change the  entire  content  and  meaning  and  what
        happens to the date when such manipulation occurs. However, we  did
        not rely on the evidence of Mr Bates in reaching our decision.
    31. The  Facebook  entries  have  the  name  of  PB  on  them  arguably
        indicating that they are entries created by another person and  not
        the appellant.
    32. The Judge has not been shown to have erred in law  when  noting  in
        the appellant's screening and asylum interviews that the  appellant
        makes no mention of a real risk of harm arising because of postings
        on his Facebook entry  or  of  warnings  being  received  from  the
        Iranian authorities, both of which are matters he later  sought  to
        rely upon. It is reasonable to assume that if an individual  claims
        to face a real risk on return to Iran, as a result of  the  matters
        appearing on the Facebook  account,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect
        specific mention would have been made  of  the  same  in  both  the
        Screening and Asylum interviews. The finding of the Judge that such
        documents had been created by  the  appellant  in  support  of  his
        asylum claim is within the range of findings the Judge was arguably
        entitled to make on the evidence.
    33. The clear inference by the Judge was that the lack of disclosure of
        the existence of such evidence, or  the  alleged  warnings,  at  an
        earlier stage in the proceedings was because such documents had not
        come into existence until the creation of  the  appellant's  appeal
        bundle disclosed at a much later date. Accordingly, the  Judge  was
        entitled to attach the weight he thought was appropriate to content
        of the Facebook account. We find this is a finding  fully  open  to
        the Judge based on the evidence he was asked to consider.
    34. We also note that at [30] of the decision under challenge the Judge
        makes adverse credibility finding not related to the Facebook entry
        at all.
    35. At [32] the  Judge  makes  a  finding  in  the  appellant's  favour
        regarding the weight to be placed upon  a  certain  aspect  of  the
        evidence as  he  does  in  [15]  regarding  a  discrepancy  in  the
        evidence.
    36. The Judge's findings regarding the circumstances of  the  appellant
        travelling to the United Kingdom have not been shown to be  outside
        the range of findings reasonably available to the Judge such as  to
        enable us to find arguable legal error.
    37. A core finding is that the Judge did not find  that  the  appellant
        has ever expressed views of an anti-Islamic or  anti-state  nature,
        that his account is a fabrication, or has never expressed any views
        about atheism. The appellant can remove the entries on his Facebook
        account which will not be available  to  be  seen  by  the  Iranian
        authorities even if the appellant is asked to provide his password,
        in the event he is questioned on return.
    38. Having considered the submissions in detail and all  other  aspects
        of this case, including the documentary evidence  provided  by  the
        appellant, we do not find the appellant has made out  any  arguable
        legal error material to the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal.  The
        Judge did not find the appellants claim to be credible. Accordingly
        there will be no need for the appellant to ask  his  wife  to  send
        evidence of a controversial nature which may place him at risk.  It
        is not established that this applies to a simple  request  for  his
        wife to forward his passport to him.
    39. The appellant in his screening interview was asked whether  he  had
        been involved with or accused  of  being  involved  with  any  pro-
        government groups, political organisations, religious organisation,
        armed  or  violent  organisations,  group  or  parties  or  written
        anything that might be controversial or  been  suspected  of  being
        involved in the matter set out a question 5.7 to which  he  replied
        in relation to all matters "no".  It is clear the appellant had  no
        adverse profile during his time in Iran.
    40. There was some discussion during the error of law  hearing  of  the
        boxing  certificates  within  the  appellant's  bundle  issued   in
        relation to boxing and related  activities  in  the  names  of  the
        appellant and PM and GM.  The certificates  do  not  appear  to  be
        contentious and it has been accepted  that  the  appellant  was  an
        amateur boxer.  However, this adds nothing of significance  to  the
        issues in relation to the Facebook evidence.
    41. No arguable legal error material to the decision is made out.


Decision

    42. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.








   Anonymity.


    43. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


          We make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
          (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17th of May 2017












