
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/05673/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 October 2017                         |On 05 December 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     am
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie sitting at Taylor House on  12  July  2017
    whereby  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 3 August 2017.  The Appellant's claim was that he was at
    risk on return to Bangladesh because he is  gay  and  that  thereby  he
    would be persecuted or that he would be at  serious  risk  of  harm  in
    terms of humanitarian protection or indeed in breach of  Article  3  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.  Additionally,  the  Appellant
    said he relied on paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules and  on
    Article 8.

2.     Permission  was  granted  in  this  case  by  Acting  Resident  Judge
    Appleyard by way of a decision dated 25  August  2017  when  the  judge
    noted as follows:

         "The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and made  application  to
         the Respondent  for  international  protection  consequent  upon  a
         claimed fear of persecution by reason of his  homosexuality.   That
         application was refused and he appealed  and  following  a  hearing
         Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Devittie,   in   a   decision
         promulgated on 3 August 2017, dismissed the Appellant's appeal  'on
         asylum grounds'...  Nevertheless, the grounds are all arguable  and
         particularly the assertion that the Judge has erred in dealing only
         with an asylum appeal when before him were also appeals in relation
         to  humanitarian  protection,  paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the
         Immigration Rules and Articles 3 and 8."

3.    The judge had concluded in his decision as follows at paragraph 9:

         "I find in the light of the unsatisfactory  features  that  I  have
         identified, that the Appellant has failed to establish that  it  is
         reasonably likely to be true that he is a gay person.   It  follows
         that  this  Appellant  does  not  have  a  well-founded   fear   of
         persecution in Bangladesh because of his sexuality.  He has  failed
         to establish that he is a gay person.  I would accordingly  dismiss
         this appeal."


4.    Mr Rees who appears before me today and who had also  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, drafted the grounds of appeal dated 11  August
    2017.  It is contended  that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  as
    follows:

         "(1)     The first ground of appeal is that FtT Judge Devittie  has
             fallen into legal error in his decision in his  having  failed
             to address directly much of the Appellant's  case  put  before
             him.  The judge has  failed  to  deal  with  his  Humanitarian
             Protection claim, his ECHR Art 3 claim, his para 276ADE(1)(vi)
             claim under the Immigration Rules as well as his  ECHR  Art  8
             claim.  For the judge has only made a decision on  the  asylum
             claim.  Yet the judge  has  made  an  anonymity  direction  in
             relation to this case."

5.    In submissions before me today it  was  submitted  that  there  was  a
    proper challenge to credibility particularly at paragraphs 4, 6, 7  and
    8 of the grounds.

6.    Ms Pettersen relies on the Rule 24 reply which says in material  parts
    that the judge did give detailed reasons why  he  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant is gay, that the Appellant had been in the UK since 2009  and
    yet he waited until 2016 to mention his sexuality even though he  could
    have mentioned it in 2013 when his Tier 4 application was  refused.  It
    is also said on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  although  there
    does appear to be an omission in that the judge did not explicitly deal
    with Article 3 or humanitarian protection, in a case such as  this  the
    case would have fallen or stood with the asylum claim.   Ultimately  it
    was submitted that the outcome would be the same and that  the  grounds
    themselves  did  not  make  any  detailed  challenge  in   respect   of
    credibility and although it was accepted that the judge had Rules,  the
    Appellant had only been here for eight years  and  there  was  no  real
    evidence other than that he had  some  distant  relative  or  relatives
    here.  There was no real evidence of very  significant  obstacles.   It
    was submitted that there was indeed an omy significant  obstacles.   It
    was submitted that there was indeed an omission by the judge.   It  was
    unfortunate but it was a  case  where  it  was  unlikely  to  make  any
    difference and any error therefore was not material.

7.    I have to say I had much sympathy with that submission  on  behalf  of
    the Respondent. The Appellant's grounds did not fully engage  with  the
    credibility aspects of the case.  When in  discussion  this  morning  I
    asked Mr Rees to deal with these matters, in  reality  his  submissions
    amounted to mere disagreement with various aspects of  what  the  judge
    had found but I do hesitate because the omissions on the  part  of  the
    judge are significant in relation to not making findings in respect  of
    paragraph  276ADE,  Article  8  and  humanitarian  protection.   It  is
    possible that the judge may ultimately have come to the same  decision,
    namely to dismiss the Appellant's claim, but it  is  right  to  observe
    that it is not easy to be clear if he would have done so.

8.    What I explored with the parties was whether I  ought  to  remit  this
    matter with the current findings to enable the omissions, to  be  dealt
    with by the same  judge.  Namely  the  paragraph  276ADE,  humanitarian
    protection and Article 8 matters. In my  judgment,  however,  there  is
    just enough to enable me to conclude that the matter has to be remitted
    for a complete rehearing. That is because in my judgment the judge  has
    failed to fully grapple with the issues in respect of  risk  on  return
    relating  to  sexual  orientation.  The  Appellant  has  provided  some
    explanation for his delay in claiming asylum and the  problems  centred
    around "coming out.   I have to say  it  has  been  a  finely  balanced
    decision.

9.    In the end, I am just persuaded that there is a material error of  law
    in the whole of the decision, including  the  protection  claim.  There
    will be a complete re-hearing. None of the findings shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

There is an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.


ANONYMITY

Rule 4 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008Unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: Abid Mahmood
Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            Mahmood
Dated: 25th October 2017
