
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05904/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                              |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     FSA

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan         (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") which it made on 24 March 2018
following a hearing of 21 March 2018 and which it sent to the  parties  on
27 March 2018.  The tribunal's decision  was  to  dismiss  the  claimant's
appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of 25 May 2016  refusing  to
grant him international protection.

2.    The tribunal granted the claimant anonymity.  Nothing was  said  about
that before me and, in the circumstances, I have  decided  to  maintain  the
status quo and continue that grant.

3.    The claimant is a national of Iran.  The tribunal decided that he  had
been born on 1 January 1998 notwithstanding an age assessment report which
suggested he had been born at a later date but which the tribunal  found  to
be unreliable.  He is of Kurdish ethnicity.  Put simply, he claimed that  he
had been involved in alcohol smuggling activities with his father  and  that
his father had been arrested  by  the  authorities  as  a  result  of  that.
However, he also said that he was fearful of return to Iran because  he  had
distributed leaflets for the pro-Kurdish oppositionist party referred to  as
"PJAK" and because he is a Sunni Muslim rather than a Shia Muslim.  It has
also been argued on his behalf that, even if his account  is  not  true,  he
would be at risk at the hands of the authorities upon return  as  a  Kurdish
failed asylum seeker.

4.    The respondent did not believe that the claimant had given a  truthful
account and did not  believe,  therefore,  that  there  was  any  reason  to
conclude that he would be at risk upon return.  That is why she refused  his
claim. The claimant appealed that decision  and  it  was  dismissed  by  the
tribunal  in  an  earlier  decision  which  was  sent  to  the  parties   on
10 November 2016.  That  decision,  however,  was  set  aside  because  it
contained an error of law and a rehearing of the appeal  was  directed.   It
was that which led to the tribunal's decision to which I have referred.

5.    The tribunal accepted that the claimant is a national of Iran, from  a
remote village in Iran, and that he is Kurdish.  It accepted  his  claim  of
having been born on 1 January 1998 or at least that there was no reason to
reach any adverse credibility finding with respect to his claims as  to  his
age (see paragraph 16 of the tribunal's written reasons of 24 March 2018).
But it rejected, as untruthful, the various claims he had made with  respect
to smuggling and leafleting.  It explained why it was doing so in this way:

      "     17.  C)  Alcohol smuggling.  I find that the  appellant's  claim
           to have assisted his father with alcohol  smuggling  into  Iran,
           later in his witness statement adding toy  smuggling,  does  not
           engage the 1951 Convention.  I note his claim set  out  in  his
           appeal representations that as an  alcohol  smuggler  he  was  a
           member of a particular social  group  in  Iran.   Wisely  in  my
           judgment, this particular claim was not pursued or even referred
           to during the course of the hearing.  Neither was it argued that
           the appellant's alcohol smuggling activities were indicative  of
           him holding an imputed political opinion in Iran.   However,  he
           did claim that he was  at  risk  in  Iran  because  the  Iranian
           authorities arrested his father because of his father's  alcohol
           trading, then claiming that he  was  'possibly  executed'.   The
           respondent rejected this account in its entirety because it  was
           insufficiently detailed as to how the smuggling was carried  out
           and  how  his  smuggling  activity  was   concealed   from   the
           authorities.  I make the following findings.

            18.  I note the appellant's claims at  both  his  screening  and
           his asylum interviews as to his  father's  arrest.   However,  I
           find his account vague and in parts lacking in credibility.  For
           example,  he  stated  in  answer  to  his   asylum   interview's
           question 92 that he did not know when his father  was  arrested
           but he knew that he had been and that he was held by an  Iranian
           security agency.  This was because in his  original  account  at
           his asylum  interview  his  father  telephoned  the  appellant's
           mother to tell her  and  she  in  turn  was  able  to  tell  the
           appellant's father that the house had been raided.  However, the
           appellant's account changed when he claimed that was at the time
           of his father's alleged arrest at his  cousin's  house  and  was
           heading home when a neighbour shouted to him that his father was
           arrested and warning him not  to  return  home.   In  answer  to
           question 99 he was unable to remember when this  happened,  but
           when again asked he said it happened about eleven days before he
           arrived in the United Kingdom, a response I  find  unexpectedly
           precise for someone claiming totally literacy, and also a  claim
           that was in stark contrast to the vagueness of his first reply.

            19.  During the course of the hearing the appellant stated  that
           when he heard about his father's arrest he was at  his  father's
           cousin's house, which he visited once  or  twice  a  week.   His
           father's cousin lived not more than five minutes walk away  from
           the appellant's family home.  I  note  that  in  answer  to  the
           asylum interview question 94 as to how the appellant  knew  his
           father was taken, he replied 'When he  called  my  mother'.   In
           answer to question 96 as to  when  he  called  the  appellant's
           mother, he replied 'When I  went  to  my  cousin's  and  in  the
           evening he called my mother and she told  him  about  the  house
           raid'.   I  then   note  the   appellant's   witness   statement
           paragraph 9(a) in which he stated that he wished to clarify that
           his father did not contact his mother.  He stated 'I have  never
           said this.  This must be an error in my  substantive  interview.
           My mother was with my father at the time  and  they  raided  our
           home and arrested him.  The phone call which I have referred  to
           in my account was from my father's  cousin  to  my  mother.   My
           mother told him what had happened and that my  father  had  been
           arrested.'

            20.  I find the appellant inconsistent  in  this  part   of  his
           account.   The  asylum  interview  record  is  clear   and   was
           unchallenged in this particular part until the appellant's first
           witness statement of 24 October 2016,  six  months  after  the
           asylum interview, a delay that has never been explained.

            21.  The appellant's account is that when  he  heard  about  his
           father's arrest he went back to is cousin's house, which was not
           more than five minutes walk away.  I find it  lacks  credibility
           that if  the  Iranian  authorities  had  the  slightest  adverse
           interest in the  appellant  that  they  would  not  have  easily
           located  him  in  that  tiny  village,  which  the   appellant's
           representative at the hearing acknowledged had a  population  of
           around 250 people.

            22.  I find the  appellant's  account  of  his  claimed  alcohol
           smuggling activities and  his  father's  arrest  and  'possible'
           execution both vague and inconsistent and therefore, even having
           regard to the low standard of proof in these matters, I  do  not
           believe this entire part of his claim.

            23.  D)  Appellant's lack of education.   The  appellant  stated
           several times in his account  that  he  was  illiterate  and  he
           repeated this on a number of occasions during the course of  his
           evidence.    However,   in   answer    to    the    respondent's
           representative's question as to his  age  and  when  he  stopped
           going to school he replied  'I  was  seventeen  years  old'.   I
           intervened in order to clarify his evidence.  I asked him if  he
           was saying he went to school in Iran.   He  replied  'Yes'.   He
           paused and then added 'I haven't had any  education'.   I  asked
           him whether he did or did not go to school in Iran.  He  replied
           'Yes, I went until  I  was  seventeen  but  didn't  receive  any
           education.  I went every year and they sent me home  every  time
           because of my ear'.  I asked him whether he was now saying  that
           he only went to school in Iran once a year.  He replied  'I  was
           bullied'.  I then asked him whether  he  would  please  tell  me
           whether he did or did not go to school in Iran, yes or  no.   He
           replied, 'No I did not go to school.  I can't read or write.   I
           didn't have education'.

            24.  I note the appellant's asylum  interview  record  where  at
           questions 12-13 he was asked whether he studied  in  Iran.   He
           replied that his father took him to school  but  he  experienced
           bullying because of the shape of his right ear.  He stated  that
           he stopped going to  school  when  he  was  seventeen.   It  was
           pointed out to him at question 14 that he had just stated  that
           he did not attend school because he was bullied and was asked if
           he was now saying that he attended school until the  age  of  17
           and whether he could confirm if he went to  school  in  Iran  or
           not.  He replied that he started going to school at the  age  of
           ten and his father would take  him  to  school  every  day,  but
           because he experienced the same bullying every day  he  did  not
           stay at school and went home  and  continued  like  that  for  a
           number of years.  I find that irrespective  of  the  appellant's
           inconsistency in his evidence I do not find it credible that  he
           was taken to school every day and simply walked out again  every
           day.  I do not believe the appellant's claim that he received no
           education in Iran.

            25.  Leafleting for PIAK.   The  appellant  claimed  during  the
           course of his asylum interview in answer to questions 67-68 that
           he supported PIAK but was not politically active other  than  by
           discreetly distributing written materials for PJAK at night time
           along  with  four   other  people.   He  stated  in  answer   to
           question 74 that he carried on  this  activity  for  about  two
           months.  Of importance, however, is the fact that this  was  the
           appellant's first mention of  this  claim.   When  asked  for  a
           reason as to why he  failed  to  mention  it  at  his  screening
           interview, he stated in answer to questions 81-82 of his asylum
           interview that because he had been held for three nights and was
           not allowed to go out of doors, he was mentally  exhausted.   He
           then later stated that he forgot to mention it  because  he  was
           asleep when the officer woke him up and told him he was going to
           be screened.

            26.  I note case law, YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145
           in which it was held that the purpose of a  screening  interview
           was for the appellant to establish  the  general  nature  office
           case in order for the respondent to decide how best  to  process
           it.  It was stated that asylum seekers were  still  expected  to
           tell the truth and answers given in screening  interviews  could
           be  compared  fairly  with  answers  given   later.    Screening
           interviews were not carried out in order to establish in  detail
           the reasons for a person's claim and it would  not  normally  be
           appropriate for the respondent to ask supplementary questions or
           to entertain elaborate answers and an inaccurate summary by  the
           interviewing officer at that stage would be excusable.  Further,
           the screening interview might well be conducted when the  asylum
           seeker was tired after a long journey.  These things had  to  be
           considered  when  any  inconsistencies  between  the   screening
           interview and the later case were evaluated.

            27.  I note that the appellant gave two  different  reasons  for
           failing to  mention  at  his  screening  interview  his  claimed
           leafleting on behalf of PJAK.  He initially stated that  it  was
           because he was held for three nights, was not allowed to go  out
           of doors and was therefore mentally exhausted, and  then  stated
           that he forgot to mention it because  he  was  asleep  when  the
           officer woke him up in order to tell him he was going to  attend
           his  screen  interview.   However,  I  find  neither  of   these
           explanations credible.  I make  this  finding  because  I  would
           expect that if he was indeed  involved  with  PJAK  in  the  way
           claimed, this would have been at the forefront of his mind  when
           asked to explain why he could not return to  Iran  and  I  would
           have expected it to form a mainstay  of  his  asylum  claim.   I
           additionally note his professed awareness of the dangers of such
           involvement with and on behalf of PJAK and the risk of execution
           if discovered, as stated in answer to questions 73 and 78 of his
           asylum interview.  I accept that he was not required to  provide
           detail of his claim at the screening interview stage but he  was
           required to tell the truth.  I remind myself of question 4.2 in
           which he was asked to briefly  explain  'all  the  reasons'  why
           could not return to Iran.  His reply to the  question  comprised
           entirely of him allegedly helping his father to smuggle  alcohol
           to Iran.  He added that his father was arrested and that he  was
           told that he was 'possibly executed'.  The appellant then stated
           that the authorities arrested families and he  therefore  feared
           arrest.

            28.  I have also considered the fact that the appellant  entered
           the United Kingdom on 28 January 2016 and gave his  screening
           interview the following day at 12.35 in the afternoon.   I  note
           his  readiness  to  be  interviewed,  as  shown  at  A1  of  the
           respondent's bundle.  I am satisfied that if true he would  have
           been fully aware that his claimed activities on behalf  of  PJAK
           would lead to drastic consequences for him if  detected  because
           he said so during the  course  of  his  asylum  interview  three
           months later.  I therefore do not find it at all  credible  that
           he would simply forget to mention it when asked.  I find that he
           fabricated his claim to have carried  out  tasks  on  behalf  of
           PJAK."

6.    The tribunal then went on to consider whether the  claimant  might  be
at risk of persecution or serious harm  in  consequence  of  him  being,  or
strictly speaking I suppose potentially  being,  a  returned  failed  asylum
seeker.  As to that the tribunal said this:

      "     30.  With regard to the appellant's return to Iran, I find  that
           he would be returned as a failed asylum seeker.  I am  satisfied
           that he does not face a real risk of persecution or a breach  of
           his articles 2 or 3 1950 Convention rights on return to Iran on
           account of him having left the country illegally, if  indeed  he
           did so, or as a failed asylum seeker, because I find that it has
           not been shown even to the low standard in  these  matters  that
           the Iranian State had the slightest adverse interest in him.   I
           note relevant case law of SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:   failed
           asylum seeker)  Iran  CG   [2016]  UKUT 308  setting  out  this
           principle.  During the course of her submissions the appellant's
           representative urged me to consider paragraph 23 of the decision
           and to find that upon his return to Iran he would  be  subjected
           to more than a period of simple detention or  questioning,  this
           because in the context of  the  overall  evidence  his  previous
           activities in Iran showed that he acted against the State and at
           the very least he would therefore be subjected to  a  breach  of
           his article 3 1950 Convention rights.  However, I do not for one
           moment accept this.  Indeed following careful  consideration  of
           all elements of his claim, the  only  matter  I  do  believe  in
           relation to it is set out above, namely that  I  have  found  in
           accordance with the  lower  standard  of  proof  that  he  is  a
           national of Iran.  Consequently, I am satisfied on the  evidence
           that upon return to Iran he would at most be held  for  a  brief
           period and questioned at the port of entry, and I  am  satisfied
           that he has failed to show otherwise."

7.    Finally, the tribunal dealt with the question of whether he  might  be
at risk due to his being a Sunni Muslim or, indeed, due  to  his  being  of
Kurdish ethnicity.  As to that it said this:

      "     31.  I note from his  appeal  notice  representations  that  the
           appellant claimed that he was unable to return to  Iran  because
           of  his  Kurdish  ethnicity  and  his  Sunni Muslim  religion.
           However, I am satisfied that he failed to show that he would  be
           at real risk for either of these reasons.  I also remind  myself
           of paragraph 34 of SSH and  HR  in  which  it  was  noted  that
           although it was not suggested that  the  Kurdish  appellants  in
           that particular appeal faced risk on return on the sole basis of
           being Kurdish, the Upper Tribunal's conclusion  was  that  even
           though being Kurdish was relevant to how  a  returnee  might  be
           treated  by the authorities, the evidence did not  show  a  real
           risk of ill-treatment to  Kurdish  returnees  who  were  not  of
           adverse interest to the Iranian State, either on the basis what
           would  happen  to  him  when  questioned  at  the   airport   or
           subsequently if they were convicted of  an  offence  of  illegal
           exit.  Specifically, the Upper Tribunal noted that in respect of
           one of the appellants in that appeal, it did not  appear  to  be
           disputed that he was Kurdish and undocumented and therefore  the
           Upper Tribunal saw no reason for  remittal  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal, as prosecution for illegal exit  was  an  outcome  not
           experienced by such returnees and where it did occur,  the  most
           likely sentence in relation to the illegal exit charge would  be
           a fine.  It was not shown that there would be  a  real  risk  of
           prosecution under Article 500 for propaganda against the  State
           on the basis of having made an asylum claim which was  found  to
           be false."

8.    The tribunal then made a finding in  the  alternative  to  the  effect
that if the claimant were to be at risk in his home area he  would  be  able
to take advantage of an internal flight alternative.

9.    Permission to appeal was sought.  The grounds run to six pages but  to
summarise and I hope permissibly truncate, they assert as follows:

             (a)   the  tribunal  wrongly  detected  inconsistency  in   the
           claimant's account as to how it had  been  discovered  that  his
           father had been arrested by the authorities;

            (b)  the tribunal had erred in  its  assessment  of  credibility
           through failing to take account of the claimant's young age;

            (c)  the  tribunal  had  wrongly  concluded  or  had  failed  to
           explain how it arrived at the view that the account the claimant
           had offered with respect to alcohol smuggling was vague;

            (d)  the tribunal had provided an inadequate  assessment  as  to
           the risk the claimant might face (irrespective of the  truth  or
           otherwise of his account) on return to Iran.

10.      Permission to appeal was granted.  The Granting Judge  thought  it
           arguable that the tribunal
 had wrongly identified a non-existent inconsistency and that it had  failed
           to take into account the
 claimant's age 'at the time certain events occurred'.

11.   Permission having been granted the  matter  was  listed  for  an  oral
hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  consideration  could
be given to the issue of whether the tribunal had erred in law and,  if  so,
what  should  flow  from  that.   Representation  at  that  hearing  was  as
indicated above and  I  am  grateful  to  each  representative.   Ms Patel,
essentially, relied upon the written grounds.  She argued that the  tribunal
had clearly misunderstood the indications given by the claimant  as  to  how
the father's arrest had come to light.  She argued that  that  infected  all
of the credibility findings and rendered  the  tribunal's  decision  unsafe.
The tribunal had failed to  indicate,  in  its  written  reasons,  that  the
claimant's young age had  been  taken  into  account  with  respect  to  its
credibility assessment.  It was not enough for it simply to  have  mentioned
his age.  That did not mean it had been properly taken  into  account.   The
account given in the substantive asylum interview as to  smuggling  was  not
vague at all.  As to risk on return, whilst the  tribunal  had  referred  to
the then most relevant Country Guidance decision in  SSH  and  HR  (Illegal
Exit:  Failed Asylum Seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308, it had been required
to go further than it did in its analysis and should have  appreciated  that
the claimant would be asked questions upon return  which  would  reveal  the
basis of his claim had involved pro-Kurdish activities  and  that  that,  of
itself, would have excited further interest which would  have  led  to  ill-
treatment.  Mr Tan, for the Secretary of State, argued  that  the  tribunal
had carried out a holistic consideration with respect to  credibility,  that
even if it had wrongly identified an  inconsistency  that  did  not  detract
from the soundness of the overall credibility assessment  and  that  it  had
properly applied the Country Guidance with respect to risk upon return.

12.   I have decided, as I indicated to  the  parties  at  the  end  of  the
hearing, that the tribunal did not err in law.  I shall now  explain  why  I
have so decided.

13.   The tribunal, with respect to the claimant's claimed activities  which
he said had caused him to be at risk, reached a  clear  adverse  credibility
conclusion.  It explained that in a part of  its  written  reasons  which  I
have reproduced above.  There is a specific attack upon what it had  to  say
at paragraph 19 of its written reasons regarding what it  perceived  to  be
inconsistency in the account given at the substantive  asylum  interview  as
to who it was who had informed his mother of his  father's  apprehension  by
the authorities.  The tribunal thought that he was  clearly  saying  it  was
the father himself who had called his mother  to  explain  that.   Ms Patel
says it is clear that the claimant was saying it was his cousin and not  the
father.  The relevant passage of the substantive asylum  interview  is  from
question 92-98.  I would accept that, whilst it is just about  possible  to
read the passage in the way that the tribunal did,  it  is  very  much  more
likely that what the claimant was trying to convey was that his cousin  (not
his father) had called his mother to relate the relevant  information.   So,
I conclude that the tribunal did misunderstand the evidence with respect  to
that discrete aspect.  But, as Mr Tan points out, the  tribunal  had  other
concerns with respect to that aspect of the account.   At  paragraph 18  of
its written reasons the tribunal noted that the claimant had said he  became
aware of his father's arrest at a time when he was  in  his  cousin's  house
(see question 93 of the substantive asylum interview record and his answer)
but had then gone on to say that he had found out  about  the  arrest  when,
whilst walking home, he was informed of it by a neighbour.

14.   Additionally and in any event, the adverse credibility  assessment  as
contained in the written reasons is a broad based one which does not  simply
rely upon a consideration as to the circumstances surrounding  the  father's
claimed arrest.  The tribunal had other concerns. The most notable of  those
was that the claimant had delayed in claiming to  be  at  risk  due  to  his
having been leafleting for PJAK.  Ms Patel criticised the  tribunal  before
me for attaching weight  to  that  delay  but  it  carefully  explained,  at
paragraph 25 of its written reasons, why it was  doing  so  notwithstanding
that the omission had occurred in a screening interview rather than  in  the
substantive asylum interview.  In my judgment the credibility assessment  is
entirely sustainable notwithstanding the single imperfection identified.   I
do not agree that the one error it made infected the whole  of  its  adverse
credibility findings.

15.   As to the claimant's young age, the tribunal  did  not  expressly  say
that it was taking his young age into account  when  assessing  credibility.
Perhaps its written reasons would have been more complete if it had,  albeit
briefly, said something to that effect.  But it did  give  consideration  to
the question of the claimant's age so it clearly knew that  it  was  dealing
with a young person.  Assuming the above birth date is correct the  claimant
was aged 18, albeit only just, and so was an adult albeit only just, at  the
time of both the screening interview and the substantive  asylum  interview.
I am satisfied that the tribunal would have had  at  the  forefront  of  its
mind the claimant's young age when it was making its  credibility  findings.
Given that it had spent some time  addressing  the  evidence  regarding  his
age, it can hardly be said that it  had  suddenly,  for  some  reason,  lost
sight of that.

16.   As to vagueness, this only relates to what the  claimant  had  had  to
say about smuggling.  It is  fair  to  say,  as  does  Ms Patel,  that  the
tribunal did not actually explain why it thought the  account  offered  with
respect to smuggling had been vague as opposed to what it  also  said  which
was that it was inconsistent.  Ms Patel, in suggesting that the account was
the opposite of vague, takes me to a passage of questions and  answers  from
the substantive asylum interview running from question 104-117.  I agree it
may well be that the tribunal had that passage in mind when it said what  it
did.  That is because it  is  at  that  point  in  the  interview  that  the
claimant was asked about the smuggling.  I agree that he did provide  detail
about aspects of it but he did not, for example, explain  how  the  smuggled
goods would be obtained nor who the goods  were  then  sold  on  to.   I  am
narrowly persuaded that it was open to  the  tribunal  to  characterise  the
account as vague on that basis.  But additionally and in any event, it  does
not seem to me that that aspect played a significant part in the  tribunal's
view that the claimant was not a witness of truth.

17.   Turning then to the question of risk on return, as  I  understand  it,
Ms Patel seeks to argue that the tribunal should have asked itself what the
claimant was likely to be asked by the authorities upon return as  a  failed
asylum seeker who had illegally exited Iran.   Such  a  consideration  would
have led to a conclusion that he would be asked what he had said in  support
of his unsuccessful claim for asylum. Since (argues Ms Patel) the  claimant
cannot be expected to lie, he would tell the authorities  or  it  should  be
assumed that he would tell them, that he had claimed to  be  leafleting  for
PJAK.  Since  the  authorities  are  very  concerned  about  that  sort   of
oppositionist activity, that would lead to more intense scrutiny of him  and
to ill-treatment during the process of further investigation.

18.   The most obviously relevant Country Guidance decision is that of  SSH
and  HR  cited  above.   The  tribunal  expressly  referred   to   that   at
paragraph 30 of its  written  reasons.   It  concluded  that  he  would  be
subjected to what would amount to relatively brief questioning but  no  more
than that.  In SSH and HR it was said that a male returnee would not  be  at
risk upon return solely on account of illegal exit or being a failed  asylum
seeker.  It was specifically considered that no such  risk  would  exist  at
the time of  questioning  on  return  to  Iran.   The  tribunal  was  simply
following the Country Guidance, in that regard, as it was required  to  do.
Additionally and in any event, it does not  appear  that  the  tribunal  was
invited to specifically entertain the possibility that a question  might  be
asked  which  would  reveal  that  the  claimant  had  asserted  to  the  UK
immigration authorities that he had been leafleting for PJAK and  that  such
would, of itself, lead to persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment.   In  the
circumstances I detect no error of law in the tribunal's careful approach.

19.   It has not been  shown  that  the  tribunal  made  an  error  of  law.
Accordingly, its decision shall stand and this appeal to the Upper Tribunal
must fail.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, its decision shall stand.


Signed:                      Date: 4 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




Anonymity

The claimant was granted anonymity by the First-tier Tribunal.  I  continue
that grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall directly  or
indirectly identify the claimant or any member of his family.  This  applies
to all parties to the proceedings.  Failure to comply may lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed:                      Date:  4 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

