
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/05181/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 March 2018                            |On 18 April 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    Mr GM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Iran, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision made by the Secretary of State of  18  May  2017  to
    refuse his application for asylum in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Andonian dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  20  July
    2017.  The Appellant now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with  permission
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 19 December 2017.

 2. The background to the Appellant's appeal is that he entered the  UK  on
    12 January 2011 and claimed  asylum  based  on  his  imputed  political
    opinion on 19 January 2011. That application was refused and the appeal
    against it  was  dismissed  on  28  March  2011.  His  application  for
    permission to appeal against that decision was refused and  his  appeal
    rights were exhausted in May 2011. He claims that he  was  baptised  in
    2013 and made further submissions to  the  Home  Office  based  on  his
    conversion to Christianity in 2014 and the Home Office refused to grant
    asylum on this basis in a decision dated 18 May 2017.

 3. In considering the appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out details
    of the Appellant's  claim  and  his  oral  evidence.   The  judge  made
    findings at paragraphs 7-33 of the decision.  The judge found that  the
    Appellant had not  established  that  he  has  genuinely  converted  to
    Christianity or that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Iran.



Error of law

 4. The grounds of appeal take issue with a number of findings made by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and contend that the  analysis  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is fatally undermined by a failure to provide sufficient
    reasoning for adverse credibility findings and that he adopts the wrong
    standard of proof.

 5. It is contended that the judge made an error in his adverse credibility
    finding at paragraph 7 of the decision where he  found  it  not  to  be
    credible that the Appellant did not think that there was a  translation
    for the Koran in Farsi. The judge said;

         "That did not sound to be credible, and I take judicial notice that
         bibles and other spiritual books of all faiths are  translated  and
         it is reasonable to conclude (in the absence  of  evidence  to  the
         contrary,(the burden is on the appellant to  discharge)  (sic),  in
         all languages, and it is simply not credible to say  without  more,
         that any Iranian speaking Farsi who is a Muslim  would  either  not
         understand the Koran in Arabic or would not have been taught it  in
         Arabic, or that he would not have  been  able  to  obtain  a  Farsi
         translation of it"

 6. I agree that the judge has not explained the basis for his  conclusions
    as to the availability of the Koran in Farsi  in  Iran  or  as  to  the
    teaching of the Koran in Arabic there.

 7. It is further contended in the grounds of appeal that the  judge  based
    an adverse credibility finding on the absence of a baptism  certificate
    from the Appellant's church. The judge notes the absence of  a  baptism
    certificate at paragraph 9 saying that he found it 'odd' that there was
    no baptism certificate and that no proper explanation was  given  about
    that. However at paragraph 11 he set out the evidence from  the  pastor
    from the Appellant's church that it is not the practice of  the  church
    to issue baptism certificates. Yet the judge went on to note again that
    he  found  it  'strange'  that  the  church  did  not   issue   baptism
    certificates [12]. Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that,  although  the  judge
    referred to the absence of a baptism certificate did not mean  that  he
    attached significant weight to this. However that  is  not  clear  from
    reading the decision where the judge  referred  to  this  matter  on  a
    number of occasions. In my view, in focussing on the issue of the  lack
    of a baptism certificate, the judge failed to properly engage with  the
    evidence of the pastor.

 8. A further error identified in the grounds of appeal is that  the  judge
    failed to give sustainable reasons for  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    wife accepts his conversion. At paragraph 18 the  judge  said  that  he
    found it 'difficult to believe'  that  the  Appellant's  wife  and  two
    children would like to be converted and that they are  happy  with  the
    Appellant's conversion in light of the fact that his wife's father said
    that he would kill him if his went back to Iran.  However  in  my  view
    this is speculative and the judge has failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for this conclusion.

 9. A further issue  rained  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  relates  to  his
    solicitors submissions made after  the  asylum  interview.  The  asylum
    interview was  held  on  12  January  2017.  On  17  January  2017  his
    solicitors wrote to the Home Office to clarify a number of the  answers
    given to questions asked.  The letter stated that during the  interview
    the Appellant felt under  pressure  and  that  he  was  upset  when  he
    realised that he had failed to provide correct responses where he  knew
    the answers.  The judge did not have to accept this explanation or  the
    corrections. However at paragraph  27  he  appeared  top  dismiss  this
    letter saying that the Appellant said that he did  not  understand  the
    interpreter. However it is not  clear  when  the  Appellant  gave  this
    explanation given that this  is  not  what  was  said  in  the  letter.
    Accordingly the judge failed to engage with the contents of the  letter
    or to explain why he rejected the corrections made in the letter.

10. Whilst I accept  that  the  judge  has  given  other  reasons  for  his
    conclusion that the Appellant's conversion is not credible, and it  may
    be that only one or two of these errors may not have been fatal to  the
    overall findings, I find that the cumulative  effect  of  the  lack  of
    reasoning in relation to these key factors are sufficient to  undermine
    the conclusions reached by the judge.

11. Accordingly  I  find  that  the  judge  made  material  errors  in  his
    consideration of the evidence.

12. In light of the Presidential Practice Statements I  take  into  account
    that the effect of  the  error  identified  has  been  to  deprive  the
    Appellant of the opportunity for his case to be considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal and that the  nature  or  extent  of  the  judicial  fact
    finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made
    is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule  2  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, it  is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law.

I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                       Date: 12 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
