
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05774/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 October 2019                   |On 21 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Gibbs ('the Judge') who, in a  decision  promulgated
        on 1 August 2019, dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection
        and human rights grounds.





Discussion


The findings

     2.  The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 13 May  1971.  He
        sought a grant of international protection claiming to have a well-
        founded fear of persecution on return to Bangladesh as a result  of
        an actual and/or imputed political opinion from which  he  will  be
        unable to avail himself of the protection of his country of origin.
        The appellant also claimed to face a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment
        sufficient to breach articles 2 and 3 ECHR from Abu Jahed stated to
        be a well-known leader of  the  Awami  League  and/or  other  state
        actors due to court actions in which the appellant has  been  named
        and his actual or perceived political activities.
     3. The Judge noted the appellant's immigration  history  which  showed
        that after leaving Bangladesh in 1998 the  appellant  travelled  to
        Dubai where he remained  for  5  �  years.  On  10  July  2003  the
        appellant left Dubai with his employer and entering  the  UK  as  a
        domestic worker with leave valid to 1 January 2004.  The  appellant
        overstayed and on 11 December 2009 applied for indefinite leave  to
        remain pursuant to article 8 ECHR which was  refused  on  17  March
        2010 with no right of appeal.
     4. On 18 May 2015 the respondent sent  the  appellant  a  request  for
        further information, but no  such  information  was  received.  The
        appellant was treated as an absconder and  on  17  March  2017  was
        encountered  working  illegally  at  India  Gate  restaurant.   The
        appellant refused to comply  with  the  Emergency  Travel  Document
        process and on 18 April 2017 claimed asylum. That was rejected in a
        decision of 1 June 2017 against which the appellant  appealed.  The
        appeal was dismissed although the decision was  set  aside  by  the
        Upper Tribunal as a result of which the matter  came  before  Judge
        Gibbs.
     5. The Judge, having considered the documentary and oral evidence sets
        out findings of fact from [19] of the decision under challenge.
     6. In relation to the medical evidence deduced by the appellant by way
        of a report from  Dr  Martin  dated  28  January  2018,  the  Judge
        concluded at [20] that  although  it  was  not  disputed  that  the
        appellant had scars which Dr Martin stated were consistent with  an
        assault the Judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  assault  occurred
        because of the appellant's political activities.  The  Judge  noted
        that the appellant had previously through his legal representatives
        claimed to have been assaulted and tortured by his employers  which
        was found to be an alternative explanation for the scarring.
     7. The Judge was concerned that in the appellant's ASC  he  failed  to
        mention what he later claimed to key aspects of  his  claim  namely
        his long-standing membership of the BNP and  the  criminal  charges
        laid against  him.  The  Judge  records  at  [22]  the  appellant's
        attempts to address such inconsistency but finds at [23]:


             23.  With regards to his membership of the BNP I do  not  find
                  that the above statement helps to clarify  the  issue;  if
                  anything  it  appears  to  me  that  the   appellant   was
                  reaffirming his evidence that he joined the BNP only  once
                  he was in the UK. Further, when asked about this issue  in
                  oral evidence the appellant said  that  he  had  not  been
                  asked if he was a member of the BNP  in  Bangladesh,  only
                  since his arrival in the UK. I am not however persuaded by
                  this explanation because the question at  ASC.5.5  clearly
                  says: "have you ever been involved  with,  or  accused  of
                  being involved with any pro-government  groups,  political
                  organisation, religious  organisation,  armed  or  violent
                  organisation, group or party?"


     8. The Judge was not persuaded by  the  appellant's  explanations  and
        found his failure to mention any BNP activity in Bangladesh and the
        charges he claims  to  have  been  laid  against  him  in  his  ASC
        undermined his credibility [25].
     9. The Judge also noted that the appellant's membership of the BNP  in
        Bangladesh was a matter that his witness Mr Salam was  asked  about
        as in his letter of 4 May 2017 he made no reference to knowing  the
        appellant in Bangladesh or being  aware  of  his  party  membership
        there. Despite this Mr Salam  in  examination  in  chief  recounted
        meeting the appellant in  Jalapur  in  1995  when  he  claimed  the
        appellant was the secretary of the BNP unit there. The Judge  notes
        that the Presenting Officer felt ambushed by the new evidence which
        the Judge allowed in and for questioning  to  continue,  the  issue
        being the weight the Judge was to give to such evidence. The  Judge
        finds such weight was significantly undermined by late  disclosure,
        particularly given the significance of  the  evidence,  and  placed
        weight upon the  fact  that  while  Mr  Salam's  letter  refers  to
        problems that the appellant experienced in Bangladesh  he  made  no
        reference whatsoever to  having  any  personal  experience  of  the
        appellant in Bangladesh.  The  Judge  found  the  omission  by  the
        witness of any meeting with the appellant or of being aware of  his
        political activities in Bangladesh in the letter of 4 May  2017  to
        be significant which undermined the weight that could  be  attached
        to the witness's evidence as a whole [26 - 27].
    10. The Judge also notes that a letter from the  General  Secretary  of
        the  BNP-  UK  made  no  reference  to  the  appellant's  political
        activities in Bangladesh.
    11. At [29] the Judge expresses concern that a person  who  claimed  to
        have been politically active with or on behalf the BNP since  1990,
        when he was 19 years of age, could only express what  is  described
        as a basic knowledge of the parties aims. Within this paragraph the
        Judge writes: "In his witness statement  the  appellant  apparently
        acknowledges that his  answers  were  not  detailed  but  seeks  to
        explain this because of his lack of education. I find however  that
        it is reasonable to expect a person who has dedicated the  majority
        of their life to supporting and promoting a party, and  who  claims
        to have held the post of general secretary to be  able  to  express
        the parties aims and policies in more detail I also find  that  the
        appellant has successfully passed ESOL exams in  the  UK  which  is
        evidence of education and ability".
    12. At [30] the Judge finds  that  given  the  concerns  regarding  the
        appellant's political activities in  Bangladesh  it  was  also  not
        found reasonably likely that he was attacked as claimed; especially
        in light of the fact the appellant did not mention  any  attack  in
        his ASC and it was only in his oral evidence that he has sought  to
        attribute the attack to Abu Jahed's henchmen, omissions which  were
        found to cast further doubt upon his claim.
    13. The Judge notes, however, in  [31]  that  the  main  focus  of  the
        appellant's claim is that because of his  political  activities  in
        the UK false charges have been laid against him in  Bangladesh  and
        consequently he will be at risk on return. The appellant claimed in
        2011 he was contacted by a friend in Bangladesh,  a  secretary  for
        the BNP in the appellant's area, who told him about a building that
        had been erected without permission on government land by Abu Jahed
        and that consequently the appellant organised a  political  meeting
        in the UK to discuss this. When Abu Jahed found  out  he  laid  the
        false charges against the  appellant  and  the  appellant's  family
        members have subsequently been attacked.
    14. The Judge's findings regarding this core aspect of the  appellant's
        claim are set out between [32 - 41] of the decision under challenge
        in which the  Judge  was  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant  was
        specifically  contacted  by  his  friend  with  the  intention   of
        effecting change, firstly because the appellant had  not  lived  in
        Bangladesh since 1998 and it was not credible he could be  expected
        to have any influence and,  further,  that  he  did  not  hold  any
        particular position in the BNP - UK which could have led his friend
        to expect useful  intervention  [32].  The  Judge  also  noted  the
        appellant accepted in oral evidence that the meeting was  the  only
        meeting he had organised in the  UK  but  that  the  appellant  had
        failed to explain why he decided to arrange this particular meeting
        given his evidence in reply to question 96 of his AIR that:  "I  am
        not very educated, I just attended meetings and demonstrations when
        I am able to" [33].
    15. The Judge also notes that in his oral evidence the  appellant  said
        that the meeting was part of Mr  Salam's  up  and  coming  election
        campaign which was found to be consistent with a  further  response
        to question 93 of his asylum interview where the appellant  claimed
        it was a meeting for people from his party and that  Mr  Salam  had
        attended. The Judge notes at [34] "Even if I  accept  that  such  a
        meeting took place I am not persuaded that it was organised by  the
        appellant or that it led to him and his family being targeted". The
        Judge also noted that the letter from Mr Salam made no reference at
        all to the meeting although claimed in his oral  evidence  that  he
        had been invited to a meeting by  the  appellant  although  it  was
        "difficult" to remember the appellant's role. The Judge  notes  the
        appellant's account was supported by Mr Wasim but that  the  weight
        that could be given to this  person's  evidence,  who  was  an  old
        friend  of  the  appellant  whose  was  not  found  to  be   wholly
        independent especially in light of the fact Mr Wasim had previously
        sought to assist the appellant by offering him  employment  at  his
        restaurant "The Pride of Asia", was limited.
    16. In relation to the documentary evidence produced by  the  appellant
        which he claims supported his claim of  false  charges  being  laid
        against him the Judge finds as follows:


             35.  I also find that the documents  that  the  appellant  has
                  submitted which  he  claims  are  evidence  of  the  false
                  charges laid against  him  contain  inconsistencies  which
                  undermined the weight that I can attached to them. I  find
                  that the arrest warrant (p.A22 of the  appellant's  bundle
                  "AB") is dated 10 August 2011 whereas the offence of which
                  the appellant is accused however is alleged to have  taken
                  place on 30 August 2011 (p.24 AB) and the  request  by  Mr
                  S.I Kurshed Alam to file a formal case is  also  dated  30
                  August 2011 (p.A25 AB).  There  is  also  a  charge  sheet
                  (p.A28 AB) which includes the dates 30 August 2011 and  28
                  November 2011 without explanation. When asked about  these
                  discrepancies the appellant was unable to explain,  saying
                  that the charges are false and he doesn't know  about  the
                  alleged incident. Although that explanation  does  not  in
                  itself lack credibility, I find that  the  inconsistencies
                  in the documents nonetheless undermined the weight that  I
                  can attach to them.


    17. The Judge noted reliance by the appellant on a report  prepared  by
        Dr Hoque who  stated  that  the  Bangladeshi  court  documents  are
        reliable  as  they  conform  to  official  Bangladeshi  legal   and
        administrative standards insofar as the size of the official paper,
        watermarks, language,  typeface,  structure,  official  stamps  and
        other bureaucratic and legal conventions  included  with  them  are
        credible and consistent with  his  personal  observations  and,  as
        such, are likely to be genuine. The Judge did not  find  this  view
        conclusive on the basis that the  expert  had  not  been  asked  to
        consider the inconsistencies in the documents. At  [36]  the  Judge
        finds that whilst the documents may have been issued by an official
        source that  did  not  persuade  the  Judge  that  the  content  is
        reliable.
    18. The Judge also  had  regard  to  the  respondent's  CPIN  regarding
        Bangladesh which refers at 13.2.1 to a report from the  Immigration
        Refugee Board of Canada stating "There is a significant  prevalence
        of fraudulent documents [in Bangladesh] including passports,  birth
        certificates,  bank  statements,   taxation   documents,   business
        documents, school documents, if we ask for it it can be  produced."
        The Judge noted the author of report recording  that  there  is  no
        difficulty at all for anyone  to  obtain  such  documents  although
        quality varies with the price paid.
    19. The Judge did not find that the documents provided by the appellant
        from Bangladesh pertaining to the criminal charges are reliable.
    20. At [38] the Judge finds:


             38.   There  are,  I  find,  other  inconsistencies   in   the
                  appellant's evidence which, taken individually may not  be
                  significant, but when considered as part of  the  totality
                  of the evidence  before  me  cast  further  doubt  on  the
                  credibility of his claim. I find that the  timing  of  the
                  appellant's asylum claim, many years after  his  leave  to
                  remain in the UK expired, and only following  his  arrest,
                  casts doubt upon the credibility of his claim (s.8  Asylum
                  and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004).  I
                  do not  find  credible  the  appellants  evidence  in  his
                  witness  statement  (paragraph  19)  that  since  2010  he
                  believed that he had an outstanding application before the
                  Home Office. Further, the immigration history before me is
                  that his leave to  remain  first  expired  in  2004,  long
                  before any political activity in the UK and the  appellant
                  has failed to explain why he overstayed for six years  and
                  did not return to Bangladesh.


    21. The degree of anxious scrutiny the Judge applied to the evidence is
        demonstrated by the finding at [39] in which the Judge refers to an
        application by the appellant to extend his leave to remain  in  the
        United Kingdom made on 1 June 2010 in which there is  reference  to
        the appellant claiming he was being  abused  and  tortured  by  his
        former employer; although the appellant now denied this before  the
        Judge. The Judge  also  noted  further  concern  arising  from  the
        evidence at [40] in which the appellant had stated in  reply  to  a
        question in his asylum interview that he had lived at an address in
        the Mile End Road in London for the previous 10 years which was the
        address of the Pride of Asia restaurant owned by Mr Wasim,  yet  in
        his oral evidence the  appellant  denied  living  at  that  address
        claiming he moved from place to place. Mr Wasim initially said  the
        appellant had lived at  the  address  but  then  also  changed  his
        evidence to say that this had not been a permanent arrangement.
    22. The Judge found that no weight could  be  placed  on  letters  from
        Bangladesh said to  originate  from  the  appellant's  brother  and
        cousin in light of the concerns that were expressed  by  the  Judge
        regarding the evidence [41].
    23. The Judge draws together the threads of the findings in relation to
        the protection claim at [42] in the following terms:


             42.  I am not therefore persuaded that it is reasonably likely
                  that the appellant was a member of the BNP  in  Bangladesh
                  or was  attacked  because  of  his  political  activities.
                  Although I accept that he joined the  BNP  -  UK  and  has
                  attended meetings and demonstrations I  am  not  persuaded
                  that it is reasonably likely that he organised a political
                  meeting in 2011 which led  to  false  charges  being  laid
                  against  him  in  Bangladesh.  Nor  am  I  persuaded  that
                  following his attendance at a protest  against  the  Prime
                  Minister of Bangladesh that further charges were  laid.  I
                  am also not satisfied that his family have been  targeted.
                  I find that the appellant is  no  more  than  a  low-level
                  member of the BNP -  UK,  with  no  political  profile  in
                  Bangladesh or outstanding charges. Based on these findings
                  of fact Dr Giustozzi's expert report does not  assist  the
                  appellant  because  the  appellant's  risk  on  return  as
                  assessed by him is based on  the  appellant's  account  of
                  being credible. I am  not  therefore  persuaded  that  the
                  appellant will be at risk of serious  harm  on  return  to
                  Bangladesh.


Error of Law

    24. The appellant asserts the Judge erred in  law  when  rejecting  his
        claim to be a member of the BNP on the basis that his knowledge  of
        the party was vague within the BNP. The appellant claims there were
        numerous  statements  and  other  evidence  which   suggested   the
        appellant was in fact a member of the BNP  and  continues  to  have
        problems as a result of his activities in the United Kingdom.
    25. Such evidence was clearly taken into account by the Judge  and  the
        appellant fails to make out that any of the material  provided  was
        not considered and balanced by the Judge  when  assessing,  to  the
        lower standard, whether the  appellant's  claim  is  credible.  The
        grounds assert that Dr Giustozzi comments that the BNP organisation
        is known to be more loosely organised at local level and  qualified
        activists at local level being in short supply  make  it  plausible
        that the appellant would have limited knowledge of party  policies.
        The Judge was  aware  having  considered  the  interview  that  the
        appellant was able to answer  questions  about  when  the  BNP  was
        formed, its broad aims and other matters referred to at [14] of the
        appellants skeleton argument prepared for the  hearing  on  5  July
        2019. Whilst that may be so, the Judge was not satisfied that  even
        accepting a person's degree of knowledge may be variable  that  the
        appellant had demonstrated that he possessed a degree of  knowledge
        a person  holding  the  status  he  claimed  within  the  party  in
        Bangladesh would be reasonable be  expected  to  have.  This  is  a
        finding within the range of those reasonably open to the  Judge  on
        the evidence.
    26. It is  also  important  to  note  the  Judge  did  not  reject  the
        appellant's  claim  solely  as  a  result  of  his   inability   to
        demonstrate  the  degree  of  knowledge  the  Judge  found  it  was
        reasonable he would have had, had he held the post  he  claimed  to
        have held in Bangladesh. The Judge clearly considered the  evidence
        holistically and it was only having done so that the Judge came  to
        the conclusions referred to above.
    27. In relation to the sur place activities in the UK;  the  Judge  was
        entitled to consider the appellant's  claim  to  have  organised  a
        meeting in the United Kingdom which led to problems with Abu  Jahed
        which indicated a status  within  the  party  contradicted  by  the
        appellant's own claims and other aspects of the evidence  as  noted
        above. The  Judge's  conclusions  regarding  the  appellant's  role
        within the BNP in the UK, his attendance at the one meeting but not
        being satisfied that the appellant either organised that meeting or
        that the purpose of the meeting was as claimed has not  been  shown
        to be a finding outside the range of those available to  the  Judge
        on the evidence. Such finding is supported  by  the  other  adverse
        credibility  findings  made.  As  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
        organised such a meeting was  not  shown  to  be  credible  it  was
        reasonable for the Judge to reject the claim made by the  appellant
        asserting he faced risk on return as a result of charges being laid
        against him associated with that event.
    28. Similarly, it is not irrational for the  Judge  to  have  concluded
        that an alternative explanation for the scarring on the appellant's
        body had been provided by  reference  to  the  appellant's  earlier
        claim of having been tortured and ill-treated by  his  employer  in
        Dubai. Although the appellant  denied  having  made  such  a  claim
        before the Judge evidence of the same is in the  papers  considered
        by the Judge. The appellant's ability to change his evidence before
        the Tribunal to enable him to maximise his prospects of success  is
        clearly evident  from  the  evidence  made  available  which  casts
        further doubt upon his credibility.
    29. The Judge clearly considered the expert report  of  Dr  Hoque.  The
        Judge was entitled to find that even if the documents conformed  in
        their presentation and  structure  to  court  documents  issued  in
        Bangladesh  this  did  not  make  them  genuine.  The  charges  the
        appellant claimed he faces are defamation  with  other  outstanding
        charges associated with rioting, murder, and causing grievous hurt,
        which may lead to life imprisonment. The appellant asserts that  he
        is not claimed that these documents are genuine, and claims to have
        throughout stated they are not, but the fact they exist  will  give
        rise to a real risk on return to Bangladesh of being  arrested  and
        imprisoned.
    30. The Judge was fully aware of  the  appellant's  claim.  Whilst  the
        appellant claims in his submissions that he accepts the charges are
        false as he always stated there were not genuine the conclusions in
        the report of Dr Hoque  clearly  indicate  that  he  was  asked  to
        consider whether the documents were in fact genuine,  i.e.  charges
        and related  documents  issued  by  a  court  in  Bangladesh.   The
        appellant  had  claimed  this  was  so  even  if  containing  false
        information/allegations. It is not made out an expert would produce
        a report stating that in his opinion the documents were genuine  if
        he was not asked that specific question. The appellant's claim that
        the documents are genuine has been shown to be  disingenuous.  That
        is a finding open to the Judge on the evidence.
    31. The Judge goes further than merely indicating  that  the  documents
        contain discrepancies. Whilst Dr Giustozzi in his report claims  it
        is plausible that Abu Jahed could  have  abused  his  position  and
        acted  illegally  building  on  public  land  and  that  where  the
        appellant has encouraged action to be taken against him  Abu  Jahed
        he will be motivated to bring false charges through the courts as a
        way of silencing him  in  the  future,  the  action  the  appellant
        claimed gave rise to such a reaction  has  been  found  not  to  be
        credible. The appellant has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
        considerable number of years with no credible evidence that he is a
        person of any influence within the BNP such as to create a  profile
        that will place him  at  risk  on  return.  The  Judge  finds  that
        although it is claimed the documents had been issued by a court and
        therefore created a risk of arrest on return  no  such  proceedings
        had been issued. The lack of credibility in the  appellant's  claim
        is material to his claim that such documents had been issued by the
        courts. The document in the format of  proceedings  issued  by  the
        courts in Bangladesh does not necessarily mean  it  is  a  document
        that has actually been issued that will give rise to a real risk on
        return. The Judge's finding that no such risk arises is within  the
        range of those reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.
    32. The Judge's language is also very  specific  on  this  point.   The
        Judge comments that the  documents  may  have  been  issued  by  an
        official source but makes no specific finding that they  have  been
        issued by an official source. There  was  no  evidence  before  the
        Judge of  sufficient  clarity  to  warrant  a  finding  that  these
        documents had been issued by a court of law such  as  to  create  a
        real risk for the appellant on return. The core of the  appellant's
        claim was that such an event had occurred, but that  core  was  not
        found to be credible by the Judge.  That  is  the  Judge's  primary
        finding. Considering, as an option, that  the  documents  may  have
        been issued from an official source does  not  undermine  the  core
        finding. This is not an  appeal  in  which  only  one  finding  was
        available to the Judge and it is not  been  made  out  the  Judge's
        conclusion of no real risk being faced by the appellant  on  return
        is  outside  the  range  of  reasonable  findings  available   when
        considering the evidence as  a  whole.  The  Judge's  findings  are
        sufficiently clear to illuminate the reasons for why  the  decision
        was made.  In particular, it was not made out why Abu  Jahed  would
        have issued proceedings against  the  appellant  when  it  was  not
        established through credible evidence that he had done anything  to
        warrant such adverse interest. The Judge's finding is that he is no
        more than a low-level member of the BNP - UK.
    33. The appellant also asserts  the  Judge  has  failed  to  take  into
        account all the evidence at [41]  in  which  the  Judge  finds  she
        cannot place any weight on the letters or the medical evidence that
        accompanied that correspondence. This assertion has no merit as the
        Judge clearly considered that  evidence  as  part  of  the  overall
        assessment of the appellant's case and considered the  weight  that
        could be attributed to the same in light of the findings made. This
        is not a case of the Judge  ignoring  evidence  but  of  the  Judge
        assessing the correct degree of weight that could  be  attached  to
        that  evidence.  The  weight  of  the  evidence  was  against   the
        appellant, as noted above, warranting little  or  no  weight  being
        attached to evidence supporting a contention that was not found  to
        be credible.  The  Judge  has  not  been  shown  to  have  fettered
        discretion or not given the evidence the required degree of anxious
        scrutiny.
    34. In relation  to  the  evidence  of  Mr  Salam,  the  Judge  clearly
        considered  that  evidence  in  an   appropriate   manner.   Having
        considered all the evidence the Judge  makes  a  finding  that  the
        central core of the appellant's case is  not  credible.  The  Judge
        considered as part  of  the  assessment  of  the  main  issues  the
        evidence of Mr Salam.  The  fact  the  Judge  does  not  mention  a
        particular aspect  of  the  evidence  does  not  mean  it  was  not
        considered.  The  Judge  did  not  consider  the  evidence  of  the
        appellant or Mr Salam determinative in light of the number of other
        issues that arose as recorded in the determination.
    35. Whilst the appellant disagrees with  the  Judge's  conclusions  and
        clearly wishes to remain in the  United  Kingdom  this  is  not  an
        appeal where the only findings open to the Judge  was  one  in  the
        appellant's favour, as he  is  claims.  It  is  not  made  out  the
        findings or overall conclusions in relation to the  protection  and
        human rights claims are not within the range  of  those  reasonably
        available to the Judge on the evidence. The Judge  not  only  makes
        findings but also sets out reasons for why those findings have been
        made. Whilst the grounds disagree they do not establish the Judge's
        conclusions  are  irrational  or  contrary  to  the  evidence  when
        considered as a whole. The  appellant  does  not  establish  it  is
        appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to interfere any further in this
        decision. The determination shall stand.



Decision

    36. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    37. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 October 2019












