
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05326/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the Papers                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st October 2019                 |On 24th October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national  of  Sudan  born  in  1996.     He  seeks
       international protection on the grounds that he  has  a  well-founded
       fear of persecution in Sudan for reasons of his race, membership of a
       particular social group and imputed political opinion: he is accepted
       to be of the Tama tribe, and is  therefore  classed  as  a  'non-Arab
       Darfuri'.

    2. By its decision of the 30th May 2018 the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
       Moxon) dismissed the Appellant's appeal. By my decision  of  the  8th
       November 2018 I set that decision aside (see 'error of law'  decision
       attached).  The hearing to re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  was
       adjourned awaiting new country guidance on the position  of  non-Arab
       Darfuris in Sudan.

    3. By her letter of the 15th October 2019 the Secretary of State invited
       me to allow the Appellant's appeal on protection grounds. The reasons
       can be shortly stated,  since  they  are  made  plain  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal's decision in AAR & AA (Non-Arab Darfuris  -  return)  Sudan
       [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC).   At present the Upper Tribunal  holds  that
       any non-Arab Darfuri appeal must be determined with reference to  the
       decisions in AA (non-Arab Darfuris  -  relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]
       UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00010.    The
       effect of those combined authorities is that the identity of a  'non-
       Arab Darfuri' is to be determined with reference to the  individual's
       ethnicity, not former place of residence, and further  that  such  an
       individual is a refugee.

       Anonymity Order

    4. The Appellant is a refugee. Having had  regard  to  Rule  14  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and  the  Presidential
       Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I therefore consider  it
       appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
           family.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  both  the
           Appellant and the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

       Decisions and Directions

    5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside for  error
       of law.

    6. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

           "the appeal is allowed on protection grounds".

    7. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           21st October 2019


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05326/18


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At:   Bradford                       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 12th September 2018              |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr T. Hussan, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national  of  Sudan  born  in  1996.     He  seeks
       international protection on the grounds that he  has  a  well-founded
       fear of persecution in Sudan for reasons of his race, membership of a
       particular social group and imputed political opinion: he is accepted
       to be of the Tama tribe, and is  therefore  classed  as  a  'non-Arab
       Darfuri'.

    2. By its decision of the 30th May 2018 the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
       Moxon) recognised the conclusions reached by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
       the extant country guidance AA (non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan
       CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 which it summarised thus: "all non-Darfuris are
       at risk of persecution in Sudan and cannot reasonably relocate".   It
       nevertheless went on to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights  and
       protection grounds, having found that  the  Respondent  had  produced
       fresh evidence to the effect that non-Arab Darfuris are able to  lead
       a reasonable life in Khartoum without fear of persecution.

    3. The matter in issue in this onward appeal  is  whether  the  evidence
       produced by the Respondent was  capable,  as  a  matter  of  law,  of
       displacing the clear guidance in AA (Sudan).

       The Country Guidance

    4. The conclusions in AA (Sudan)  were  reached  by  consent,  as  Upper
       Tribunal Judge (then Senior Immigration Judge) Allen explains in  the
       body of the decision:

           "4.   It was common ground that the appeal fell to  be  allowed.
           The UK Border Agency produced an Operational Guidance Note (OGN)
           on Sudan on 2 November 2009.  At paragraph  3.8.9  we  find  the
           following:

                "3.8.9 Ordinary non-Arab Darfuris  are  not  thought  to  be
                     subject to systematic persecution outside  Darfur  and
                     the courts have found that it is not unduly  harsh  to
                     expect  them  to  internally  relocate  to   Khartoum.
                     However, those decisions predated the developments and
                     reports referred to at paragraph 3.9.4 to 3.9.7 below,
                     and restrictions on the operations of  NGOs  -  a  key
                     source of country of origin  information  on  Sudan  -
                     have  meant  that  we  have  been  unable  to   obtain
                     sufficient reliable information to be able  to  assess
                     accurately whether there  is  a  continued  heightened
                     risk to non-Arab Darfuris in Khartoum.   In  light  of
                     the  fact  that  we  do  not   yet   have   sufficient
                     information  to  allay  the  concerns  raised  in  the
                     reports, case owners should not  argue  that  non-Arab
                     Darfuris can relocate internally within Sudan.

                3.8.10 Conclusion.  All  non-Arab  Darfuris,  regardless  of
                     their political or other  affiliations,  are  at  real
                     risk of persecution in Darfur and internal  relocation
                     elsewhere in Sudan is not currently to be relied upon.
                     Claimants  who  establish  that  they   are   non-Arab
                     Darfuris and who do  not  fall  within  the  exclusion
                     clauses will therefore qualify for asylum."

           5.    Paragraphs 3.9.4 to 3.9.7  of  the  OGN  summarise  recent
           evidence on the situation in  Khartoum.   On  10  May  2008  JEM
           launched an assault on Omdurman, Khartoum as  a  consequence  of
           which there were reports of arbitrary arrests  by  the  Sudanese
           authorities,  extrajudicial  executions  and  ill-treatment   of
           detainees following the attack.  The  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
           Office stated that following the fighting large number  of  non-
           Arab Darfuris living in Khartoum were detained.  On 4 March 2009
           the ICC  announced  the  issue  of  an  arrest  warrant  against
           President Bashir for war crimes and crimes against  humanity  in
           Darfur.  This led to the expulsion of a number of  international
           NGOs and the closure of some local human  rights  organisations,
           which severely reduced the ability of  the  local  human  rights
           community to monitor and  report  on  human  rights  violations.
           There was continued  press  censorship  and  intimidation  which
           further increased restrictions on the freedom of expression.   A
           UNHCR report of November 2008 refers to the use by the  National
           Intelligence and Security Services (NISS)  of  arbitrary  arrest
           against political dissidents in Khartoum which can involve  ill-
           treatment, torture and unofficial places of detention, and it is
           said that Darfurians may raise the  suspicion  of  the  security
           forces by the mere fact of travelling from other parts of  Sudan
           to Darfur, by having travelled abroad, or having been in contact
           with individuals and organisations abroad."

    5. In January 2015 the Upper  Tribunal  promulgated  a  further  country
       guidance decision on Sudan: MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010.
       The Tribunal found no reason to  depart  from  the  findings  in  AA,
       noting the evidence of country expert Peter Verney that the situation
       in Khartoum had, since 2009, in fact worsened for non-Arab Darfuris.

       The First-tier Tribunal Decision

    6.  In  this  case  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directs  itself  to   the
       conclusions in both AA and MM. It then records the guidance given  by
       Elias LJ  in  TM  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2010] EWCA Civ 916 to  the  effect  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is bound by country guidance, and  that  failure  to  follow
       that guidance without good reason is likely to amount to an error  of
       law.

    7. Having so directed itself  the  Tribunal  reviews  the  new  evidence
       relied upon  by  the  Home  Office.  This  consisted  exclusively  of
       extracts from the August 2017 'Country Policy and  Information  Note'
       Sudan: Non-Arab Darfuris. The passages cited in the determination are
       as follows:

           "2.3.9 Most sources commenting on the human rights situation  of
           non-Arab  Darfuris  in  2016  and  2017  report  that  there  is
           discrimination of such persons but do not indicate that there is
           widespread, systemic targeting of these groups  in  Khartoum  on
           grounds of ethnicity alone. The Home Office view is,  therefore,
           that there is now cogent evidence  which  has  become  available
           since the promulgation of AA and MM establishing that in general
           non-Arab Darfuris are not at risk of persecution solely  on  the
           grounds of ethnicity in Khartoum.

           2.3.10 Sources -  primarily  information  obtained  by  a  joint
           Danish-UK fact finding mission  of  early  2016,  an  Australian
           government  report  of  April  2016,   and   the   Foreign   and
           Commonwealth Office - indicate that there is a  significant  and
           established population of (non-Arab) Darfuris living in Khartoum
           and surrounding areas. This includes people who have moved  from
           Darfur since the conflict began in 2003,  who  are  able  to  go
           about their business and daily lives in Khartoum.  Darfuris  are
           also present in all areas and levels of society including  at  a
           senior level in government, in academia, as university students,
           in the security forces, and the media.

           2.3.11 The government reportedly monitors the Darfuri  community
           because of its suspected links with  Darfuri  rebel  groups  and
           those  critical  of  the  government  and/or  have  a  political
           profile, including students and political activists.  There  are
           reports of arrests, detention, harassment and  torture  of  non-
           Arab Darfuris, as well as sexual abuse of  women.  Some  sources
           report that Darfuris are likely to face worse treatment once  in
           detention than other ethnic groups because they may be perceived
           to  be  rebel  sympathisers,  and  that  they  are  particularly
           vulnerable to torture and ill-treatment (see Khartoum, Treatment
           of non-Arab Darfuris).

           2.3.12 A number of Darfuris have returned to Khartoum in  recent
           years, largely from Israel  and  Jordan.  Those  returning  from
           Israel  are  generally  treated  with  greater  suspicion  those
           returning from other countries. While most returnees who entered
           Sudan are likely to  be  questioned,  they  are  not  likely  to
           experience further complications, unless they are  a  person  of
           interest  to  the  authorities  because  of  their  profile   or
           activities  in  opposition  to  the  government.  However,   the
           evidence does not establish that non-Arab Darfuri returnees  are
           ill-treated on return on grounds of their ethnicity only.

           2.3.13 Sources are broadly consistent in reporting that Darfuris
           who have been targeted are those who have, or are  perceived  to
           have, a particular profile and  to  have  undertaken  activities
           opposing the government. These factors  have  been  decisive  in
           bringing them to the adverse attention of the state,  not  their
           ethnicity alone.

           2.3.14 Darfuris generally live in the poorer areas  of  Khartoum
           and are economically disadvantaged compared to  other  Sudanese.
           They face discrimination in accessing public services, education
           and  employment,  and  may  face   forced   eviction,   societal
           harassment from  other  (Arab)  Sudanese,  and  lack  access  to
           humanitarian assistance.  However,  such  treatment  is  not  so
           severe that it is likely generally to amount to  persecution  or
           serious harm.

           2.3.15 The evidence, when considered in its entirety,  does  not
           establish that the  authorities  target  non-Arab  Darfuris  and
           subject  them  to  treatment  amounting  to  persecution  simply
           because of their ethnicity. Rather, a person's non-Arab  Darfuri
           ethnicity is a factor which may increase the likelihood of  them
           coming to the attention of the  authorities  and,  depending  on
           their  profile  and  activities,  may  then  lead  to  treatment
           amounting to persecution.

           ....

           From 5.2.9: 'Overall, DFAT assesses that  Darfuris  in  Khartoum
           face a moderate risk of discrimination and violence on the basis
           of their ethnicity and their actual or perceived support for  or
           association with rebel groups. DFAT assesses that  Darfuris  who
           actively criticise the Government, such as through participating
           in protests, face a higher risk'

           5.2.16  In  September  2016,  the  British  Embassy,   Khartoum,
           observed that 'The British Embassy is in  regular  contact  with
           Darfuri groups from  civil  society,  government  and  political
           parties.  In  the  course  of  these  contacts,  no  substantial
           concerns  have  been  raised  over  the  treatment  of  non-Arab
           Darfuris settled in regions outside  of  Darfur  that  we  would
           consider  ethnic  persecution,  although  many   face   economic
           marginalisation having been displaced due to  conflict.  We  are
           also not aware of reports of systematic  targeting  of  Darfuris
           from United Nations agencies or other embassies with whom we are
           in contact."

    8. Having set that evidence out, the Tribunal concludes:

           "Even  upon  consideration  of  the  submissions  and  objective
           evidence relied upon by the Appellant, I find that there is good
           reason to depart from the country guidance cases, by  virtue  of
           the compelling evidence within the  Home  Office  notes.  It  is
           clear from several sources relied  upon  that  non-Arab  Darfuri
           tribal members in Khartoum are liable to face discrimination but
           not persecution"

       The  determination  expressly  accepts  that  in  areas  outside  the
       capital, such as Darfur itself, the situation may  remain  the  same,
       but finding that conditions have improved in  Khartoum  it  finds  no
       risk of harm to the Appellant there. At  paragraph  46  the  Tribunal
       notes that the Appellant has been able to find work in the  past  and
       for that reason it is likely that he will be able  to  find  work  in
       Khartoum today.    The appeal was thereby dismissed.

    9. Although it is not a feature of the appeal before me, it is important
       to note that the Tribunal had, in addition, expressly considered  and
       rejected the Appellant's account of past persecution for  reasons  of
       his political opinion.

       The Appeal

   10. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
       in the following material respects:

        i) Failure to take material evidence into  account.  The  Appellant
           had placed before the  Tribunal  a  bundle  of  recent  evidence
           relating to the position of non-Arab Darfuris in Sudan, and none
           of this evidence is considered in the determination. Further  it
           is submitted that the extracts from the CPIN were selective, and
           that paragraphs capable of supporting the Appellant's case  were
           ignored.

       ii) Misdirection. The First-tier Tribunal directed  itself  that  it
           needed to find "good reason" to depart from AA. It is  submitted
           that the proper test is that set out in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ
           982 and  reflected  in  the  Practice  Direction:  "very  strong
           grounds supported by cogent evidence".

   11. For the Respondent, Mr Diwnycz opposed the  appeal  on  all  grounds,
       save to accept that insofar  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  have
       suggested as much at its paragraph 45, it would be an error to assume
       that the passage of time in itself was good  reason  to  depart  from
       country guidance.




       Discussion and Findings

   12. I begin by noting  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is  not
       clearly structured. The starting point in any protection appeal is to
       determine whether the claimant has a well-founded fear of persecution
       for a Convention reason in his home area, or the area that he will be
       returned to. It is only if that risk is made out will it be necessary
       to assess whether or not that  risk  pertains  to  the  rest  of  the
       country, and if not, whether it would in  all  the  circumstances  be
       'reasonable'  for  the  claimant  to  relocate  in  order  to   avoid
       persecution.  Although the Tribunal acknowledges,  at  paragraph  45,
       that the "situation in other areas, such as Darfur itself, remains as
       outlined in AA and MM" there is no clear finding on  whether  or  not
       the Appellant in this case has, in his home area, a well-founded fear
       of persecution by virtue of his ethnicity alone.  This  is  important
       because if he does, then the only question to be asked in respect  of
       Khartoum would be whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
       Appellant to relocate there.

   13. It is not at all clear from paragraphs  26-37  of  the  determination
       that this was the focus of the Tribunal's enquiry.  Those  paragraphs
       are, in very large measure, directed at the question of  whether  the
       Appellant would face persecution in Khartoum.  I note, having  regard
       to the CPIN, that this was the extent of the Respondent's  invitation
       to depart from the country guidance:

           "The Home Office view is, therefore, that there  is  now  cogent
           evidence which has become available since the promulgation of AA
           and MM establishing that in general non-Arab Darfuris are not at
           risk of persecution  solely  on  the  grounds  of  ethnicity  in
           Khartoum".

                                                               (my emphasis)

       The same guidance indicated the Respondent's view that  the  question
       of internal flight would need to be decided on a case-by-case basis.

   14. Apart from the reference to the Appellant being able to get a job  in
       Khartoum there is no evidence on the face of the  determination  that
       the  First-tier  Tribunal  undertook  a  holistic   internal   flight
       assessment,  for  instance  whether  he  would  be  able  to  lead  a
       'relatively normal life' in view of the evidence on non-Arab Darfuris
       in the city.  Even on the evidence cited in the determination  it  is
       possible that such an assessment would  have  been  resolved  in  the
       Appellant's favour. See for instance:

           "There are reports of arrests, detention, harassment and torture
           of non-Arab Darfuris, as well as sexual  abuse  of  women.  Some
           sources report that Darfuris are likely to face worse  treatment
           once in detention than other ethnic groups because they  may  be
           perceived  to  be  rebel  sympathisers,  and   that   they   are
           particularly vulnerable to torture and ill-treatment  [paragraph
           2.3.11 of CPIN cited at paragraph 28 of the determination]

           Darfuris generally live in the poorer areas of Khartoum and  are
           economically disadvantaged compared to other Sudanese. They face
           discrimination  in  accessing  public  services,  education  and
           employment, and may face forced  eviction,  societal  harassment
           from other (Arab) Sudanese,  and  lack  access  to  humanitarian
           assistance. However, such treatment is not so severe that it  is
           likely generally  to  amount  to  persecution  or  serious  harm
           [2.3.14 at paragraph 31]

           The  evidence,  when  considered  in  its  entirety,  does   not
           establish that the  authorities  target  non-Arab  Darfuris  and
           subject  them  to  treatment  amounting  to  persecution  simply
           because of their ethnicity. Rather, a person's non-Arab  Darfuri
           ethnicity is a factor which may increase the likelihood of  them
           coming to the attention of the  authorities  and,  depending  on
           their  profile  and  activities,  may  then  lead  to  treatment
           amounting to persecution [2.3.15 at paragraph 32]

   15. As the grounds note, the CPIN also  contained  other  passages  which
       were capable of supporting the Appellant's case on  internal  flight,
       (and indeed risk):

           "Darfuris in Khartoum face discrimination  in  accessing  public
           services, education and employment, experience forced  eviction,
           societal harassment from other Sudanese, and do not have  access
           to humanitarian assistance [3.1.5]

           ...

           The DFAT assessed in its April 2016  report:  'There  are  [...]
           examples of individuals from Darfur being  targeted  outside  of
           Darfur, particularly in Khartoum. There are a number of  factors
           that influence the treatment of Darfuris in Khartoum,  including
           their actual or perceived support for or association with  rebel
           groups, or the criticism, particularly  from  students,  of  the
           implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in  Darfur  (which
           guaranteed free university education for Darfuris). For example,
           between late April and early July 2015 over 200 Darfuri students
           and their families were detained in Khartoum following protests'
           [5.2.9]"

   16. I am for these reasons satisfied that ground  (i)  is  made  out.  It
       perhaps follows that ground (ii) must  also  be  made  out  since  it
       cannot be said that "very strong grounds" were found to  depart  from
       AA in circumstances where the Tribunal did not direct itself  to  the
       appropriate tests or consider all of the relevant evidence.

       Anonymity Order

   17. The Appellant continues to  seek  granted  international  protection.
       Having had regard  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013:
       Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make an order
       in the following terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
           family.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  both  the
           Appellant and the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

       Decisions and Directions

   18. I have found that the Tribunal failed:

        a) to make clear findings on whether  the  Appellant  has  a  well-
           founded fear of persecution for reasons of his ethnicity in  his
           home area of  Al-Gezira  state  (I  note  that  although  it  is
           accepted that the Appellant is of the  Tama  tribe,  a  non-Arab
           Darfuri ethnic group, he is not himself from  Darfur:  Al-Gezira
           lies in the east of the country adjacent to the Blue Nile)

        b) to  conduct  a  holistic  assessment  of  whether  it  would  be
           reasonable for the Appellant to relocate to Khartoum; and

        c) to take all relevant information into account  in  finding  that
           there was no risk of persecution in Khartoum.

   19. The decision, insofar as  it  relates  to  these  three  areas,  must
       therefore be set aside and remade.  The  determination  does  however
       contain findings that have not  been  disturbed.  The  Appellant  had
       advanced a case that he had been arrested and tortured in  the  past:
       this was comprehensively rejected by the Tribunal and those  findings
       have not been challenged. I therefore do not consider it  appropriate
       that this matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  matter
       will be relisted in the Upper Tribunal for re-making in due course.

   20. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           8th November 2018
