
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/05326/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 September 2017                     |   On 4 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     H O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
     Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who was born on  2  April  1973.
    He entered the UK illegally in 2008 and has been arrested for a variety
    of offences since then.  Removal directions were set for February  2017
    but he refused to leave for his flight stating that he was unwell.   He
    subsequently claimed asylum on 23 February 2017.

 2. On being taken into detention on 23 February 2017 a Rule 35 report  was
    made on him for the purpose of which he gave a brief account of torture
    that he  said  he  had  suffered  in  Algeria.   Included  within  this
    statement it is recorded that "he reports he was stabbed on  his  right
    hand with a knife attached to a gun, as a threat".  It is  stated  that
    on his right hand there was an incision scar which was compatible  with
    a stab from a sharp object.  A doctor examining the appellant  at  that
    time reported that he had examined the appellant and  that  he  "hereby
    report[ed] that I have concerns that  the  detainee  may  have  been  a
    victim of torture", adding that "This is a factual report rather than a
    medico-legal one".  Subsequent to this  report  having  been  made  the
    appellant had an asylum interview in which he was  not  asked  specific
    questions about this incident and did  not  volunteer  any  information
    about it.  His application for asylum was subsequently refused.

 3. Thereafter the appellant appealed against the refusal of asylum and his
    appeal was heard at Harmondsworth before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal,
    who, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated the following day,  29  June
    2017, dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 4. Central to the appellant's appeal was the issue of credibility, and one
    of the aspects to which the judge properly  had  regard  was  that  the
    appellant had been in this country for some six years and had not  made
    any asylum claim previously.  Also, the appellant's criminal history is
    such  that  he  cannot  claim  to  be  a  person  whose   word   should
    automatically be accepted.  However, the judge, when making his adverse
    credibility findings, stated at paragraph 20 of his decision, that "the
    Tribunal accepted no aspect of his claimed account and the major reason
    for doing so is that he has throughout omitted to mention that  he  was
    stabbed with a bayonet at the time of the claimed car  park  incident",
    adding that "this was mentioned for the  first  time  in  the  Rule  35
    Report" and that:

         "The Tribunal noted that it has not been mentioned  in  the  asylum
         interview  nor  in  the  witness  statement  and  is  a  major  and
         significant discrepancy.  If the Appellant had truly  been  stabbed
         by a bayonet, then the Tribunal finds that he would have  mentioned
         it as it was a direct manifestation of his claimed fear".

 5. Permission was granted to bring this appeal by Designated Judge Shaerf,
    who noted as follows when dealing with this aspect of the appeal:

         "The first ground for appeal asserts  the  Judge's  basis  for  his
         adverse credibility finding is flawed  because  the  Appellant  had
         alleged ill-treatment, an injury to his hand, when  the  Respondent
         was preparing a Rule 35 report which was some weeks before  he  was
         interviewed and that at interview he was  not  asked  any  question
         which would have given him the opportunity  to  describe  any  ill-
         treatment he might have received.  The ground also  complains  that
         this was the sole basis for the Judge's adverse credibility finding
         and as such that finding is inadequately reasoned".

 6. Judge Shaerf considered that this (and the other ground argued, which I
    do not need to  consider  by  reason  of  what  follows)  disclosed  an
    arguable error of law.

 7. The way in  which  Mr  Eaton  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  puts  the
    appellant's case is that it appears from a reading of paragraph 20 that
    when making his finding the judge does not appreciate that the Rule  35
    report predated the asylum interview.  On behalf of the respondent,  Mr
    Kotas has referred the Tribunal to paragraph 3 of the decision in which
    the chronology is set out, because the  judge  in  that  paragraph  has
    stated in terms, that there had been a screening interview followed  by
    a substantive asylum interview which had been completed by 11 May  2017
    and "there had been an earlier Rule 35  Report  dated  7th  March  2017
    while in detention".

 8. The date of the report was in fact 23 February 2017  and  not  7  March
    2017 and in reply Mr Eaton has  emphasised  that  the  purpose  of  the
    report was to alert the respondent to any ill-treatment  relied  on  by
    the appellant so that the appellant could be asked questions about this
    in interview.  Although Mr Kotas has suggested that the questions  were
    wide-ranging and the appellant had an opportunity if he  considered  it
    appropriate to rely again on the claimed incident with the bayonet,  it
    is certainly correct that the appellant was not asked in terms to  give
    further particulars regarding this incident.

 9. While it is right that the appellant did not mention this  incident  in
    his witness statement either, at paragraph 14 of  the  decision  it  is
    noted that when asked about  what the judge regarded as  a  discrepancy
    by the Tribunal during the hearing the appellant had  replied  that  it
    had been mentioned to the doctor at Harmondsworth  and  had  shown  his
    hand and stated that it was not an issue.

10. In these circumstances, Mr Eaton submits that at  the  very  least  the
    reason behind the adverse credibility finding has not  been  adequately
    reasoned, because it is not clear from what is  said  at  paragraph  20
    that the judge when making this finding had the correct  chronology  in
    mind.

11. Although this is a finely balanced decision, I consider that Mr Eaton's
    submissions must be accepted.  The normal meaning to  be  derived  from
    paragraph 20 is that the appellant had failed to mention  that  he  had
    been stabbed with a bayonet on the first occasion when  he  could  have
    done so and did not do so until the Rule 35 report was made.   Although
    the judge had noted earlier what the chronology was, it does not appear
    on the face of this decision that he had  this  correct  chronology  in
    mind when making this finding.  Alternatively, it is at least  possible
    that he did not, and in these circumstances,  given  that  this  is  an
    asylum claim and that the  judge  is  required  to  show  that  he  has
    exercised anxious scrutiny in  reaching  his  decision,  this  decision
    cannot stand.

12. In these circumstances, the appeal will have to be reheard  and  it  is
    appropriate for the appeal  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross  (or  whatever  other  hearing  centre
    comes within the ambit of Hatton Cross) to be heard by any judge  other
    than Judge Lal and I will so  order.   No  findings  of  fact  will  be
    retained and it is accordingly not necessary for  me  to  consider  the
    second ground of appeal.  I express no view as to the  merits  of  this
    appeal save that it must be reheard.

Decision

13. I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal as containing
    a material error of law and remit this appeal to  Hatton  Cross  to  be
    considered by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Lal,  with
    no findings of fact retained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
             Dated: 29 September 2017







