
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/05468/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 January 2018                         |On 1 February 2018               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                     VCU
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Naith, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  She was born on 29 August 1987.



 2. She appealed against the respondent's  refusal  to  grant  her  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds dated 5 May 2016.

 3. The appeal was dismissed by Judge Traynor (the  judge)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 October 2017.

 4. The grounds claim the judge arguably erred in applying  the  Devaseelan
    guidelines.  Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702.   The  grounds  claim  the
    circumstances before the judge were materially  different  or  slightly
    different from the earlier decision in 2015.   The  grounds  claim  the
    judge:

         "...... seems to purely  rely  on  the  previous  findings  without
         giving weight/findings of fact to the overall evidence  adduced  at
         the current hearing, for example, the evidence of her vulnerability
         and psychological therapy service  which  should  have  been  given
         special consideration taking into cognisance that she is  now  with
         her child."

 5. Judge Saffer granted permission to appeal  on  29  November  2017.   He
    said:

         "It is arguable that the judge may have erred in not assessing what
         impact having a 5 month old  child  may  have  on  the  appellant's
         ability to relocate safely from those who had previously trafficked
         her and provide for herself and her child  adequately  without  any
         evidence of family support, and how that  factual  matrix  differed
         from the one put forward at her previous hearing, where she had  no
         child.  All grounds may be argued."

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

 7. The appellant failed to attend the hearing, nor was she represented.  I
    was satisfied the appellant and her  representatives  had  been  served
    with notice of the hearing.  There was no explanation for absence.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Mr Naith submitted that the judge had not erred.  As of the date of the
    first decision by Judge Hanes the  appellant  had  no  child.   It  was
    difficult to see how the judge had erred in terms of Devaseelan.  I  am
    asked to find that the judge made no error of law.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. Devaseelan was relevant in terms of the findings of Judge  Hanes  which
    the judge took into account in his decision.  He  also  carried  out  a
    careful  and  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  appellant's  change  of
    circumstances  given  the  birth  of  the  child  which  he  considered
    extensively at [26]-[28], [35]-[39] and [48]-[49].

10. The case as put to the judge was exactly the same in every  respect  as
    that before Judge Hanes. See [44].  Nevertheless, the judge  took  into
    account HD (trafficked women) Nigeria CG UKUT [2016]  00454  (IAC)  and
    also the fact that in the meantime, the appellant had given birth to  a
    child.  The judge found that at its highest, what was being  argued  on
    behalf of the appellant is that she would "...... face some  degree  of
    difficulty upon return to Nigeria".  See [45].

11. Insofar as there were new circumstances in terms  of  the  birth  of  a
    child to the appellant, the judge extensively considered the same:

      a) At [13] the judge recited that the appellant was not  pursuing  her
         appeal on asylum grounds, notwithstanding that it had been found by
         a competent authority that she was the victim of  trafficking  from
         Nigeria, but rather claimed that if  she  was  to  be  returned  to
         Nigeria it would cause great difficulty for her and her child.  Her
         claim was that as a single parent with no  family  support  and  no
         other assistance, she  would  be  in  parlous  circumstances.   See
         decision at [14].

      b) The judge was cognizant of the claim that the appellant's change of
         circumstances on the birth of the child were relevant in  terms  of
         an Article 3 claim.  See decision [17]-[18].  The judge  considered
         that claim in terms of HD (trafficked women) Nigeria CG UKUT [2016]
         00454 (IAC) at [19]-[25].

12. The judge set out his findings at [40]-[50] of the decision.  He  noted
    the withdrawal of the asylum claim.  The appellant  no  longer  pursued
    that claim on the basis that she was a member of  a  particular  social
    group, namely trafficked women from Nigeria.  She advanced no  evidence
    that she would face a real risk of serious harm in accordance with  the
    terms  specified  in  339C  so  as  to  entitle  her  to   humanitarian
    protection, the appeal being pursued  solely  upon  the  grounds  under
    Articles 3 and 8.

13. As regards Article 3, the appellant produced no new evidence which  had
    not been considered by Judge Hanes in  May  2015.   Her  representative
    identified nothing within HD that might be relevant to the  appellant's
    circumstances so as to show that the findings of Judge Hanes should  be
    revisited.  The judge  found  the  appellant's  circumstances  remained
    exactly the same as  those  before  Judge  Hanes  except  that  in  the
    meantime, she had  given  birth  to  a  child.   The  judge  found  the
    appellant's claim in terms of HD misconceived  given  the  confirmation
    that the appeal was not  being  pursued  on  asylum  grounds  but  that
    nevertheless it was claimed the appellant would be  vulnerable  and  at
    risk of re-trafficking. The judge dealt with the claim as put  to  him.
    The judge found at its highest, what was  being  argued  was  that  the
    appellant would face some degree of difficulty on  return  to  Nigeria.
    His analysis, which he was entitled to come to on the facts before him,
    was that there was no credible evidence to suggest that the appellant's
    removal to Nigeria with her child was  likely  to  place  her  in  such
    circumstances where she would be homeless  and  destitute  and  without
    family support.  See [46] of the decision.

14. As regards Article 8, the judge considered the same at [48]-[49].   The
    judge took into account that as of the date of the hearing  in  October
    2017, the child was only five months old.  He found  that  the  child's
    best interests were to be with her mother and  that  she  could  return
    with her to Nigeria see [49] of the decision.

15. I conclude that the decision does not contain a material error  of  law
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law  and  shall
stand.

Anonymity direction continued.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 26 January 2018.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

