
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/05844/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 August 2017                        |On 7 September 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     CB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellant who claims asylum.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure  and  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 20 April 1985.
     She entered the United Kingdom on 11 February 2010 with  a  six  month
    visit visa valid until 27 July 2010.

 3. On 21 December 2015, the appellant claimed asylum.  On 20 May 2016, the
    Secretary  of  State  refused  her  claim  for   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and on human rights grounds.  The appellant appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated  on  1  December  2016,
    Judge Mathews dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge M J Gillespie) on 4 April 2017.

The Appellant's Claim

 5. The basis of the appellant's claim was as follows.  She  claimed  that,
    whilst in the UK, she had been forced to marry a man in the  UK  ("FA")
    on 18 April 2010, undertaking an Islamic marriage.  The  appellant  was
    unhappy with the arrangement and, after about six months  of  marriage,
    she was taken to her sister's house and abandoned by FA.  In 2012,  her
    uncle arranged a divorce and FA's brother brought the divorce papers to
    her signed by FA.  She has received threatening  telephone  calls  from
    FA's brother, claiming that she has dishonoured his family on the basis
    that it was she who left FA.  She fears  FA's  family  if  returned  to
    Bangladesh.

 6. Sometime after she was abandoned, the appellant went to live  with  her
    uncle in the UK.  He was  physically  and  verbally  abusive.   He  was
    subsequently convicted in the Crown Court for falsely imprisoning  her.
    Her brother gave evidence at the trial although the appellant did  not.
    Nevertheless, the uncle's sons have threatened they will  take  revenge
    upon her in Bangladesh for taking part  in  the  prosecution  of  their
    father.  She fears her uncle's family if returned to Bangladesh.

 7. In his determination, Judge Mathews rejected the appellant's account of
    her marriage, divorce or that she had been subject to threats or abuse.



The Appellant's Grounds

 8. Mr Joseph, who represented the appellant, relied upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

 9. First, he submitted that the judge  had  made  an  adverse  finding  in
    relation to whether the appellant had married which was irrational.  He
    submitted that there was the appellant's oral  evidence,  that  of  her
    brother and photographs.  In addition, he submitted that the judge  had
    stated that although there had been "reference  to  recordings  of  the
    wedding" (at [18]), there was "no recording"  before  him  ([19]).   Mr
    Joseph submitted that a DVD copy of the recording of  the  wedding  was
    available at the hearing and, although he could not be certain, it  had
    been drawn to the judge's attention but it had been decided not to play
    it.

10. Secondly, Mr Joseph submitted that the judge had been wrong to  expect,
    and take into account as relevant to the appellant's  credibility,  the
    absence of supporting evidence  from  her  family,  in  particular  her
    mother.

11. Thirdly, it was unreasonable of the judge to  take  into  account  that
    there was an eighteen-month delay between the appellant's claim to have
    been abandoned by her husband and their divorce.  He submitted that the
    appellant could not be responsible for her ex-husband's actions.

12. Fourthly, Mr Joseph submitted that it was irrational for the  judge  to
    take into account that no attempt had been  made  by  her  ex-husband's
    brothers to take revenge in the UK.  The threat was from  the  brothers
    who were in Bangladesh and not from her ex-husband's family in the UK.

13. Fifthly, Mr Joseph submitted that it was irrational  to  count  against
    the appellant that she had been threatened, that her case was that  she
    had been warned of the threat by her ex-husband's  family.   There  was
    nothing surprising or implausible in that.

14. Finally, Mr Joseph submitted that the judge had been wrong to  make  an
    adverse finding in relation to her claim to fear her uncle  given  that
    he accepted his  conviction  for  falsely  imprisoning  the  appellant.
    That, Mr Joseph submitted, reflected on the  judge's  approach  to  the
    appellant's evidence at para 26 of his determination in  which  he  had
    regard to her failure to seek protection as soon as she was divorced.

15. Mr Diwnycz, who represented the respondent, accepted that the judge had
    been advised about  the  availability  of  the  DVD  recording  at  the
    hearing.  He acknowledged that its existence was  referred  to  by  the
    appellant in her witness statement at para 19.  Mr Diwnycz acknowledged
    that this called into question  the  judge's  reasoning  in  making  an
    adverse finding that the wedding had not taken place.

16. Further, Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that there was some  inconsistency  in
    the judge's findings at paras 29 and 35.  Mr Diwnycz submitted that the
    judge's finding at para 29 was ambiguous.  There he stated: "I  am  not
    satisfied that the  appellant  was  married  as  claimed,  divorced  as
    claimed, or she suffered any threats  or  abuse  during  or  after  her
    asserted marriage".  At para 35 he stated that he  was  not  satisfied:
    "that she was married or divorced as claimed, or subject to any threats
    as claimed".  Mr Diwnycz said it was not clear, as the  judge  granting
    permission pointed out, whether the judge had found that  the  marriage
    had not  occurred  or  rather  it  had  taken  place  but  not  in  the
    circumstances alleged.

17. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to deal specifically with the remainder  of  Mr
    Joseph's submissions.  Mr Diwnycz did  not  seek  to  put  forward  any
    positive submission to sustain the judge's decision, acknowledging that
    there was sufficient error to make the decision unsustainable.

Discussion

18. In substance, I accept Mr Joseph's submissions.

19. First, it is accepted  by  the  respondent  that  a  recording  of  the
    appellant's claimed wedding was available on DVD at  the  hearing.   It
    was not played.  The judge counts against the appellant that it was not
    available (see para 19).  Given the position taken by Mr Diwnycz,  this
    was factually an error on a matter relevant to the appellant's claim to
    have been married.

20.  Secondly,  Mr  Diwnycz  acknowledged  that  there  were  ambiguous  or
    inconsistent findings in paras 29 and 35 of  the  determination  as  to
    whether or not the judge accepted that the appellant had  been  married
    at all.  That, in itself, amounts to an error of law.

21. Thirdly, whilst I would not accept Mr Joseph's submission that, on  the
    basis of the evidence the judge actually considered, any  finding  that
    the marriage had not taken place was irrational, the judge's  reasoning
    was inadequate.  I accept Mr Joseph's submission that there was nothing
    inherently implausible in the appellant's ex-husband's brothers warning
    her, in effect, what to expect if she  returned  to  Bangladesh.   That
    was, as Mr Diwnycz pointed out, still a threat.  The fact that her  ex-
    husband's relatives had not shown any adverse interest in her in the UK
    fails to grapple with  her  evidence  that  the  threat  was  from  his
    brothers in Bangladesh and there is no  suggestion  that  other  family
    members were involved.  Further, it is not clear to me  why  the  judge
    should count against the appellant that, despite knowing that  her  ex-
    husband had abandoned her, the divorce did not take place for a further
    eighteen months.

22. Finally, in relation to her fear of her uncle, I did not understand  Mr
    Diwnycz to seek to support the judge's finding  in  the  light  of  the
    other errors that he acknowledged.  It was accepted, indeed it would be
    difficult not to do so, that the  appellant's  uncle  had  abused  her,
    given the conviction for false  imprisonment.   In  part,  the  judge's
    reasoning is based upon the appellant's credibility (see para  34)  and
    his reasoning in that regard  must,  necessarily,  be  tainted  by  his
    adverse conclusion when  considering  her  fear  based  upon  a  forced
    marriage which he rejects.

23. In the light of the submissions that were made by both representatives,
    and for the reasons I have given above, I am satisfied that the judge's
    adverse findings were legally flawed and cannot stand.

Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and it is set aside.

25. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,   the
    appropriate disposition of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Mathews.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            6 September 2017
