
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05152/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 5th September 2016                |On 6th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 a h ibrahim
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of  Iran,  born  on  10th
    August 1996.  He has  not  sought  anonymity.   He  appeals  against  a
    decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald, promulgated on 25th July
    2016, dismissing  his  appeal  against  refusal  of  recognition  as  a
    refugee.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are  directed  against  the
    judge's finding at paragraph 14(c) that because the appellant  did  not
    remain or seek protection in "Kurdish Iraq ... an  autonomous  part  of
    Iraq, peopled by his own compatriots" his  credibility  was  "seriously
    impugned".

 3. Mr McGinley wondered whether the judge had confused  the  present  case
    with the  more  common  situation  of  Iraqis  who  may  have  internal
    relocation to Iraqi  Kurdistan  available  to  them.   This  appellant,
    although Kurdish, had crossed an international border to reach Iraq.

 4. In response  to  Mr  McGinley's  submissions  Mrs  O'Brien  fairly  and
    correctly conceded that the judge took this point without  notice,  and
    made too much of it.

 5. There may be availability of protection in Iraqi Kurdistan,  but  there
    was no evidence or submissions  about  that  issue.   The  respondent's
    decision founded upon the appellant's failure to  claim  in  the  first
    available safe country, but under reference to  Bulgaria,  Belgium  and
    France not to Iraq.  There was no Presenting Officer in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mr McGinley had  been  asked  to  take  his  client  through
    matters referred to in the refusal letter, but the question whether the
    appellant might reasonably have remained in  Iraqi  Kurdistan  had  not
    been raised.  The error was not one which could be extracted  from  the
    decision, so as to leave adequate support by other reasoning.

 6. It became common ground that the case should be disposed of as follows.
     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   None  of  its
    findings in fact are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(1) of  the  2007
    Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial  fact-
    finding necessary for the decision to be re-made is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  members
    of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the  case  are  not  to
    include Judge Herwald.


                           [pic]


                           6 September 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
