
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05324/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th September, 2017                  |On 25th September, 2017             |
|and given ex tempore. Sent               |                                    |
|to Promulgation on 22nd                  |                                    |
|September 2017                           |                                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                           Sarhang Muhammed Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson of Counsel, instructed by Bolton
Citizens' Advice Bureau
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant was born on 6 August 1995 and is a citizen of Iran.

2.   He entered the United Kingdom on 5 November 2015,  and  claimed  asylum
    on his arrival.  His claim for asylum was refused by the  Secretary  of
    State on 18th May, 2016.

3.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Alis  on  22nd  December  2016,  at
    Manchester.   The  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum   appeal,
    humanitarian protection appeal and human rights appeal.

4.   At the outset of the hearing, the appellant's Counsel indicated to  the
    judge that the appellant would not be giving evidence since his  doctor
    had advised him that he was a vulnerable witness.  The  grounds  assert
    that when making findings on the appellant's age, at paragraphs  45  to
    50 of the determination, the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  take  into
    account  the  role  the  appellant's  vulnerability  as   accepted   at
    paragraphs 55 to 57 played in the age assessment, but was accepted.  It
    was also suggested that it was arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to apply country guidance to the facts of  the  particular  case
    and  consider  the  risk  on  return  particularly  in  the  light   of
    questioning of the appellant given his particular  characteristics  and
    his accepted vulnerabilities, after the judge had accepted his  illegal
    departure from the round.

5.   I  indicated  to  the  representatives  that  having  read  the  papers
    earlier, I was of the initial view that  the  determination  could  not
    stand.  I emphasised that this was only a preliminary view and  that  I
    was prepared to be persuaded otherwise.  Mr  Diwyncz  indicated  to  me
    that the determination could not stand, given the failure of the  judge
    to consider country guidance and the risk to him  on  return  to  Iran,
    given that the judge accepted  the  appellant's  illegal  exit.   I  am
    grateful to him.

6.   The determination is set aside in its entirety.  I remit the appeal  to
    hearing afresh by a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Alis. Were I to retain the appeal in the Upper  Tribunal
    and reserve it to myself it might take months to come before me  again.
    A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required  and  three  hours  should  be
    allowed to the hearing of the appeal.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

