
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05570/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2021                     |On 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    A H R
                         (ANONYMITY order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel, instructed by Milestone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Following a "remote hearing" on 16 December 2020 I found an  error  of
      law in this case.  My Reasons for Finding  an  Error  of  Law  and  my
      Decision to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
      dated 26 February 2021 and were sent to the parties.  I set out  below
      that decision in its entirety because it will explain much of  what  I
      have to do today.   For  the  avoidance  of  any  possible  doubt  the
      anonymity order I made then remains in force.

   2. When finding that there had been an error of  law  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal I said the following:

                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

  1  Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
  2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of  any
  matter likely to lead members of the public to  identify  the  Appellant.
  Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make  this
  order because the Appellant is  an  asylum  seeker  and  is  entitled  to
  privacy.

  2  This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  dismissing the  appeal  of  the  Appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
  Secretary of State refusing him asylum or  other  form  of  international
  protection and leave to remain on human rights grounds.

  3  The short point is that the Appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  and
  claims to be gay but the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not believe him.

  4  There are  extensive  and  appropriate  grounds  of  appeal  that  are
  supplemented by a "Response to Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker's  Directions
  dated 30-03-020" signed by Mr  Briddock  and  dated  5  May  2020  and  a
  document entitled "SSHD's Response to the Appellant's Grounds" signed  by
  Mr Ian Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer dated 11  May  2020.
  These were prepared after it was postulated that  the  appeal  should  be
  determined without a hearing. Judge Coker purported to decide the  appeal
  but her decision was set aside because, contrary to the impression  given
  to  Judge  Coker,  the  Appellant  had  not  had  proper  notice  of  the
  proceedings.

  5  It is necessary to look rather carefully at exactly  what  the  First-
  tier Tribunal Judge  decided  before  looking  at  how  the  decision  is
  criticised.

  6  It is the Appellant's case that he was born in  Sylhet  in  Bangladesh
  into a Muslim family.  He says that he realised that he was gay  when  he
  was about 16 years of age but he did  not  disclose  that  to  anyone  in
  Bangladesh.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on a  working  holidaymaker
  visa in August 2008 when he was 23 years old.  He arrived in  April  2009
  (not August 2008) with leave which expired in April 2011.

  7  He said that in June 2010 he  met  a  man  I  identify  as  "BK"  (see
  paragraph 18 of the witness statement) and  formed  an  open  and  casual
  sexual relationship with him.  That relationship ended and the  Appellant
  lost contact with BK but it  gave  him  the  confidence  to  express  his
  sexuality.

  8  After his leave to be in  the  United  Kingdom  lapsed  the  Appellant
  overstayed  and  he  was  encountered  in  August  2011  working  without
  permission.  He was detained and applied for asylum.  The application was
  considered under the (no longer existing) Detained  Fast  Track  process.
  The application was refused and an appeal dismissed on 5 October 2011  by
  Immigration Judge Charlton-Brown.  The Appellant's claim to  be  gay  was
  not believed.  He was refused permission to appeal the  decision  of  the
  First-tier Tribunal but he  was  released  from  detention  and  he  made
  further submissions in July 2012 which were refused in July 2017.

  9  It is his case  that  he  met  another  Bangladeshi  national,  who  I
  identify as "K".  There is inconsistency in the evidence about when  they
  met but they said that in about April  of  2012  they  started  a  sexual
  relationship and had been cohabiting since February 2014.  Mr  K  claimed
  asylum in July 2012 based on his sexuality and his being in  a  same  sex
  relationship with the Appellant.   The  application  was  refused  and  a
  resulting appeal dismissed in October 2012.  Mr K made a fresh claim  for
  asylum in June 2017 on the  same  basis.   That  was  refused  but  after
  judicial review proceedings he was allowed to appeal the  decision.   The
  appeal was dismissed on 1 July 2019.

  10 The Appellant made further submissions seeking asylum on  24  November
  2017 about five months after the application of Mr K.  This  was  refused
  because it was not regarded  as  a  fresh  claim  but  again  there  were
  judicial review proceedings and although the application was reconsidered
  and refused it attracted a right of appeal.  The decision was made on  20
  May 2019 and an appeal dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Abdar on 22
  January 2020. The appeal before me is an  appeal  against  Judge  Abdar's
  decision.

  11 It is accepted at least for the purposes of this appeal  that  if  the
  Appellant is gay then he would be a refugee.

  12 Before the First-tier Tribunal Mr Briddock helpfully and realistically
  accepted that Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  added
  nothing to the claim.

  13 As is apparent from the above, the Appellant suffers the  disadvantage
  of judicial decisions that neither he nor his claimed partner are gay.

  14 Judge Abdar reminded himself  of  the  decision  known  as  Devaseelan
  [2002]  UKIAT  702  and  recognised,   correctly,   that   the   previous
  determination was the necessary starting  point  and  that  any  evidence
  relied upon that could have  been  brought  to  the  attention  of  Judge
  Charlton-Brown but which was not  brought  to  her  attention  should  be
  treated with particular circumspection.

  15 Appropriately the judge then began by looking at the decision of First-
  tier Tribunal Judge Charlton-Brown which was determined  under  the  Fast
  Track Rules.

  16  Judge  Charlton-Brown  found   inconsistencies   in   the   evidence,
  particularly about whether the Appellant  had  made  known  his  emerging
  sexuality when he was in Bangladesh.  In particular,  the  Appellant  had
  denied telling anyone that he was gay when he was in Bangladesh  but  had
  also indicated, contradictorily, in answer to questions in  an  interview
  that he had told someone in Bangladesh, called "Suhel", that he was gay.

  17 Judge Charlton-Brown was also unimpressed by the late asylum claim and
  found that Appellant's credibility undermined by his professed  ignorance
  of the fact that gay sexual activity was legal in the United Kingdom. The
  Appellant said that he was told that gay sex was not criminal conduct  in
  the United Kingdom by his friend  "Shardul"  but  Shardul  did  not  give
  evidence before Judge Charlton-Brown or before Judge Abdar.

  18 However, Judge Abdar did hear from another friend of the  Appellant's,
  Mr M.  Mr M said that he and the Appellant are childhood  friends.   They
  were at school and at college together and that the Appellant was  picked
  on at school because of his "mild feminine manners".  Mr M said that  the
  Appellant did not tell him that he was gay but he knew the  Appellant  to
  be gay since around 2010 because of rumours in the  community  especially
  because of the Appellant's association with BK.  Judge Abdar  noted  that
  no evidence or explanation had been given  for  Mr  M  not  being  called
  before Judge Charlton-Brown.

  19 Judge Abdar noted that the evidence before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
  Charlton-Brown was that the Appellant did not go  to  gay  clubs  in  the
  United Kingdom because he feared that people of Bangladeshi origin  would
  learn of his sexuality.  Judge Abdar found that this contrasted  with  Mr
  M's evidence that the Appellant's sexuality was well-known even though it
  was the Appellant's case that his relationship with BK had lasted only  a
  couple of months.

  20 At paragraph  34  the  judge  said  that  he  found  Mr  M's  evidence
  unreliable and at paragraph 35 the judge said

    "However, in the absence of credible and reliable evidence, I  find  no
    cause to depart from Ft-TJ Charlton-Brown's reasons and decision on the
    Appellant's claim as at the  date  of  promulgation,  being  5  October
    2011."

  21 Judge Abdar recognised that there was evidence before him  that  could
  not  have  been  available  before  Judge  Charlton-Brown,   namely   the
  Appellant's relationship with Mr K, because that post-dated  the  earlier
  application.

  22 The Appellant's evidence was that he had met Mr K in October 2011  and
  soon after they met they kissed.  Greater intimacies  followed  soon  and
  they became a couple.

  23 The Appellant was allowed to work and started a job as  a  chef  in  a
  caf� and invited Mr K to live with him.  Evidence was provided that  they
  had cohabited.  The judge noted that the  Appellant's  witness  statement
  for the appeal before him said that the Appellant met Mr K  on  31  March
  2012 and asked Mr K to  "move  in"  in  February  2014  but  the  further
  submissions statement said they met in October 2011 and, in January  2014
  the Appellant asked Mr K to move in.

  24 Having reflected on matters, Judge Abdar accepted the explanation that
  some of the inconsistencies  were  the  result  of  typographical  errors
  rather than untruths.  Nevertheless he found that the Appellant  had  not
  satisfied him that he was gay.

  25 At paragraph 43 of the Decision and Reasons the Judge Abdar  described
  the Appellant as someone who had made "repeated applications and being  a
  keen litigator" but found no evidence of the Appellant making any  effort
  to substantiate his first claim for asylum.

  26 The judge noted that the Respondent did not  regard  the  photographic
  evidence of the Appellant attending a Gay Pride event in London 2017 with
  Mr K as indicative that either of them were gay.

  27 The Respondent acknowledged evidence linking the  Appellant  with  gay
  support groups but noted that it was not a  precondition  that  a  person
  associating with the group was gay and the proof of cohabitation was  not
  proof of sexual activity or attraction.

  28 Judge Abdar also noted that there was  no  statement  from  Mr  K  was
  provided with the further submissions  although  there  were  letters  of
  support from Mr K's friends.

  29 At paragraph 46 the Judge Abdar said

    "I take account that Mr Briddock's submissions that  the  corroborating
    evidence does not prove that the Appellant is gay but demonstrates that
    the Appellant is however, I agree with the Respondent's  views  on  the
    Appellant's evidence and I find that the evidence  is  not  such  which
    could not have easily been manipulated to fit the Appellant's purposes,
    noting the fact that the majority of the evidence the Appellant  relies
    on to corroborate the Appellant's account dates from  2017,  being  the
    year the erstwhile  further  submissions  were  refused  prior  to  the
    Appellant's further submissions of November 2017."

  30 Judge Abdar also noted that the Appellant and Mr K were cross-examined
  on their living arrangements  and  described  the  evidence  as  "largely
  consistent" but added, "in my view, the evidence is not such  that  would
  not be common knowledge between friends and those sharing a living  space
  together."

  31 The Appellant's alleged partner, Mr K's evidence is considered in  the
  First-tier Tribunal's Decision  and  Reasons  starting  at  paragraph  48
  although much of the analysis seems to look at the history of his  giving
  evidence rather than what he actually said.

  32 Mr K had applied for asylum in July 2012 having entered  with  a  work
  permit in June 2007 and overstayed.  The application was refused  and  an
  appeal dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson in  October  2012.
  Further submissions led to a further appeal which was heard and dismissed
  by First-tier Tribunal Judge Welsh.

  33 Judge Welsh had noted that Judge Robinson had found that Mr K and  the
  Appellant had fabricated their account and made findings concluding  that
  Mr K gave inconsistent and unreliable  evidence.   Judge  Robinson  found
  that a Ms B had simply accepted what she had been told.  The  Appellant's
  evidence had been rejected by Judge Charlton-Brown.  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge Welsh had little evidence before her although  there  were  witness
  statements but not oral evidence from Ms B and Mr I.  Judge  Welsh  found
  that Mr K had failed to prove that he was gay.  This was a view based  on
  an  accumulation   of   inconsistencies,   lack   of   detail,   inherent
  implausibility and  failure  to  produce  documentary  evidence  or  call
  witnesses of the kind that might  be  expected.   Judge  Welsh's  reasons
  included a finding that Mr K and the Appellant's membership of ELOP (East
  London Out Project) and CAGS (Croydon Area Gay Society) was indicative of
  contrivance rather than commitment.

  34 Judge Welsh found that the Appellant and Mr K had given  "inconsistent
  evidence about the frequency of their attendance at these groups and they
  gave  inconsistent  evidence  on  what  happens  in  the  meetings".    A
  supporting witness, a Mr I, was disbelieved by Judge Welsh for  the  same
  reasons given by Judge  Robinson  and  Judge  Welsh  concluded  that  the
  Appellant and Mr K had come together to support a false asylum claim.

  35 Judge Welsh found there was very little evidence to explain why  Ms  B
  decided that Mr K and the Appellant were gay and doubted the veracity  of
  Ms B's evidence.  Mr K was also disbelieved because of  the  lateness  of
  his claim and particularly his insistence that he did not  know  that  he
  could claim asylum on the  basis  that  he  was  gay  until  he  met  the
  Appellant.

  36 Judge Abdar found the evidence from Mr K before him to be the same  as
  the evidence before Judge Welsh and he found no  reason  to  depart  from
  Judge Welsh's decision that Mr K was not to be believed and  neither  was
  the Appellant.  At paragraph 56 of his Decision and Reasons he  described
  the Appellant as a "co-conspirator" with Mr K.

  37 Judge Abdar noted that, unlike Judge Welsh, he had heard from Ms B  in
  person and heard her cross-examined.  Ms B's evidence  is  that  she  had
  known the Appellant from when they were in Bangladesh  together  but  she
  met the Appellant in the United Kingdom for the first time when he was in
  detention. Someone had contacted her from Bangladesh  and  asked  her  to
  help.  Ms Begum thought  that  Mr  K  was  gay  because  of  his  "gentle
  manners". She had not thought that the Appellant was gay  until  he  told
  her about his relationship with Mr K.

  38 Judge Abdar found that he agreed with Judge Robinson, whose views were
  accepted by Judge Welsh, that Ms Begum had simply accepted what  she  had
  been told and that believing somebody to be gay because of  their  gentle
  manners was not a strong reason.

  39 Judge Abdar considered the evidence of Mr  R,  who  gave  evidence  of
  meeting and knowing the Appellant and Mr K since sometime in 2016.   They
  had met at a nightclub in Camden.  Mr R was a refugee from Sri Lanka  and
  is accepted to be gay.

  40 When cross-examined Mr R confirmed that he did not know the  Appellant
  and Mr K outside the gay community.

  41 Judge Abdar said that although he  had  no  reason  to  doubt  Mr  R's
  credibility he found his knowledge to be limited and based on  occasional
  contact.  Judge Abdar did not find that evidence reliable.

  42 He also heard from a Mr RR, who had known Mr K since July  2013.  Once
  their friendship had developed Mr K  told  him  that  he  was  in  a  gay
  partnership with the Appellant. Mr RR said  that  he  was  "surprised  at
  first" but "it has been years that I know them as a couple".

  43 Judge Abdar did not doubt Mr RR's sincerity but said he was "unable to
  accept Mr [RR]'s brief evidence based mostly on what he has been told  to
  be reliable".

  44 Judge Abdar then considered the evidence as a  whole.   He  found  the
  Appellant's evidence to be unreliable and the  documentary  evidence  not
  supportive of his account.  He did not find the witnesses to be  reliable
  or that their evidence "countermands the number of material flaws" in the
  Appellant and Mr  K's  evidence  in  establishing  their  sexuality.   He
  dismissed the appeal.

  45 These findings were challenged in grounds drawn  by  Mr  Briddock.   I
  consider those grounds now.

  46 He began by pointing out that the judge had heard from  the  Appellant
  and Mr K and four others, namely Ms Begum, Mr R, Mr M and Mr RR.

  47 Mr M's evidence was considered separately and was not believed but the
  sincerity of the other witnesses  was  accepted.  This  is  explained  at
  paragraphs 58, 60 and 61 (or thereabouts) respectively, where Ms B, Mr  R
  and Mr RR were found to be not reliable.  However, Judge Abdar  expressly
  found Mr RR to be sincere (paragraph 61).  Mr Briddock said that it  must
  follow that Judge Abdar accepted that Ms B was told in 2012 and Mr  R  in
  2013 that the Appellant is gay and in a  relationship  with  Mr  K.   The
  grounds contend that the Judge did not explain why evidence of this  kind
  from a person accepted to be truthful was discounted.

  48 The grounds also complain that the evidence of Mr M  was  not  treated
  properly.  At set out above,  Mr  M  had  said  that  he  had  known  the
  Appellant at school and college and  recalled  his  being  picked  on  at
  school for his "mild feminine manners" but  that  he  did  not  know  the
  Appellant to be gay until 2010 when the Appellant was "talked  about"  in
  "our circles" as being a gay man , his often being seen with Mr AK who Mr
  M described as a "renowned gay man" and his never having  a  relationship
  with a woman or his never talking about women. Judge  Abdar  viewed  this
  evidence "with circumspection".  He was particularly  concerned  that  no
  explanation had been given for Mr M not giving evidence in  the  previous
  appeal and  there  being  a  contradiction  in  the  Appellant's  alleged
  openness about his sexuality and there having been no attempt to find the
  first partner BK who Mr M said was a "renown gay man".

  49 The grounds maintain that the judge had not given any thought  to  the
  criticised speedy nature of the Fast Track proceedings when  noting  that
  Mr M had not given evidence previously.

  50 The grounds  say  there  was  no  contradiction  in  relation  to  the
  Appellant's openness about his sexuality and his not  wanting  people  in
  the Bangladeshi community to know that he was gay.  It is the Appellant's
  case that the Appellant had a partner but there was no reason  to  assume
  that was somehow publicising his sexuality  to  a  Bangladeshi  or  other
  audience.  The criticism of failing  to  find  the  former  first  sexual
  partner is not justified because it was made  plain  that  this  was  the
  first encounter of its kind and it was a short-lived relationship.

  51 Ground 2 complains that there  was  no  regard  to  proceedings  being
  conducted under the Fast Track  Rules.   Mr  Briddock  was  at  pains  to
  emphasise before me, as  he  does  in  his  papers,  that  there  was  no
  suggestion that the decision in the Fast Track case was  to  be  ignored.
  It had not been set aside; it had not been challenged by judicial review;
  it was a necessary starting point  but  the  starting  point  had  to  be
  illuminated by the fact that the process was criticised.   However,  this
  does have to be tempered with the fact that, as far as  I  can  see,  the
  Appellant did not complain that his presentation was rushed at the  first
  hearing.

  52 Ground 3 is more subtle but I consider  important.   It  is  that  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge discounted evidence that the Appellant  is  gay
  because the conduct could be attributed to another explanation.

  53 The point is, for example, the Appellant and Mr K were  cross-examined
  about their living arrangements and habits and  whilst  it  was  accepted
  that they gave consistent evidence the  judge  said,  "in  my  view,  the
  evidence is not such that would not be common knowledge  between  friends
  and those sharing a living space together".  This might conceivably be  a
  reason to regard it as of limited relevance but it is  not  a  reason  to
  discount it or disbelieve it, according to the grounds.  The grounds  say
  that it was "reversing the standard of proof" but clearly mean "reversing
  the burden of proof".

  54 The Judge's finding that the evidence was "not such  which  could  not
  have easily been manipulated to fit the Appellant's purposes" is  not  an
  appropriate direction or observation when the  test  is  whether  it  was
  reasonably likely that it could be genuine.

  55 Ground 4 refers to unexplained findings and refers to particularly  to
  paragraph 43 of the Decision and Reasons where the Judge says:

    "Despite making repeated applications and being  a  keen  litigator,  I
    have no evidence of the Appellant making any or any genuine  effort  to
    substantiate the Appellant's first claim for asylum on grounds of being
    gay and fearing persecution on return to Bangladesh".

  56 The grounds assert that the Appellant has not made "repeated  claims",
  rather he has made one fresh claim and the reference to not  "making  any
  or any genuine effort to substantiate" his first claim makes no sense and
  is certainly not a reason for disbelieving the claim.

  57 As indicated, this produced a response from  Mr  Jarvis  which  I  now
  consider.

  58 Paragraph 5 is important.  The Secretary of State has urged that Judge
  Abdar gave detailed reasons for rejecting the additional witness evidence
  insofar as it went to the core evidence for sexual identity.   There  was
  no contradiction or tension, just a finding that the Appellant  does  not
  like.  The main response to ground 2 is there was no case raised that the
  Fast Track decision was rushed through and unfair to this Appellant.

  59 Ground 3 is just a complaint that the Judge had accepted  evidence  of
  cohabitation but not evidence of more.

  60 The point was that the Appellant and his  main  partner  witness  were
  disbelieved in other proceedings and the judge found no reason to come to
  another conclusion.

  61 Mr Briddock's response to  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker's  directions
  which is itself dated 5 May 2020 is full and  illuminating.   I  consider
  the response to ground 1.  At paragraph 8 it is asserted that:

    "It is not correct, therefore, that the witnesses are merely  repeating
    what they had been told.  Their sincere belief is  based  on  years  of
    interaction and friendship with the Appellant and his partner."

  62 This is a matter of some importance because ground 1  is  built  on  a
  premise that needs to be tested and Mr  Briddock  particularly  was  very
  helpful in taking me through the evidence.  In her statement  Ms  B  says
  that she has known the Appellant since they were in  Bangladesh  and  she
  understood he had started a same sex relationship  with  his  partner  in
  April 2012 and she was not surprised that the partner was gay but had not
  suspected the Appellant was gay.  However, she said there was "never been
  any doubt in my mind" that the Appellant is gay since she  was  told  and
  said that she was "convinced they are gay men"  and  expresses  the  view
  that "anyone who sees them together would have no doubt about it".

  63 This is not very detailed evidence.  It might mean that anybody seeing
  them together would know they were gay because of the way they interacted
  with each other but that is not explained although, if true, it certainly
  indicates the Appellant has claimed for some time to be gay.

  64 The statement of Mr R explains that he is gay and is a  refugee  as  a
  consequence.  Paragraph 5 is particularly telling.  After explaining that
  the Appellant and his partner had tried to initiate a conversation  in  a
  language that he does not speak he said:

    "I didn't understand what they said.  They didn't tell me they were gay
    or that they were together, but you don't need one to tell you to  know
    they are together when you see them  kissing  and  cuddling.   On  that
    occasion, we had a nice chat and exchanged phone numbers."

  65 At paragraph 8 he says he is "convinced" that  they  are  gay  and  in
  addition to seeing them at various gay clubs:  "I  have  also  seen  them
  kissing and cuddling while I'd been dancing or chatting away to others".

  66 The statement of Mr R R says that he is from Bangladesh and knows  the
  Appellant's partner because they used to play cricket together.   He  was
  surprised to learn that the partner was gay but "it has been years that I
  know them as a couple.  They complement each other perfectly.   They  are
  kind and caring to each other."  He strongly believed that  they  were  a
  genuine couple.

  67 The evidence of Mr M was treated differently but his evidence  was  to
  the effect that he had known the Appellant for some  time.   He  had  not
  thought that the Appellant was gay but on reflection realised he had  not
  heard him talking about girls.

  68 One of these witnesses, Mr R, particularly bases his belief  that  the
  Appellant and his partner are gay on seeing them  interacting  physically
  in appropriate settings on more than one occasion.  I find this  evidence
  particularly significant.  It might be untruthful.  It  is  hard  to  see
  that it is mistaken.  If it is truthful and the Appellant is not  gay  it
  follows that the Appellant and his partner are straight men who  are  not
  only identifying with gay support groups  but  attending  gay  nightclubs
  where they exchange physical intimacies in a way that satisfies a gay man
  that they are indeed gay and are doing it not because they  are  gay  but
  because they want people to think, wrongly, that they are gay.

  69 The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealing with this witness  at  paragraph
  60 says:

    "Whilst I had no reason to doubt Mr R's  credibility,  I  find  Mr  R's
    knowledge of the Appellant and Mr K to be  limited,  only  seeing  them
    occasionally at clubs  ...  I  do  not  find  Mr  R's  evidence  to  be
    reliable."

  70 I do not know what Judge Abdar means by this.  I cannot make any sense
  of that finding in the light of the evidence that I have set  out  above.
  I stress, that evidence might not be true but that was not the reason for
  discounting it.  I do not know what is unreliable  about  it  or  if  the
  incidents spoken of happened why the judge was so willing to assume  they
  were not indicative of two people who are gay.

  71 I have reflected carefully on my obligation to determine if  there  is
  an error of law and to avoid the temptation of thinking that  a  decision
  that I might not have made must be wrong.  I  acknowledge  too  that  the
  Judge Abdar has gone to  a  lot  of  trouble  to  decide  the  appeal  in
  accordance with Devaseelan.

  72 For all that I can find no lawful explanation  for  rejecting  Mr  R's
  evidence and that undermines the decision as a whole.

  73 I find this point the most persuasive and the others less compelling.

  74 I am not  impressed  with  the  "Fast  Track"  points.   There  is  no
  suggestion that the case was rushed through Fast Track unfairly  and  the
  decision should not be discredited because the system was  unfair  unless
  the unfairness was exhibited in this case.

  75 It is going too far to say that the Judge reversed the burden of proof
  but I agree that the Decision and Reasons does  suggest  that  the  Judge
  lost sight of the low standard of proof and, perhaps,  tended  to  equate
  unreliable evidence that the Appellant is gay with evidence  that  he  is
  not gay.

  76 It is right to emphasise that whilst there might be  reasons  to  give
  little weight to the evidence supporting the Appellant's contention  that
  he is gay none of the evidence is good evidence that the Appellant is not
  gay and the standard of proof is low.

  77 The error of law is that Judge has accepted much of  the  evidence  as
  truthful but has not given cogent reasons for finding it unreliable.  The
  reasons, such as they are, do not show any appreciation of the  depth  of
  the evidence contained in a few short phrases.

  78 Mr Briddock said that if I set aside the decision it had to be because
  the decision was perverse and I should allow the appeal  outright.   That
  was a bold submission.  Mr Avery was right when he said that  credibility
  was an evaluative whole exercise and if it  was  done  wrongly  then  the
  proper course was to do it again.  That may not always be right but it is
  right here.

  79 I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   I  direct  that
  the appeal be heard again in the Upper Tribunal.  I see no reason why  it
  should not be done by video link and it is likely  to  be  listed  for  a
  remote hearing.  If either party objects to that the objection should  be
  made forthwith and will be considered.

  80 I anticipate the hearing will last three hours.  I do not see any need
  for an interpreter.

  81 I see no need for further evidence and if the parties wish to serve it
  then it must be served  in  appropriately  bound  indexed  form  and  any
  witness evidence should be in a statement drawn to stand as  evidence-in-
  chief without the need of further questions and served on the  party  and
  the Tribunal no less than seven days before the hearing.  Any application
  to rely on further evidence must be made in the appropriate form.

  Notice of Decision

  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set  aside  its  decision  and  I
  direct that the Appeal be heard again in the Upper  Tribunal.  Directions
  for the proper conduct of that hearing are set out above.

   3. It will be apparent from sub-paragraph 10 above that this is an appeal
      against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      Appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  on  20  May
      2019 refusing him asylum or other kind of international protection.

   4. It is for the Appellant to prove to the low "real risk" standard  that
      he is entitled to international protection.

   5. At the start of the hearing in response to my invitation to comment on
      an overview of the case Ms Cunha rightly  and  helpfully  reminded  me
      that credibility was not the only issue in the  case.   If  I  decided
      that the Appellant is indeed gay as he claims, he must also  show,  as
      explained in HJ (Iran) v SSHD (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC 31 that in the event
      of his return he faced ill-treatment or would avoid such ill treatment
      being discreet because he was afraid to be himself. Even in  countries
      where gay people risk persecution on account of  their  sexuality  gay
      people not always refugees. Some  gay  people  are  not  going  to  do
      anything that creates a real risk of their sexuality being  discovered
      because that is how they chose to live.

   6. The Appellant gave evidence before me  adopting  a  witness  statement
      signed as long ago as 27 November 2019.  I have alluded to the gist of
      this evidence above.  The essential points that he makes are  that  he
      is a Bangladeshi national born in 1984 and that he was brought  up  in
      the Muslim tradition.  He came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  working
      holidaymaker in May 2009.  He realised at the age of about 16 that  he
      was gay.  He knew this would be regarded as shocking by his family.

   7. He talked about a brief relationship with a  man  that  confirmed  his
      sexual identity and then his growing friendship with the  witness  "Mr
      K".  He described in some detail his first sexual experience with Mr K
      and their decision to move in together and make a home together.

   8. He confirmed that neither of  their  families  would  accept  them  in
      Bangladesh.  They had become used to  the  freedom  to  express  their
      relationship in the United Kingdom and that they:

  "Would be forced to conceal our  sexuality  in  Bangladesh  for  fear  of
  persecution and getting harmed if not killed.  We would have to  live  in
  fear of our sexuality being discovered.  We wouldn't be able to live with
  each other as we wouldn't be able to justify why two  men  live  together
  unless they are gay."

   9. He was cross-examined.

  10. He confirmed, as is clearly the case, that he had been disbelieved  in
      earlier hearings.

  11. He was also asked about his relationship with his "sponsor".

  12. The sponsor, Mrs B, gave evidence, out of turn with the consent of the
      Presenting Officer, because that was convenient for her.

  13. In outline she said she had known the  Appellant  "from  when  he  was
      living in Bangladesh" and he told her that he started in  a  same  sex
      relationship with his partner Mr K in April 2012.  She did  not  think
      that he was gay until he told her that.  She did believe Mr  K  to  be
      gay because of his "gentle manners".

  14. She said at paragraph 7:

  "There has never been any doubt in my mind that [the appellant] is a  gay
  man, since he initially told me about his attraction and relationship  to
  [Mr K].  I am convinced they are gay men.  Anyone  who  sees  them  often
  would have no doubts about it.  I am quite surprised that the Home Office
  and Immigration Judges have not believed them to be gay."

  15. She was cross-examined.

  16. There was some uncertainty in her evidence about when  she  first  met
      the Appellant.  She claimed at one point to have met him in Bangladesh
      but that is hard to reconcile with the  evidence  that  she  had  left
      Bangladesh before he was born.

  17. Although this was a "face to face" hearing it was  possible  at  short
      notice to arrange for a video link and  I  heard  by  video  link  the
      evidence of Mr M at page 47 in the bundle.  He adopted  the  statement
      signed on 28 November 2019.

  18. He said that he was a British  citizen  who  was  born  in  Sylhet  in
      Bangladesh and he had known the Appellant since childhood.  They  went
      to the same school together.

  19. He said he had not realised that the Appellant was gay when they  were
      in Bangladesh but with the illumination of hindsight he realised  that
      he never remembered him talking about girls and he was picked  on  for
      his "mild, feminine manners".

  20. He had known since 2010 that the Appellant is gay.  He remembered  the
      Appellant being "talked about"  because  of  his  association  with  a
      renowned gay man who I identify as BK.  He realised how the  Appellant
      had never talked about a woman or had never been  known  to  be  in  a
      relationship with a woman and he assumed he was in fact gay.

  21. He now knew the Appellant's partner Mr K and he said it was  something
      he would "know by the way they are always together and behaving  in  a
      loving manner towards each other that they are a couple".

  22. He confirmed that in his opinion they would not be able to  live  like
      that in Bangladesh.

  23. He was cross-examined.

  24. He accepted that much of what he knew was from  gossip.   He  did  not
      really know the Appellant's partner.

  25. The Appellant's partner, "Mr K" gave evidence.  He adopted a statement
      made on 27 November 2019.

  26. He explained that he was a Bangladeshi Muslim born in Sylhet in  1985.
      He arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2007  with  a  work  permit  and
      thought himself unable to return to Bangladesh at the  expiry  of  his
      visa because he feared persecution because he is gay.

  27. He talked about claiming asylum and the appeal being dismissed.

  28. He explained how homosexuality was seen as  something  that  could  be
      cured by exorcism that often involved beatings.  He talked  about  his
      emerging sexuality and his realisation at the age of about 16 that  he
      was gay.

  29. He explained how he had had other partners before the Appellant.

  30. He moved in to live with his uncle in October 2011  when  he  met  the
      Appellant for the first time at his uncle's home.  His uncle  and  Mrs
      B's husband were close friends and he and the Appellant had  more  and
      more to do with each other and a relationship started.   More  details
      are  given  in  the  statement.   He  could  not  imagine  living   in
      Bangladesh.  He would be forced to conceal his identity  and  to  live
      discreetly.

  31. He was cross-examined.

  32. In answer to  questions  he  said  it  was  just  not  normal  in  the
      Bangladesh community for men  to  live  together.   He  confirmed  the
      Appellant was the first man with  whom  he  had  shared  a  home.   He
      emphasised that "we are not single, we are partners".

  33. As he did before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr R  gave  evidence  before
      me.  I considered his evidence particularly at sub-paragraphs  68,  69
      and 70 above.

  34. Mr R explained that he was given asylum in the United Kingdom  because
      of his sexual orientation.   He  is  a  gay  man.   He  frequents  gay
      nightclubs.  He also dresses as a drag queen.

  35. He remembered getting to know the Appellant and his partner at  a  gay
      club.  He remembered his  relationship  with  the  Appellant  and  his
      partner beginning because they assumed from his  appearance  that  he,
      like them, was from Bangladesh and they spoke to  him  in  a  language
      that they expected him to understand but he did not.   He  comes  from
      Sri Lanka.  That was only significant because it gave them a reason to
      remember the conversation.

  36. They "got on" and he went on to say that he was "convinced  that  [the
      Appellant and Mr K] are gay men.  Besides having  seen  them  visiting
      gay clubs, I have also seen them kissing and cuddling while I've  been
      dancing or chatting away to others".

  37. I made it clear in my reasons for finding error of law  that  if  that
      evidence proved reliable it was likely to be important.

  38. In cross-examination he accepted that it is possible that not everyone
      he had seen at a gay nightclub was gay and that not every  couple  who
      were seen fondling each other were gay.  He could not judge a person's
      soul.  He had only met them in the clubs but  he  was  satisfied  they
      were gay.

  39. Mr RR also gave evidence.  He similarly  adopted  his  statement.   He
      said that he plays cricket with the Appellant's partner.   After  they
      had known each other for some time the Appellant's  partner  explained
      that he was gay.  Mr RR was himself born in Bangladesh and he found it
      surprising that Mr K was prepared to admit to being gay because it  is
      socially unacceptable in Bangladesh but he did not condemn Mr  K.   He
      was satisfied that they were living as a gay couple and he  wanted  to
      support them.

  40. He had been to their home to visit.  He had  not  seen  them  fondling
      each other but the way they reacted to each other was just not the way
      men normally behaved.  They were talking and touching  "not  like  two
      men usually do".

  41. In evaluating this evidence I am very aware that the Appellant and his
      partner had been disbelieved in other proceedings.  It is also my view
      that they have not been  disbelieved  because  they  have  been  shown
      unequivocally to be dishonest but because in each case an  amalgam  of
      factors, including the late claim for asylum left the judges in  doubt
      having reviewed the evidence as a whole.

  42. I begin by considering the evidence that only I have heard.

  43. The evidence of Mr RR is of limited value.  He was not able to explain
      in much detail when pressed how he knew the Appellant and his  partner
      to be gay and he did not  spend  a  great  deal  of  time  with  them.
      Nevertheless he told me quietly and calmly that he got to  know  Mr  K
      and was surprised to be told by him that he was gay but when he met Mr
      K's partner the Appellant he was able to accept the  claim  that  they
      were gay simply by the way they reacted.

  44. I am entirely satisfied that he told the truth as he perceived it.

  45. This evidence is not conclusive but it clearly adds to the picture  of
      the Appellant and his partner identifying themselves as gay  men.   It
      was not their opening line  in  the  conversation  but  I  accept  the
      evidence that as Mr RR got to know Mr K, Mr K thought it important  to
      say a bit more about himself and revealed that he  was  gay  and  this
      news, although initially surprising to Mr RR, became believable as  he
      saw more of them.

  46. If the  Appellant  and  his  partner  were  "case  building",  whether
      dishonestly or to support a genuine case, the revelation that they are
      holding themselves out as gay might have been expected at  an  earlier
      stage.

  47. This evidence points entirely one way and that is  in  favour  of  the
      Appellant being gay but it is not determinative.

  48. The evidence of Mr R the drag queen was particularly helpful.  I  have
      no reason to doubt that he is a gay man. He can be expected  to  be  a
      little more aware than other people about the behaviour and conduct of
      other gay people.  He was perfectly open to the possibility of  people
      going to gay clubs who are not gay and even the possibility of  people
      who are not gay expressing physical signs of affection.   Nevertheless
      it was clearly his view that the Appellant and his partner are  a  gay
      couple.  There was no evidence that he was  in  the  habit  of  giving
      evidence in support of gay people.  There was no reason to think  that
      he was being  rewarded  in  any  way.   There  was  really  no  reason
      whatsoever to do anything other than accept at face  value  his  claim
      that he believed the Appellant and his partner to be  gay  because  he
      had seen them on several occasions, become friendly  with  them,  seen
      them reacting to each other and they were in his mind  clearly  a  gay
      couple.

  49. Clearly Mr R could not have given evidence in this Appellant's  appeal
      before Judge Charlton-Brown. He had not  met  the  Appellant  and  the
      Appellant had not started his relationship with Mr K.

  50. I have not been told the reason  for  Mr  R  not  giving  evidence  in
      support of Mr K. It is feature of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walsh's
      decision in Mr K's case that Mr K did not rely on supporting  evidence
      from  the  gay  community.  This  causes  me  to  give  a  degree   of
      circumspection to his evidence. The point was not explored  in  cross-
      examination and I still found his evidence to be truthful, as did  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge.

  51. I also fund it reliable because I find it very unlikely that he  could
      be so wrong in his assessment of the Appellant.

  52. The other evidence was not particularly helpful.

  53. Mrs B did not really add much.  Her evidence was a little confused  in
      places.  I do not suggest she was dishonest in the sense  of  somebody
      trying to be deceitful but the evidence of her chronology was  unclear
      in places and her claim to have known the  Appellant  from  Bangladesh
      without explanation was just wrong.  I make it clear  that  I  do  not
      regard her as a  liar  but  there  was  something  muddled  about  her
      evidence which left it being of limited value.

  54. Mr M in truth did not add much.  He was basically reporting on  gossip
      in the community.  However I accept he was telling  the  truth  as  he
      understood it and his evidence, and  Mrs  B's  evidence  to  a  lesser
      extent, do have a confirmatory role.

  55.  The  Appellant  and  his  partner  have  the  disadvantage  of  being
      disbelieved and there are clearly aspects  of  the  stories  that  are
      unsatisfactory.  However the story is capable of  being  believed  and
      when I consider it illuminated by the evidence that is unique to  this
      hearing before me or these proceedings I am quite  satisfied  that  on
      the low standard of proof that the Appellant and his partner  are  gay
      men.

  56. I have reflected also on Ms Cunha's absolutely correct  reminder  that
      that is not the end of the story but their evidence is plain that they
      have no wish to return  to  Bangladesh  because  societal  disapproval
      would be so strong that they could not  express  their  affection.   I
      accept that they would want to show an element of discretion like they
      do in the United Kingdom.  Their physical expression is at  gay  clubs
      where such behaviour is unobjectionable.

  57. When  Mr  K  became  friendly  with  a  cricket  partner  he  did  not
      immediately make known  his  sexual  orientation.   That  is  entirely
      different from suggesting that they are living so discreetly that they
      would not attract attention.  Indeed the evidence of Mr M is, I  find,
      useful in this respect.  They have attracted attention in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Word has got  round.   I  am  quite  satisfied  to  the  low
      standard that they would be known as gay people in Bangladesh if  they
      express  themselves  in  they  would  want  to  do,  that  is  in  the
      understated way that they do in the United Kingdom.

  58. I do not accept that being  gay  in  Bangladesh  necessarily  attracts
      persecution but I have reminded  myself  of  the  Country  Policy  and
      Information Note Bangladesh Sexual  Orientation  and  Gender  Identity
      published by the Respondent in November 2017.  This is  identified  as
      version  3.   Paragraph  8.2  is   headed   "Societal   Violence   and
      Discrimination Towards Gay and Bisexual Men".  It refers  to  men  who
      have sex with men being beaten and feminised males  being  abused  and
      victimised. At paragraph 8.2.4 there is reference to  the  Australia's
      Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of  July  2016  Report  saying
      that gay men  face  a  "high  risk  of  societal  discrimination"  and
      "visible gay men  face  a  high  risk  of  violence,  including  being
      killed."

  59. I am quite satisfied from that evidence  that  openly  gay  people  in
      Bangladesh may very well be  persecuted  and  that  is  sufficient  to
      establish a real risk of persecution in this case.

  60. I am also satisfied that this Appellant is a gay  man  who  would  not
      want to supress expressions of his sexuality in  Bangladesh  but  that
      any such expressions would bring such a risk that  he  would  probably
      supress his feelings to avoid persecution and that  is  sufficient  to
      make him a refugee.

  61. I confirm that I have considered all of the papers before me.

  62. There is evidence of the Appellant's  supporting  gay  groups  in  the
      United Kingdom and photographs of him with his partner.  These  things
      are not conclusive at all and are not said to be but they add  to  the
      picture of the Appellant being a gay man. I  have  given  them  little
      weight in reach my conclusion that the Appellant is indeed gay  as  he
      claims to be.

  63. Putting everything together I allow his appeal.  The  Appellant  is  a
      refugee.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 May 2021                    |

