
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05426/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2018                           |On 29 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Mehrdad [D]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Uddin (Counsel), Bankfield Health Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Barber, promulgated on 26th July 2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Sheldon Court on 18th July  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matters comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born on 1st January
    1990.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 16th May 2016, refusing his application for asylum and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he  had  a  girlfriend  in
    Iran, who had been engaged to be married in Iran,  and  he  fell  under
    suspicion of adultery.  This was the claim that the Appellant raised in
    his screening interview, where the Appellant had said that  he  had  no
    religion.  By the time that  the  Appellant  went  to  his  substantive
    interview on  18th  April  2016,  and  by  the  time  that  his  asylum
    application had been refused  on  16th  May  2016,  the  Appellant  had
    changed his claim to include the fact that, two  days  before  he  left
    Iran, he was introduced to Christianity and  decided,  on  the  day  he
    left, that "I could class myself as a Christian" (see AIR  21  to  23).
    He did not have time to investigate Christianity in Iran as he had left
    so soon.  The judge considering this aspect of the  claim,  justifiably
    treated it with some scepticism, at the  outset  of  his  determination
    (paragraph 1).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was  introduced  to
    Christianity by a man called Ahmed just before he left Iran  (paragraph
    15).  The question of whether the  Appellant  had  then  "converted  to
    Christianity in the UK" was addressed  by  the  judge  (paragraph  15).
    Here it was held that, "the Appellant may or may not have converted  to
    Christianity in the UK.  However, on balance," it was said, "  that  he
    is probably relying upon Christianity as a means  to  substantiate  his
    claim to asylum for the following reasons" (paragraph 16).

 5. Thereafter, the judge provides extensive reasons for why the  Appellant
    could not substantiate his  claim  for  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his
    conversion to Christianity.  Looking at these  reasons,  it  cannot  be
    said that the judge was not entitled to come to these  conclusions,  as
    the Tribunal of fact, and having heard the evidence.

 6. However, there were two further matters.   First,  the  Appellant  said
    that he had joined his church "and started evangelising on the  streets
    of Birmingham shortly  afterwards"  and  that  there  were  letters  in
    support of this.  The judge observed that, "I place no weight on  these
    letters at all" (paragraph 18).

 7. Second, at the hearing before the Tribunal, the pastor  of  the  church
    had sent a supporting letter, which was to the effect that  the  church
    was "confident of his belief as a Christian ...", and that  accordingly
    the Appellant had been baptised into the faith.  The pastor himself did
    not attend the hearing.  The judge observed that the pastor  "will  not
    be attending any future hearings as there are too many Iranian  members
    of the church claiming asylum on  the  basis  of  their  conversion  to
    Christianity ..." (paragraph 23).

 8. In looking at this letter from the Oasis Church from  the  pastor,  the
    judge observed that, "I place no weight on what the  pastor  states  in
    either his letter of 26th May 2017 or his letter of 28th May 2017.   He
    has not attended to have his evidence tested ..." (paragraph 24).

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  engaged  in  two
    fundamental errors.  First, he applied the wrong standard of proof when
    stating  that:  "On  balance  I  think  he  is  probably  relying  upon
    Christianity as a means  to  substantiate  his  claim  to  asylum  ..."
    (paragraph 16).  Second, the judge went on to say that, "the  Appellant
    may or may not have converted to Christianity in the UK".  That did not
    demonstrate the judge having come to a firm conclusion either way.   If
    the judge was  not  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  had  converted  to
    Christianity it was incumbent upon him  to  so  find  (paragraph  9  of
    grounds).   Third,  the  judge  rejected  evidence  in  the   form   of
    photographs and letters observing, "I place no weight on these letters.
     There was written evidence from Rob Hooper, and  the  judge  concluded
    (at paragraph 24) that, "the letter is of no evidential value"  because
    of the failure of the witness to attend and subject himself  to  cross-
    examination.  This, it was contended, was wrong because the  judge  may
    well have been entitled to say that the non-attendance of  the  witness
    went to the weight to be given to his evidence, but he was not entitled
    to reject such a letter outright simply on account  on  non-attendance.
    Further, it was said that the judge had no evidential basis to say that
    Mr Hooper, the pastor, "is producing these letters on  demand  for  the
    Iranian Christian converts to attend his church" (paragraph 23).

11. On 19th December 2017, the Upper Tribunal  granted  permission  on  the
    grounds that the judge's findings concerning the claimed  adultery  had
    "no arguable merit" to it but that the matters raised  in  the  grounds
    concerning the judge's  disbelief  in  the  Appellant's  conversion  to
    Christianity raise arguable issues.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 5th October 2018, Mr  Uddin,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that he  would  not  rely  upon  the
    grounds of application insofar as the claimed adultery was alleged  (at
    paragraphs 19 to 27 of the grounds) because no permission to appeal had
    been granted on this basis.  However, he would rely upon the conversion
    part of the challenge in the grounds, where the Appellant  had  alleged
    that he had converted to Christianity.

13. First, whereas it is the case that the  judge  at  the  outset  of  the
    determination did correctly set out the  standard  of  proof  as  there
    being "a real risk or reasonable degree of likelihood of the  Appellant
    suffering persecution in the country of return" (see paragraph  5),  by
    the time that the judge came to making his findings  of  fact,  he  had
    used the civil  standard  of  proof  referring  to  "on  balance",  and
    concluding that the Appellant probably was relying upon Christianity in
    order to substantiate his claim.  In fact, the judge did not come to  a
    firm finding on the Appellant's conversion from Islam  to  Christianity
    because in the same paragraph the judge had said, "the Appellant may or
    may not have converted to Christianity in the  UK",  whereas  this  was
    precisely the crux of the claim that the Appellant was  making  as  the
    basis for his asylum claim.

14. Second, insofar as there had been a non-attendance by Pastor Rob Hooper
    from the Oasis Church, the judge  was  wrong  to  have  concluded  that
    attendance  at  the  Tribunal  hearing  of  the   so-called   "Dorodian
    witnesses" was essential for a religious conversion  case  to  succeed.
    This was because of a recent  decision  by  the  Court  of  Session  in
    Scotland, which made it quite  clear  that  written  support  from  the
    church, together with the  church's  firm  belief  in  the  Appellant's
    conversion to its creed, could be entirely probative of the claim  that
    was made, even where church witnesses had not attended court.

15. For his part, Mr Diwnycz submitted that he would have  little  to  add,
    and that he could "not boldly resist" the application  that  was  being
    made today because of two reasons.  First, the judge had  stated  that,
    "I place no weight on what the pastor states ..." (paragraph 24)  which
    was going too far; and second, because he had arguably not applied  the
    correct test and not decided that which needed to be  decided,  namely,
    the Appellant's  conversion  to  Christianity,  by  stating  that  "the
    Appellant may or may not have converted" (paragraph 16).

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, this is a case where  the
    judge had evidence before him from  Pastor  Rob  Hooper  of  the  Oasis
    Church supporting the Appellant in terms that it was "confident of  his
    belief as a Christian" and the judge recognised that in his  letter  of
    26th May 2017, the Appellant had "found [the Appellant] to be a genuine
    believer in Jesus Christ" (paragraph 23).  In the light of this, it was
    important for the judge to have concluded whether the Appellant  was  a
    person who had actually converted  to  Christianity.   The  observation
    that he may or may not have converted "to Christianity in the  UK"  was
    precisely what was in issue  and  needed  determination.   It  was  not
    enough  to  say  that  "on  balance"  he  is  properly   relying   upon
    Christianity to remain here.  Once that question was determined by  the
    judge, it was then open to him to consider whether the  Appellant  upon
    return to Iran would be a "open Christian"  or  a  "closet  Christian",
    given that only the former would engage the principles  in  HJ  (Iran),
    but the latter would not.

17. Second, insofar as it is the case that the pastor did  not  attend  the
    hearing because upon the demands on the Oasis Church on a weekly  basis
    to  come  and  in  person  support  Claimants  before  the  Immigration
    Tribunals alleging a conversion of faith, it was also an error  to  say
    that, "I place no weight on what the pastor states" because of his non-
    attendance at the hearing (paragraph 24).  This is  particularly  given
    what has been decided by the Court of Session in Scotland in TF and  MA
    [2018]  CSIH  58.   These  are  matters  which  will  now  need  to  be
    reconsidered again by the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Barber, pursuant to practice statement 7.2.(b) because
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in
    order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in Rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. No anonymity order is made.  This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018










