
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/05684/2019 (V)
     PA/05677/2019
     PA/05693/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Working Remotely by Skype            |                                     |
|On 29 April 2021                     |On 17 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     xe
                                     le
                                     fe
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms B Smith instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellants are citizens of Albania who were born respectively on  7
    December 1998, 16 February 2000 and 15 May 2003.  The  first  appellant
    is the sister of the second and third appellants, who are her brothers.

 3. The appellants left Albania around 10 September 2015 and travelled  via
    a number of countries to the UK where they claimed asylum on 2 November
    2015.  They were then aged 16, 15 and 12 years old respectively.

 4. The following  day,  the  appellants  were  referred  to  the  National
    Referral Mechanism ("NRM") and, on 9 November  2015,  the  NRM  decided
    that there were reasonable grounds to believe that the appellants  were
    victims of trafficking and modern slavery.  However, on 24 August 2019,
    the  NRM  in  its  Conclusive  Grounds  decision  concluded  that   the
    appellants were not the victims of human trafficking or modern slavery.

 5. On 3 June 2019, the Secretary of State refused each of the  appellants'
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.
     The respondent did not accept that the appellants had been  trafficked
    from Albania by individuals in order to repay  a  debt  owed  by  their
    father in Albania.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
    sent on 30 January 2020, Judge Hatton dismissed each of the appellants'
    appeals  on  all  grounds.   In  particular,  the  judge  made  adverse
    credibility findings and did not accept the appellants'  accounts  that
    they had been trafficked from Albania as they  claimed.   Instead,  the
    judge found that "the appellants had left Albania and travelled to  the
    UK with the full knowledge and consent of both their parents  and  that
    no trafficking gang was involved in this process" (see para 78  of  his
    determination).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellants sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    challenging the adverse credibility finding on four grounds.

 8. Ground 1: the judge had been wrong to discount the medico-legal  expert
    report produced by Dr Agnew-Davies simply on the basis that she had not
    had sight of the NRM decisions when preparing her report.

 9. Ground 2: the judge had been wrong to take into account that  a  travel
    proxy had been signed by the appellants' father allowing the appellants
    to leave Albania in  reaching  the  finding  that,  rather  than  being
    trafficked from Albania, the appellants had left with  the  consent  of
    their parents.  There was no evidence that the  travel  proxy  had,  in
    fact, been signed by the appellants' father.

10. Ground 3: the judge had impermissibly found aspects of the  appellants'
    account implausible, inconsistently with the approach set out in  HK  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.

11. Ground 4: the judge had wrongly found a number  of  inconsistencies  in
    the appellants' evidence and had failed to take into account, not least
    following Dr Agnew-Davies'  report,  that  the  appellants  were  young
    children who might  have  difficulty  recalling  the  detail  of  their
    accounts.

12. On 10 March 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Landes)  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal on all grounds.

13. Following the UT's directions, the appellants made further  submissions
    requesting an oral hearing and,  albeit  in  substance,  repeating  the
    basis upon which permission had been sought and granted.

14. The appeals were listed at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on 29 April
    2021 working remotely.  The appellants were represented by Ms Smith and
    the respondent was represented by Mr Kotas, both  of  whom  joined  the
    hearing via Skype.

Discussion

15. Ms Smith relied upon  the  four  grounds  of  appeal.   In  particular,
    however, she relied upon ground 2 concerning the travel proxy which she
    submitted  was,  if  established,  sufficient  to  make  the   decision
    unsustainable as it was fundamental to the judge's  reasoning  that  he
    accepted that the appellants' father had agreed to them leaving Albania
    inconsistently  with   their   claim   of   having   been   trafficked.
    Nevertheless, Ms Smith, having made oral  submissions  in  relation  to
    ground 2, also made further submissions in relation  to  the  remaining
    grounds 1, 3 and 4.

16. Having heard those submissions, Mr Kotas indicated that if ground 2 was
    established he would not seek to uphold the decision and it  should  be
    set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

17. In the light of that concession, I indicated that I was satisfied  that
    ground  2  was  established  and,  as  was  then  agreed  between   the
    representatives, I indicated that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    should be set aside and the appeal remitted for a fresh hearing.  I now
    give my reasons for concluding that ground 2 is established.

18. At para 42 of his determination, the judge referred  to  a  letter  (at
    page 78 of the respondent's bundle) dated 12 September  2017  from  the
    British Embassy in Tirana.  At paras 42-46, the judge said this:

         "42. The above letter additionally confirms that the Appellants and
             their mother submitted a travel proxy No 45 dated 3  September
             2015, issued by the Consul of the Republic of  Albania,  based
             at the Embassy of Albania  in  London.   Although  the  letter
             states that a copy of this travel proxy has not been retained,
             I note that the  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  decision
             dated 3 June 2019 confirms [at para  28]  that  'your  father,
             [HE] signed a travel proxy in London for you and your siblings
             to travel out of Albania with  your  mother  on  10  September
             2015'.

         43.  Conspicuously,  the  Appellants  have  failed  to  adduce  any
             documentary evidence capable of rebutting the  assertion  made
             by the Respondent in this regard.  In particular, there is  no
             evidence before me that the Appellants  made  any  attempt  to
             contact the Albanian Embassy in London regarding  this  issue,
             notwithstanding its central importance  to  the  substance  of
             their protection claim,  in  spite  of  having  had  an  ample
             opportunity to do so.

         44.  During her closing  submissions,  Miss  Smith  suggested  that
             rather than the Appellants'  father  having  signed  a  travel
             proxy at the Embassy of Albania in London, it  was  'far  more
             likely that somebody would have forged  that  document  if  it
             indeed exists'.  I note that no documentary evidence has  been
             adduced in support of Miss Smith's suggestion.

         45.  Further, I consider the suggestion that someone forged  [HE's]
             signature on the travel proxy  is  fundamentally  incompatible
             with the documentary evidence  from  the  British  Embassy  in
             Tirana, which confirms that the Appellants' father was  issued
             with a biometric passport No BR8562069, issued  on  12  August
             2015 and valid to 11 August 2025, which was applied for  in  a
             Consular Section of  an  Albanian  Diplomatic  Mission  abroad
             [Respondent's Bundle p.78].

         46.  Accordingly, as the Appellants' father was able to  obtain  an
             Albanian passport overseas, it follows that he would have been
             required to provide biometrics in order to be issued with such
             documentation.  Correspondingly,  it  also  follows  that  the
             bearer of a valid biometric passport would have been  able  to
             satisfy the Albanian Embassy in London that  they  were  in  a
             position to sign a travel proxy  on  the  Appellants'  behalf.
             Conversely,  it  follows  that  a  person   other   than   the
             Appellants' father would not have been  able  to  satisfy  the
             Albanian authorities as to their identity and/or  relationship
             with the  Appellants.   Further,  I  consider  it  exceedingly
             unlikely that any member of  a  trafficking  gang  would  have
             risked attending an embassy  for  the  purpose  of  forging  a
             signature on a travel proxy".

19. Then, at para 73 the judge said this:

         "73. Further, it is clear from  the  travel  proxy  signed  by  the
             Appellants' father at the Albanian  Embassy  in  this  country
             that he was fully aware and supportive of their  journey  from
             Albania to the UK, especially in view of  the  fact  that  the
             Appellants' father renewed his Albanian passport on 12  August
             2015 and signed a travel proxy  authorising  his  children  to
             come to this country just 22 days later, on 3  September  2015
             [see above]".

20. At para 78, the judge reached the following conclusion:

         "Accordingly, I am satisfied that all three Appellants  arrived  in
         the UK with the full knowledge and consent of both  their  parents,
         and that no trafficking gang was involved in this process".

21. In her oral submissions, Ms Smith referred me to the  letter  from  the
    British Embassy in Tirana at p.78 of the respondent's  bundle.   Whilst
    that document refers to the appellants travelling with a "travel  proxy
    No 45 dated 03.09.2015,  issued  by  the  Consul  of  the  Republic  of
    Albania, based at the Embassy  of  Albania  in  London",  it  makes  no
    reference to that travel proxy having been signed  by  the  appellants'
    father.  As it also makes clear, no copy of that travel proxy has  been
    retained.  Neither representative was able to assist me as to  how  the
    Secretary of State came to conclude in paras 28-29, for example of  the
    first appellant's decision letter, that:

         "28. This is inconsistent with the  information  from  the  British
             Embassy Tirana we have which states  that  your  father,  [HE]
             signed a travel proxy in London for you and your  siblings  to
             travel out of Albania with your mother on 10 September 2015.

         29.  It therefore cannot be accepted your father, left your  family
             in 2005 or that you had no contact with him since.   This  has
             damaged your credibility and therefore it cannot  be  accepted
             that he fled the country because he was in debt and could  not
             make the payments".

22. In my judgment, there  was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
    appellants' father had, indeed, signed the travel  proxy.  In  reaching
    his adverse conclusion, in those circumstances, the judge erred in law.

23. That the judge accepted the appellants' father signed the travel  proxy
    was a significant and material part of the judge's reasoning  that  led
    him to disbelieve the appellants' account as to what  had  occurred  in
    Albania to their father and which, they claimed, had led to them  being
    trafficked to the UK in order to be forced to repay the debt said to be
    owed by their father to the traffickers.   That  is,  in  my  judgment,
    clear from the passages in the judge's determination which I  have  set
    out above and  in  his  conclusion  juxtaposing  (consistent  with  the
    appellants' claim) that they had been trafficked by  a  gang  with  the
    fact that they had left Albania and  come  to  the  UK  with  the  full
    knowledge and consent of both their parents.      As I  have  said,  Mr
    Kotas accepted the  materiality  of  that  conclusion,  based  upon  no
    evidence,  made  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  and   his
    determination unsustainable in law.

24. I  agree  and  for  that  reason  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    contained a material error of law.  It cannot be sustained  and  it  is
    set aside.  It is unnecessary, therefore, to consider the other grounds
    relied upon by Ms Smith.

Decision

25. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellants' appeals involved the making of an error of law.
     The decision cannot stand and is set aside.

26. As was agreed by the representatives, given the nature  and  extent  of
    fact-finding required, and having regard to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, the proper disposal of this  appeal  is
    to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a
    judge other than Judge Hatton.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                  5 May 2021
