
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05166/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Way of Skype |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd September 2020               |On 5th October 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr E A
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel instructed by Virgo Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Richardson on 22nd January 2020 dismissing his appeal against the refusal
by the Secretary of State of his asylum, humanitarian protection and human
rights claims.

The appellant, a minor, claimed that he was approached and kidnapped by a
gang outside his school and threatened at gunpoint and told to deliver
drugs.  He asserted he was a victim of forced criminality and thus he was a
member of a particular social group who was at risk on return to Albania.

The grounds for permission to appeal asserted that the First-tier Tribunal
Judge erred (a) by giving insufficient weight to the appellant's minority
when assessing the evidence, (b) failing to give adequate reasons for not
believing aspects of the appellant's account, (c) failing to consider the
psychiatric evidence as part of the credibility assessment and (d) failing
to consider the evidence in the round.

Prior to the hearing the appellant sought permission to amend the grounds
of appeal by adding a further ground of challenge that the judge had
misdirected himself on the evidence because there was no proper
consideration of the appellant's evidence in the light of the country
information found in ARC Foundation Asylos report Albania: Trafficked boys
and young men, May 2019 ("the ARC report").

It was also argued in the further grounds that the First-tier Tribunal
Judge found at paragraph 14 that "the appellant was from a stable
background, living at the time with both his parents, so was not a
vulnerable child that the [ARC] report suggests are far more likely to be
victims of trafficking". That was not borne out by the evidence that was
before him which the judge failed to properly consider.  The judge had
misdirected himself on the evidence because Dr Yahli had indicated that the
appellant was from a relatively poor social and family support network with
a history of emotional abuse and history of bullying and being a target of
perceived adverse incident. The judge had not factored that into the
findings and erred in his finding that the appellant was not a vulnerable
child and was likely to be susceptible to trafficking.

I grant permission for the appellant to amend his grounds.

At the hearing Mr Jarvis conceded that the judge had failed to consider the
medical report as part of the credibility assessment, but the key point was
whether the judge was entitled to take a restricted interpretation of the
background evidence.

    Analysis

The judge at paragraph 14 confirmed that the appellant was from a stable
background, living at the time with both his parents, "so is not a
vulnerable child that the report suggests are far more likely to be victims
of trafficking".  He did not appear to consider the evidence of Dr Yahli
when making this finding.

He also states at paragraph 15:

"The appellant's credibility needs to be considered.  The appellant has
been vague throughout as to when the incident with the criminal gang
occurred in his first interview he said in either 2015 or 2016.  He has
since clarified in his witness statement for these proceedings that it
occurred when he was 14."

Prior to considering the medical report which identified mental health
issues the judge stated at paragraph 19:

"I do not accept the appellant's account.  He has been vague as to his
account throughout his dealings with the Home Office, initially not knowing
which year the alleged kidnapping had taken place even though that had
directly led to him leaving his family and country."

The judge appeared to consider the vagueness only in terms of his minority
and made no reference to the medical report in assessing credibility and
only reached the medical report at paragraph 31 of his findings.

Further the judge at paragraph 21 stated:

"I do not accept it plausible that a criminal gang would abduct a 14 year
old child from school, who they have had no dealings with prior to this
point, and then order him to deliver a consignment of drugs and entrust the
drugs to him and seek to ensure that this is carried out by threats alone.
Although there is some support in the material supplied by the appellant to
show that criminal gangs recruit and use children there is nothing to
suggest that it is done in the way recounted by the appellant."

As Ms Yong pointed out, the ARC report at pages 307 and 308 states:

"I have seen a few examples of where people seemed to have fairly stable
relationship with their parents but where we still see the classic grooming
model at school, through older young people and adults offering them money
and trainers.  ...  A very strong correlation between young British people
being groomed into gangs and organised criminal exploitation and the
trafficking of males in Albania - a very strong correlation between the
kinds of background they come from and these kinds of networks which is why
it's not surprising to me that Albanians criminal gangs operate in the UK",

and at paragraph 2.2 on page 308 of the report:

"Alongside what I've mentioned on the grooming process I have seen quite
severe levels of violence to break down young men and make them as
compliant as possible.  I've had a few young men disclose quite extreme
forms of physical violence and abuse, lots of threatening with weapons."

In essence, the background of the country evidence needed to be considered
far more closely against the account of the appellant and detailed
reasoning given for the rejection of the appellant's account together with
a consideration of the medical report when assessing credibility. That is
not to say that the medical report will not come under some scrutiny and
the Rule 24 notice of the Secretary of State referred to JL (medical
reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC)  although Mr Jarvis placed
no emphasis on that at this stage.

The Home Office Country Policy and Information Note Albania, July 2017
refers to the Gorani tribe as an Islamic ethnic group which inhabits the
Gora region located in Albania which considers itself a separate ethnic
group, see section 10.  They are not officially recognised as a minority
group. There were directions in the file indicating quite specifically that
criminality was not to be relied upon and rather ethnicity, but the
direction of the case changed once before the First-tier Tribunal and thus
the position was rather confused. I note from the determination of the
Judge that his Gorani ethnicity was not relied upon, but Ms Yong argued it
was relevant to the overall consideration of the appellant being bullied
and thus vulnerable at school.  This may be an issue which is relevant to
the overall determination and needs to be considered but I make no
criticism of the judge in this respect.

I find there is a material error of law in the decision, not least that the
judge failed to fully consider the ARC report against the evidence of the
appellant or in this case follow the approach in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ
367 to consider the evidence holistically including the medical report
rather than considering it as an add-on after he had made his findings on
credibility.

With the agreement of the parties the matter will be remitted back to the
First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing.

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Signed   Helen Rimington   Date 25th September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

