
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/05601/2016
     PA/05604/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th November 2017                     |On 08th January 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     a b
                                     F A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Martin, Counsel instructed by French & Company,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The Appellants are both citizens of Iraq.  They are FA,  born  on  20th
    March 1966, and her son, AB, born on 18th October 1997.   They  entered
    the UK as visitors on 11th September 2015 and claimed  asylum  on  30th
    November 2015.  Those applications were refused for the  reasons  given
    in Asylum Decisions dated 20th April 2016.  Both  Appellants  appealed,
    and their appeals were heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bell  (the
    Judge) sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 6th June 2017.  He decided to allow
    the appeal of FA on asylum grounds, but to dismiss the appeal of AB  on
    asylum grounds.  However, he allowed the appeal of AB as the  dependant
    of FA.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal those  decisions  and  on
    25th September 2017 such permission was granted.



Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeals because he found the evidence of FA to be
    largely credible and accepted her account that she and her son were  at
    risk on return to Iran as a convert to Christianity.  At  the  hearing,
    Mr McVeety argued that the Judge had erred  in  law  in  reaching  this
    conclusion.  He referred to the grounds of  application  and  submitted
    that the Judge had failed to consider all of the evidence in the  round
    and had failed to attach sufficient weight to the factors identified by
    the Judge as being contrary to the credibility of the  Appellant.   The
    Judge had placed too much weight on the corroborative evidence  of  the
    Reverend Clive Burrows who gave oral evidence at the hearing.

 4. In response, Mr Martin argued that there had been no such error of law.
     The Judge had carefully analysed all the relevant evidence  in  detail
    between paragraphs 27 and 40 of the Decision.  The Judge had dealt with
    all the challenges to FA's credibility raised by  the  Respondent.   It
    could not be said that the Judge had not considered all of the evidence
    in the round.

 5. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The Respondent's challenge to the  Judge's  decision
    relates solely to his decision as to the credibility of FA.  In my view
    the Judge made no error of law in this respect.   The  Judge  carefully
    and thoroughly analysed all  of  the  evidence  in  the  Decision.   He
    identified certain factors in paragraph 36 of the Decision which caused
    him to doubt the credibility of FA.   However,  he  applied  the  lower
    standard of proof correctly and taking into account  those  factors  in
    favour of FA and  the  evidence  of  Reverend  Burrows  he  came  to  a
    conclusion which cannot be described as perverse  and  which  he  fully
    explained.  It is a matter for the Judge to decide what  weight  to  be
    attached to any particular evidence.  At paragraph 39 of  the  Decision
    he described the contribution of Reverend Burrows as "strong evidence",
    and as he explained in paragraph 39, considering all  the  evidence  in
    the round, the factors in favour of FA's credibility  outweighed  those
    on the other side of the coin.

 6. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make an order for anonymity in respect  of  both
Appellants which  I  continue  for  the  reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 4th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton




