

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/05054/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke Bennett House        |   Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 July 2017                     |On 08 August 2017                       |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              EBRAHIM IRANNEJAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:             Mr S Vokes counsel instructed by French &
Company
For the Respondent:         Mrs Obomi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 10 July 1976 and is a national of Iran.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Frankish promulgated on 28 March 2017 which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  5  May
   2016 to refuse his protection claim.
The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  Frankish  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
   Respondent's decision under the Immigration Rules.
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge was wrong to :
   a) There was procedural unfairness in the Judge's refusal to adjourn the
      case and the Judge took into account a number of  irrelevant  factors
      in refusing the application.
   b)  The  Judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  reaching   his   adverse
      credibility findings.
   c) The Judge makes adverse findings on the Appellants evidence and  then
      rejected the experts evidence on that basis.
7.  On 26 April 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale  gave  permission
   to appeal on all grounds.

8. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Vokes  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) Given the history of the case and the previous challenge to the use of
      an Iraqi Kurdish interpreter the Judges approach to the application to
      adjourn when an Iraqi interpreter was provided was in error.

   b) The Appellant had indicated in his rebuttal statement the issues  that
      he had with the Iraqi interpreter in his substantive interview.

   c)  At the CMR the Appellants representatives had again indicated that he
      preferred an Iranian Kurdish interpreter but in the absence of that he
      required a Farsi interpreter. The  court  administration  appeared  to
      have  been  aware  that  there  was  no  Iranian  Kurdish  interpreter
      available  at  Stoke  but   this   was   not   communicated   to   the
      representative.

   d) The expert witness Sheri Laizer had been asked to comment on the issue
      of the difference in the dialect between  Iraqi  and  Iranian  Kurdish
      speakers and the Judges reasons for rejecting this were inadequate.

   e) It was not the interpreter who had  to  be  satisfied  that  he  could
      interpret but the Appellant who had to be satisfied he was understood.



9. On behalf of the Respondent  Mrs Obomi submitted that :

   a) She relied on the Rule 24 notice.

   b) The Judge had fully considered the adjournment request before refusing
      it.

   c) The Judge was satisfied that while the interpreter was an Iraqi he had
      previously interpreted for Iranians in the past without any difficulty
      and it would have been obvious if there were problems.

10. In reply Mr Vokes on behalf of the Appellant submitted :

   a)  The  Judges  views  on  the  interpretation  issue  impacted  on  his
      assessment of the expert witness and tainted all of his findings.

   b) The test is one of fairness not reasonableness.

The Law

11. Rule 4(3) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
   and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  gives the power to adjourn or postpone  a
   hearing.  This power must be exercised in accordance with the  overriding
   objective and having regard to any other  relevant  considerations.   The
   decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (adjournment; fairness)  [2014]
   UKUT 00418 (IAC) emphasizes the importance of the test  of  fairness  and
   the question of whether a party will be deprived of a fair hearing if  an
   adjournment is refused.


12. Each application to adjourn  must  be  considered  on  its  own  merits,
   examining all the factors brought  to  the  Tribunal's  attention.   When
   reaching a decision on such an application, the Tribunal  may  also  have
   regard to information already held and its  own  special  expertise  (see
   rule 2(2)(d)).


13. Factors weighing in favour of adjourning  an  appeal,  even  at  a  late
   stage in proceedings, include.


   (a) Sudden illness or other compelling reason preventing  a  party  or  a
   witness attending a hearing.  Normally such a reason should be  supported
   by medical or other relevant evidence, unless there has been insufficient
   time to obtain such evidence.  However, where there is no likelihood that
   the party will be able to attend a hearing within a reasonable period,  a
   hearing may proceed in absence where the tribunal considers that this  is
   in the interests of justice in terms of rule 28.


   (b) Late changes to the grounds of appeal  or  the  reasons  for  refusal
   which change the nature of the case.  The terms of rules 19(7),  23(2)(b)
   and 24(2) should be taken into account, as appropriate, when  considering
   changes to the grounds or reasons.


   (c) Where further time is needed because of a delay in obtaining evidence
   which is outside the  party's  control,  for  example,  where  an  expert
   witness fails to provide a report within the period expected.


14. The following factors, where relevant, may weigh  against  the  granting
   of an adjournment.


   (a) The application to adjourn is not made at the earliest opportunity.


   (b) The application is speculative, such as, for example, a  request  for
   time for lodging further evidence where there is no reasonable  basis  to
   presume  that  such  evidence  exists  or  could  be  produced  within  a
   reasonable period.


   (c) The application  does  not  show  that  anything  material  would  be
   achieved by the delay, for example, where an appellant wants more time to
   instruct a legal representative but there is no evidence  that  funds  or
   legal aid is available.


   (d) The application does not  explain  how  the  reason  for  seeking  an
   adjournment is material to the case, for example, where there is a desire
   to seek further evidence but this evidence does not appear to be material
   to the issues to be decided.


   (e) The application seeks more time to prepare the appeal  when  adequate
   time has already been given.  In such  circumstances,  the  Tribunal  may
   take into consideration a failure to comply with directions.  However,  a
   failure to comply with directions will not be  sufficient  of  itself  to
   refuse an adjournment.

Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

16. At the start of the hearing, the Appellants representative  applied  for
   an adjournment. The history of this case that was before  the  Judge  was
   that the Appellant had encountered dialect  difficulties  with  an  Iraqi
   Kurdish interpreter being provided at his substantive interview which led
   to a statement dated 26.4.2016  in  which  he  identified  interpretation
   problems and the fact that he had difficulties with Iraqi dialect and  if
   an Iranian  Kurdish  speaker  was  not  available  a  Farsi  speaker  was
   preferable. His solicitors in a letter dated 8 April 2016 confirmed  this
   problem and indeed asserted that they had extended his legal aid in order
   to ensure that they could secure  the  services  of  an  Iranian  Kurdish
   interpreter. At  the  CMR  on  7  September  2016  the  Judge  noted  and
   underlined the requirement for an Iranian Kurdish interpreter.


17. The interpreter provided on  the  date  of  the  hearing  was  an  Iraqi
   Kurdish speaker.


18. In setting out his reasons for refusing the adjournment the Judge  makes
   no reference to either the Procedure Rules or  the  caselaw  that  govern
   such applications. If it was clear that  those  principles  were  applied
   this would not amount to an error of law but  I  am  satisfied  that  the
   Judge had failed to demonstrate that he addressed the issue of 'fairness'
   at all.


19. I find that a number of irrelevant factors were taken  into  account  by
   the Judge in determining that the court interpreter was  acceptable  even
   though the Appellant was clear  through  his  advocate  that  he  had  no
   confidence in the Iraqi interpreter. The Judge asserts that he  satisfied
   himself  that  no  communication  problems  were  apparent  between   the
   Appellant and the interpreter but  given  that  the  Judge  cannot  speak
   Kurdish, and the Appellants English is extremely limited and therefore he
   could not in court indicate whether  what  he  said  was  being  properly
   interpreted I find this reasons to be  inadequately  reasoned.  He  notes
   that the interpreter is 'well known and  respected'  but  does  not  make
   clear why this is relevant to the issue of whether the Appellant who  was
   a speaker of Iranian Kurdish rather than the interpreters  Iraqi  Kurdish
   could understand and be understood.


20. It appears from paragraph 7 of the Judge's decision that the  court,  if
   not the judge, was aware prior to the hearing date  that  'Bennett  House
   does not have access to any Kurdish Sorani speakers who are  specifically
   recorded as being of Iranian origin.' Given the history of the  case  and
   the very clear and reasoned application for an Iranian Kurdish speaker  I
   find  that  it  was  procedurally  unfair  not  to  give  the  Appellants
   representatives an opportunity prior to the date of  hearing  comment  on
   this and if necessary confirm that they preferred, as they had previously
   stated, a Farsi speaker. I am satisfied that rather than giving this as a
   reason for refusing the adjournment  the  Judge  should  have  considered
   whether it was a reasons to adjourn the case. The failure to  communicate
   this information prior to the date of hearing deprived the  Appellant  of
   the opportunity to make a timely application to adjourn if necessary.


21. The Judge also noted that if the Appellant or the  advocate  brought  to
   his attention any problems of interpretation he would  consider  a  fresh
   hearing and he detected no such problems  and  none  were  drawn  to  his
   attention. As I have indicated above the Appellant  would  be  unable  to
   identify in court whether he had  misunderstood  or  been  misinterpreted
   until the decision was explained to him in a language he understood.


22. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail  every
   single argument advanced before her,  nor  consider  in  isolation  every
   single piece of evidence. She must weigh all of the evidence before  her,
   and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the parties, and  in
   particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for her decision.

23. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine  whether
   the absence of an interpreter in his chosen language deprived  him  of  a
   fair hearing constitutes a clear error of law. This error I  consider  to
   be material since had the Tribunal conducted this  exercise  the  outcome
   could have been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

24. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

25. I indicated to Mr Vokes that if  I  fond  an  error  of  law  would  the
   Appellant be content to have the matter heard in Manchester where  I  was
   confident that Iranian Kurdish speaking interpreters were  available.  He
   confirmed with his client that this was the case.

Decision

26. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
   material error of law

27. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found there was an error of law because the Appellant did not have a
   fair hearing due to the refusal to adjourn and obtain an  interpreter  in
   his chosen language. In this case none of the findings  of  fact  are  to
   stand and the matter will be a complete re hearing.

28. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me and I made  the
   following directions for the resumed hearing:

      . Iranian Kurdish Interpreter

      . List for 3 hours
Signed                                                              Date
6.8.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
