
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05069/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                            |On 8 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    I. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq who entered the UK  illegally,  and
    who then claimed asylum on 14 November  2016  with  his  wife  and  two
    children as dependents upon  that  claim.  That  protection  claim  was
    refused on 12 May 2017.  His appeal against that  refusal  came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 29 June 2017, when  it  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands.  She dismissed the appeal  on
    all grounds in a decision promulgated on 13 July 2017.   The  Appellant
    sought to challenge that decision, and his application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  all  of  the  grounds
    advanced, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 5 October 2017.  Thus
    the matter comes before me.

 2. The Respondent had conceded that the Appellant was a national of  Iraq,
    and that he originated from the city of  Shorija  in  the  province  of
    Kirkuk [52]. It was argued that nonetheless the Article 15(c) threshold
    was not met. Even if it was met, it was argued that it  was  reasonable
    to expect the Appellant and his family to  relocate  to  the  KRG.  The
    grounds, as explained by Ms Brakaj,  argue  that  the  Judge  erred  by
    considering the appeal upon the incorrect premise  that  the  Appellant
    and his family originated from the KRG. Whilst I am not persuaded  that
    paragraph 45 of the decision contains such  an  error  (the  Judge  was
    plainly there talking about relocation to the  KRG),  the  argument  is
    made out in relation to paragraphs 48 and 49  of  the  decision,  as  a
    result  of  the  Judge  stating  twice  in  terms  that  the  Appellant
    originates from the KRG. It is moreover in these  paragraphs  that  the
    Judge sets out the considerations that led to her conclusion  that  the
    Appellant could be expected to return to his home area in the KRG.

 3. After due consideration Mr Diwnycz accepted on behalf of the Respondent
    that the Judge had indeed erred in fact and in law. The Respondent  had
    accepted that the Appellant originated from Shorija in the province  of
    Kirkuk, and the Judge had accepted that there was an Article 15(c) risk
    to civilians in that area. Thus the Judge needed to go on  to  consider
    whether it was reasonable to expect the family  to  relocate  to  avoid
    that risk, and that this consideration required an accurate approach to
    the family's circumstances, and, the application of the current country
    guidance. Whilst the Judge had referred herself to AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq CG  [2015] UKUT 544 she had not made any reference  to  either  BA
    (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18, or, AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944 which was  promulgated  shortly  before  her  own  decision  as
    promulgated. Thus this aspect of her decision needed to  be  set  aside
    and remade.

 4. Both parties were agreed that there was in the  circumstances  no  need
    for the appeal to be remitted to the First tier Tribunal, and that they
    were content that I should  remake  the  decision  upon  the  issue  of
    relocation in the light of the current country guidance. Neither sought
    to adduce further evidence upon  that  issue,  and  neither  sought  to
    address me upon the content of that country guidance,  or,  indeed  its
    application to the other facts, as the Judge had found them to be.

 5. The Appellant accepted at his screening  interview  that  he  had  been
    issued with a passport by the Iraqi authorities, but asserted that this
    was now lost [A2]. He denied that he had ever held a  passport  at  his
    full interview [Q13], although  he  offered  no  explanation  for  this
    inconsistency. He has never suggested that he has made any approach  to
    the Iraqi Embassy in the UK for the issue to himself of  a  replacement
    passport, and he has offered no reason why he should not be expected to
    do so. I note that the Judge rejected as untrue the  Appellant's  claim
    that his identity documents were taken from him  upon  arrest  in  Iraq
    [#41 l], and also rejected as untrue his claim to have  been  arrested.
    Indeed his account of the reasons for  leaving  Iraq  was  rejected  as
    untrue.

 6. In the circumstances, although the Judge made no  specific  finding  in
    relation to whether the Appellant had ever been issued with a  passport
    by the Iraqi authorities, I am satisfied that he had admitted that this
    was the case at his screening interview, albeit  that  he  denied  this
    subsequently. Had the Judge turned her mind to the issue I am satisfied
    that she would have rejected that denial as untrue, as indeed I do.

 7. I approach the appeal therefore on the basis  that  the  Appellant  has
    previously been issued with an Iraqi passport. Either he still has that
    in his possession, or, if he genuinely no longer  does  so  then  I  am
    satisfied that he could apply for a replacement passport to  the  Iraqi
    Embassy. The Embassy would in  my  judgement  be  able  to  access  the
    passport records of the Iraqi authorities. Were he minded to do so I am
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant  could  provide   sufficient   truthful
    biographical  details,  including  fingerprints,  to  allow  the  Iraqi
    authorities to identify the records of his former  passport,  and  thus
    issue him with a replacement passport. I am also  satisfied  that  this
    process would allow the Iraqi authorities to identify the "family book"
    records for himself, his wife and his children, since the records  held
    by  the  passport  authorities  for  the  Appellant  would  allow   the
    identification of the relevant family book  and  page  -  even  if  the
    Appellant genuinely could not identify either the  book  or  page  from
    memory himself. In those circumstances I am satisfied that  the  return
    of the family to Iraq is feasible, using a replacement passport,  or  a
    laissez passer.

 8. In those circumstances I am satisfied that it would  be  practical  for
    the family to obtain the issue of CSID cards by the Iraqi  authorities,
    either prior to their departure from the UK, or, reasonably soon  after
    their arrival in Iraq; AA.

 9. The current method and point of return to Iraq is  by  air  to  Baghdad
    airport. Whilst the family were within the airport complex there is  no
    reason to suppose that any member of the family would be at any risk of
    harm. There  is  no  prospect  of  the  Appellant  being  detained  for
    questioning.

10. In the light of the guidance to be found in BA it would be realistic to
    expect the family as Sunni Kurds to settle in Baghdad, with the benefit
    of the assistance they could access using the CSID cards they could  be
    expected to  obtain  (whether  prior  to  departure  from  the  UK,  or
    reasonably soon after their arrival in Iraq), even though there  is  no
    evidence to suggest that they have family links to that city, or family
    members living in that city who could  support  them  and  assist  them
    whilst they established themselves. There is no state of internal armed
    conflict within Baghdad. Moreover the Upper  Tribunal  did  not  accept
    that merely being a Sunni male returned from the UK was  sufficient  to
    establish a real risk of harm, whether  as  a  target  for  kidnap  for
    ransom, or, at because of the need to pass through roadblocks  operated
    by Shia militias within Baghdad. The combination of funds  provided  by
    the  Respondent  to  assist  those  returning  voluntarily,   and   the
    assistance available to returnees from the  Iraqi  authorities  holding
    CSID cards would be such that the family would avoid destitution.

11. Alternatively, should they choose to arrange it, the family would in my
    judgement be able to fly into the KRG from Baghdad  airport  to  either
    the airports at Erbil or Suleymanyeh. Since it  is  accepted  that  the
    family originate from outside the KRG, and since there is  no  evidence
    that they have every lived in the KRG before, they would enter the  KRG
    as visitors initially, a permission that would be granted  to  them  as
    ethnic Kurds from the Kirkuk area. The initial period  of  leave  would
    last ten days, but this could be renewed. Should the Appellant be  able
    to find employment then this could be renewed further and  for  a  much
    longer term. In any event the current  country  guidance  is  that  the
    authorities in the KRG do not pro-actively seek to  remove  individuals
    who have overstayed their entry permission.

12. In the light of the findings of fact made by the First tier Tribunal  I
    am not satisfied that I should infer that the family would be unable to
    arrange flights to the KRG, or, that the Appellant would be  unable  to
    secure employment in the KRG. There is no situation of  armed  conflict
    within the KRG, and upon the findings of the Judge below no  real  risk
    within the KRG to the  members  of  this  family  of  persecution,  or,
    serious harm, or, destitution.

13. In the circumstances I remake  the  decision  under  appeal  so  as  to
    dismiss the appeal.

Notice of decision

    The decision promulgated on 13 July 2017 did involve the making  of  an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard.

    The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 7 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

