
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05443/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th October 2019                          |On 13th November 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                     R I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh a Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1990 is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.
    The Appellant was represented by Mr Lee of Counsel.  The Respondent was
    represented by Mr Singh a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum which had been refused by
    the Respondent on 20th May  2019.   The  Appellant  had  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal had been  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Moore sitting at Taylor House on 9th July 2019.  The judge had
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Application for permission to appeal had been made and was  granted  on
    27th August 2019.  It was said that it was arguable that the judge  had
    failed to consider separately the stand alone  humanitarian  protection
    claim, had made material errors of fact and arguably had not considered
    points made under Article 8  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton  arguments.
    Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether
    an error of law had been made or not in this case and the matter  comes
    before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr  Lee  noted  that  there  had  been  no  separate  consideration  of
    humanitarian protection which  was  relevant  in  this  case.   It  was
    submitted that the judge had  not  looked  at  Immigration  Rules  when
    considering Article 8  in  particular  paragraph  276ADE(vi).   It  was
    further noted that there had been a significant misreading of facts  in
    that the judge believed the Appellant and his family had been in  Kabul
    for 23 years prior to him coming to the UK when in reality it had  only
    been a two to three year period.  It appeared the judge had misread the
    evidence from an earlier  decision.   It  was  submitted  that  adverse
    credibility was made against the Appellant based on that misreading  of
    the previous time spent in Kabul.  Finally in terms  of  conversion  it
    was said that no account had been taken of the  Appellant's  engagement
    with the church over a four year period.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Singh conceded that there was an error in that  the  judge  had  not
    separately considered humanitarian  protection  which  may  well  be  a
    relevant issue in this case.  It was said  that  the  judge  had  taken
    account of medical evidence as available.   That  was  in  relation  to
    Ground 1 of the permission to appeal grounds.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    and evidence provided which I now give.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The Appellant's claim was that he would face persecution in Afghanistan
    on the grounds of his conversion from Islam to Christianity  and  as  a
    result of his ethnicity namely that of being an Hazara.  The  Appellant
    had initially claimed asylum in 2006 which had been refused but he  had
    been granted discretionary leave on 26th July  2007  for  a  six  month
    period.  Thereafter the Appellant had remained in the UK and  the  Home
    Office had not removed him.  The core of the Appellant's claim was that
    his family who lived in Iran now had disowned him as a  result  of  his
    conversion to Christianity and that he suffered from ill-mental  health
    and would accordingly return to Afghanistan as a vulnerable person with
    depression and no  family  as  well  as  being  an  Hazara  (which  was
    accepted).

 8. The judge in this case properly had made reference to the principle  in
    Devaseelan in respect of the First-tier Tribunal determination of  28th
    February 2011.  It was noted that at that date the issue of  conversion
    to Christianity was not before the Tribunal.  The judge had  noted  the
    adverse credibility findings made by the judge in 2011 noting that  the
    judge had rejected the core of the Appellant's  claim  and  found  that
    neither he nor his family had problems in Afghanistan at the time  they
    left the country and equally would have no problems upon return.

 9. At paragraph 23 the judge found that with the exception of the issue of
    conversion to Christianity the Appellant appeared to rely generally  on
    the account that he had previously given before the Tribunal  in  2011.
    He noted at paragraph 24 that whilst accepting  that  the  decision  in
    2011 was only a starting point it appeared to him that no credible  and
    reliable further evidence had been provided  by  the  Appellant  (apart
    from the issue of religious conversion).  He found that in relation  to
    the Appellant's ethnicity  as  a  Hazara  together  with  his  asserted
    depression and anxiety was such that  he  would  be  vulnerable  and  a
    potential target of the Taliban or subjected to  ill-treatment  by  the
    government.  In support of that assertion the judge noted at  paragraph
    24

         "The Appellant and his family lived in Kabul for 23 years prior  to
         leaving Afghanistan for  Iran  and  I  am  in  agreement  with  the
         Tribunal Judge in 2011 that the Appellant's claim that he would  be
         a risk in Kabul when his family were able  to  live  there  for  23
         years without encountering problems and  after  the  Appellant  was
         returning a substantial number of years later as  an  adult  to  be
         totally implausible".

10. To that extent the judge in agreeing  with  and  finding  no  point  of
    dissension with the earlier judge had noted what he believed to be  the
    finding of the earlier judge that the  Appellant  and  his  family  had
    lived in Kabul for 23 years prior to the Appellant coming  to  the  UK.
    In part and possibly a large part it was a reliance upon  that  lengthy
    period of time spent in Kabul that  led  this  judge  to  conclude  his
    agreement with the earlier judge in terms of potential risk on  return.
    However it is clear that the judge  had  misread  the  earlier  judge's
    decision.  In 2011 the judge had referred  to  the  Appellant  and  his
    family living in Kabul for a period of two to three years  rather  than
    23 years as believed by this judge.  That misreading may have had  some
    significant bearing on the judge's assessment  of  risk  on  return  to
    Afghanistan  and  perhaps  in  particular  relocation  to  Kabul   when
    considering paragraph 24 of his decision.

11. The fresh evidence that the judge needed to consider as he accepted was
    the Appellant's claimed conversion from  Islam  to  Christianity.   The
    judge had essentially considered that claim at paragraphs 25 to  30  of
    his decision.  In respect of this matter the judge had  considered  the
    evidence of Reverend Wylie and had noted the absence of  evidence  from
    the Appellant's ex-partner  Julie  Kelly  who  had  introduced  him  to
    Christianity.  The judge had concluded at paragraph 31 that  whilst  he
    accepted the Appellant may have been baptised and attended a  Christian
    church in this country did not accept that he was a  genuine  Christian
    convert who would evangelise on return to Afghanistan or would  have  a
    need to falsify his faith on return.  He provided adequate reasons  for
    concluding that the Appellant was not a genuine Christian convert.

12. The Appellant's mental health in terms of anxiety and  depression  does
    not appear to have been a contested issue.  The evidence in support  of
    that is brief and essentially contained  at  pages  20  to  24  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  The judge did not dispute the  existence  of  that
    depression and anxiety and the fact that the  Appellant  was  receiving
    medication but at paragraph 37 concluded that the Appellant was  not  a
    vulnerable adult with any particular mental health  difficulties  other
    than suffering from depression and anxiety for which  he  is  receiving
    medication.  There does not appear to have been any further analysis or
    discussion of that aspect of the evidence.

13. Significantly in this decision the judge at  paragraph  35  found  that
    having decided that the Appellant  was  not  entitled  to  asylum  that
    because of those findings "it also therefore follows that a  claim  for
    humanitarian protection must inevitably be dismissed as well".

14. It does not necessarily follow that a rejection  of  the  asylum  claim
    would automatically trigger a rejection of the claim  for  humanitarian
    protection.  The judge's error in  concluding  the  Appellant  and  his
    family lived in Kabul for 23 years coupled with any adequate assessment
    of his vulnerability are potentially not  insignificant  features  when
    looking at the issue of humanitarian protection.  The judge's dismissal
    of the humanitarian protection claim  being  inevitable  following  his
    dismissal of the  asylum  claim  rather  compounds  those  earlier  two
    features.

15. I find in respect of Article 8 the judge found the Appellant was unable
    to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  namely  paragraph
    276ADE the reasons he gave for  that  were  confined  to  a  couple  of
    sentences in paragraph 37.  Again it is possible  that  in  considering
    the issue of paragraph 276ADE(vi) the judge mistakenly had in his  mind
    that the Appellant and his family had lived in Kabul for 23 years prior
    to him coming to the UK.

16. The judge erred in law in this case in the manner  in  which  he  dealt
    with  humanitarian  protection  which  was   exacerbated   by   a   not
    insignificant mistake of fact  made  by  a  misreading  of  an  earlier
    judge's decision.  I find that the combination of features referred  to
    above does amount to a material error of  law  such  that  this  matter
    needs to be considered afresh.

Decision

17. I find that an error of law was made by the judge in this case and that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to be made afresh  before
    a judge other than Judge Moore.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever





Directions

 1. This appeal needs to be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal  before
    a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore.

 2. The parties are  at  liberty  to  serve  any  fresh  evidence,  but  in
    accordance with the appropriate Procedural Rules and on the basis  that
    any evidence is served on the other party and the Tribunal at least ten
    working days prior to the hearing date.

 3. A Pushtu interpreter should be provided  unless  contrary  instructions
    are provided by the Appellant's solicitors.

    Time Estimate: one and a half hours.









