
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/05049/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19th September 2018                  |On 8th October 2018                |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     KAI
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Patyna, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of  Afghanistan.   The  Respondent  refused
    his application for asylum and humanitarian protection  in  a  decision
    letter dated 8 May 2017.  The Respondent also decided that he failed to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to  remain  on
    the basis of his family life or private life in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision and  his  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot, who in a Decision and  Reasons
    promulgated on 6 November 2017 dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

3.   The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Talbot and permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt,
    who concluded that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal took an
    incorrect approach to parts of the expert evidence and  potential  risk
    factors on return to Kabul such that the outcome of  the  appeal  could
    have been different.

The Grounds

4.   Ground 1 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  give
    good reasons for rejecting the conclusions of Dr Giustozzi, the country
    expert who had produced two reports in  support  of  his  case.  It  is
    argued that the Judge accepted that Dr Giustozzi was a reliable  expert
    and accepted that the Appellant's  account  of  his  father's  military
    involvement with the Taliban followed by his disappearance after having
    been arrested and detained by the Afghan authorities was  credible.  He
    also found it credible that the Appellant at the age of 20 was  obliged
    to fight for the Taliban for a short  period  prior  to  the  Taliban's
    collapse in 2001.  The Judge accepted all of the findings of the expert
    in relation to the likely risk to the Appellant save for those  arising
    out of the Appellant's and his father's Taliban past.

5.   It is argued that the Judge's departure from the expert's  findings  on
    this issue is at odds with the internal logic of the determination  and
    is inadequately reasoned. It is further argued that the Judge seems  to
    have conflated the findings in AK (Afghanistan) (Article 15 (c)) [2012]
    UKUT 163 with the risks arising out of  the  factors  specific  to  the
    Appellant, namely his Taliban past. It is argued that the Judge  failed
    to  separately  address  Dr  Giustozzi's  conclusions   regarding   the
    Appellant and his father's Taliban past. It is further  submitted  that
    the  expert's  conclusions  regarding  the  risk  to   those   formerly
    associated with the Taliban was unequivocal and the  Judge  formed  his
    own conclusions that the Appellant would not be at risk because of  his
    limited personal involvement with the Taliban  and  because  there  was
    insufficient evidence from objective  sources  to  indicate  that  this
    would place the Appellant at sufficient risk of serious harm.  Firstly,
    it is argued that this approach is flawed because the Judge  failed  to
    give weight to the status  of  Dr  Giustozzi's  report  as  independent
    evidence. Secondly it is argued  that  it  is  unclear  what  objective
    evidence the Judge was referring to as the objective evidence from  the
    Appellant supported his claim. Thirdly it is argued that the conclusion
    ignored the fact that Dr Giustozzi's report was based on  an  abundance
    of objective evidence and fourthly that  the  Judge  appeared  to  have
    formed his own view in respect of the country evidence.

6.   Ground 2 asserts that the Judge failed to  give  due  consideration  to
    the risk factors when considering whether he could safely relocate.  It
    is asserted that the Judge only considered generic factors and did  not
    conduct a careful and fact specific analysis taking  into  account  the
    factors advanced by the Appellant.

The Hearing

7.   The appeal therefore  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
    determine whether there was an error of law in the  decision  of  Judge
    Talbot and if so whether to set that decision aside.

8.   I heard submissions from both representatives. Ms Patyna  amplified  on
    her grounds. She submitted that the Judge accepted the expert  evidence
    up to the point of the Taliban association and the Judge did not  raise
    an issue with his analysis or expertise  and  the  departure  from  the
    expert's findings did not make sense in the light of the findings.  The
    risk was a specific one, however, and  by  including  country  guidance
    case law in his reasoning he conflated two issues and did not  analysis
    the risk arising out of the Taliban connection. In short, the treatment
    of the expert evidence was flawed and inconsistent with the rest of the
    determination and was also  flawed  because  the  Judge  made  his  own
    assumption about the country conditions which were not in issue.

9.   If Ground 1 was made out  the  substantive  appeal  could  be  allowed.
    Internal relocation did not arise. There was risk from the authorities.
    With regard to Ground 2 the Judge had not made findings in relation  to
    all risk factors.

10.  Mr Howells submitted that it was open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    disagree with the conclusions of the expert on some issues but  not  on
    others. At paragraph 27 of determination he found that the  Appellant's
    personal involvement was limited, it  occurred  a  long  time  ago  and
    forced  recruitment  was  widespread.  With  regard  to  his   father's
    involvement, very large numbers of men fought for the Taliban.  He  was
    entitled to find that despite the involvement of the Appellant and  his
    father in the Taliban the Appellant was not at risk  as  a  result.  Mr
    Howells accepted that the reference to AK was unhelpful because article
    15 (c) was a separate issue. In response to Ground 2 that the Judge did
    not consider whether there were  significant  obstacles  to  relocation
    namely  safety  and  reasonableness.  The  Judge  was  aware  that  the
    Appellant claimed to have no close family because he referred  to  that
    claim at paragraph 11 of his determination. The Judge was aware that he
    would be returning without family support.

11.  In response Ms Patyna submitted that the expert was well aware  of  the
    Appellant's chronology. It was in the context of  the  history  of  the
    Appellant that the expert assessed risk.

12.  I reserved my  decision.  Both  representatives  agreed  that  I  could
    remake the decision on the basis of the facts as found  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Discussion

13.  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the risk to  the
    Appellant on return are at [19] to [28] of the  decision.  At  [22]  he
    accepted that Dr Giustozzi was an expert and that on the basis  of  his
    two reports dated 10 May 2014 and 22 June 2017  he  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's account of  his  father's  military  involvement  with  the
    former communist regime and subsequent military  involvement  with  the
    Taliban followed by his disappearance after having  been  arrested  and
    detained by the Afghan authorities were true.

14.  The Judge then turned to the issue of risk on return. He  accepted  the
    expert's conclusion that the Appellant would not be at  risk  from  the
    authorities because of his  membership  of  Hizb-e-Islami  anymore.  He
    recorded at [25] the expert's conclusion that the family's links to the
    Taliban remained a source of risk to him from the authorities. He dealt
    with the specific risk to the Appellant because of his  perceived  link
    with the Taliban at [27]:

     "I note that  his  personal  involvement  with  the  Taliban  was  very
    limited, namely his forced recruitment to their fighting  force  for  a
    very short period some 16 years ago at a time when  forced  recruitment
    of young men was widespread to try and avoid the Taliban's collapse. As
    for  his  father's  involvement  with  the  Taliban,  there  is   again
    insufficient evidence from objective  sources  to  indicate  that  this
    would place the Appellant at sufficient risk of serious  harm,  bearing
    in mind the very large numbers of people in Afghanistan  who  supported
    or fought for the Taliban in the past (many of them under  duress),  as
    to entitle him to international protection under either Convention."

15.  Dr Giustozzi produced two reports in support of the Appellant's  claim.
    The first is dated 10 May 2014 and is in the Respondent's  bundle.  The
    key findings in relation to the risk as a result of the Appellant's and
    his father's past association with the Taliban and are at [15] to  [18]
    and [37]

    "15. The risk to (the Appellant) did not end in 2002, with the original
    wave of revenge taking petering out. The worsening  security  situation
    from 2006 onwards has created the conditions  for  the  authorities  to
    detain large numbers of people on  the  ground  of  modest  or  lacking
    evidence. Given the unsophisticated techniques  still  used  by  Afghan
    security services, one of the most common ways of obtaining information
    is to imprison people who are suspected of holding  useful  information
    and subject them to  psychological  and  physical  pressure,  including
    torture. For this reason they tend to arrest large numbers of people in
    order to interrogate them. The Afghan security  organisations  continue
    rounding up suspected insurgents in the thousands; the Afghan  Ministry
    of the interior alone claim to have arrested 5596  in  January-December
    2010, compared to 2956 in March 2009-March 2010  (the  Afghan  calendar
    year).  6700  insurgents  were  arrested  in  March  2012-March   2013.
    According to the ICRC, the number of detainees is rising very fast.  By
    September 2007 it stood at 12,000, up from 5000 a year  earlier,  reach
    16,000 in November 2009 and about 20,000 at the end  of  2011.  Such  a
    vertical rise must clearly  be  associated  with  the  insurgency.  The
    majority of the  individuals  arrested  are  detained  without  serious
    evidence, simply because they are found near the place of an  insurgent
    attack or because they  are  related  to  known  insurgents.  There  is
    therefore a serious  chance  of  mistreatment  and  physical  harm  for
    anybody  arrested  under  the  accusation  of  being  linked   to   the
    insurgency. Typically,  in  Afghanistan  political  recruitment  occurs
    along family lines. Young men and  boys  are  supposed  to  follow  the
    decisions of the fathers/family heads with regard  to  their  political
    involvement. While deviation does occur, unless a different attitude is
    demonstrated the assumption will be that the son follows  the  path  of
    the father. Often whole communities  can  be  involved  with  a  single
    political organisation. The involvement of the most senior male in  the
    family with the Taliban, as well as his own, contributes to  turn  (the
    Appellant) in a typical  suspect  for  the  authorities,  even  in  the
    absence of circumstantial evidence."

16.  At paragraph 16 of his report Dr Giustozzi concludes that on  returning
    to Afghanistan, the Appellant will be  questioned  about  his  personal
    background on arrival in Kabul airport. He  might  also  be  questioned
    later by the police if stopped at a check post or during a  search.  He
    states that arrests were often being carried out on the  basis  of  the
    slimmest evidence. He states that the Appellant would therefore  be  at
    risk of arbitrary arrest even in the absence of  any  evidence  against
    him personally. The delay in the police seeking him after the arrest of
    his father could be explained by the police receiving  a  report  about
    his presence in the area by a local informer. At paragraph 17 he states
    that the Appellant's presence in Afghanistan will not stay  secret  for
    long, particularly since he will have to seek a job and  accommodation.
    He states that from the perspective of risk  deriving  from  the  state
    authorities, relocation outside Kabul would make little difference  for
    the Appellant unless he took refuge in Taliban held  territory  in  the
    mountains. The police would still consider him a potential insurgent in
    locations other than Kabul.

17.  In Dr Giustozzi's second report dated 22 June 2017 at pages  45  to  66
    of the Appellant's appeal bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    expert revisits the issue of risk to  the  Appellant.  At  page  64  in
    summary at paragraph 13 he states:

    "However, the family's link to the Taliban remain a source of  risk  to
    him from the authorities. As explained in  my  previous  report  it  is
    common practice to detain relatives of members of  the  insurgency,  in
    the assumption that there is a high likelihood of them  being  involved
    with the insurgency too. The entire judicial system relies on  suspects
    confessing  their  crimes,  because  of  the  lack   of   investigative
    capabilities. The threat from non-state armed groups would  persist  in
    his home area of Kapisa."

18.  The First-tier Tribunal accepted on the basis of  the  expert's  report
    that the Appellant had given a credible  account  in  relation  to  his
    father and his own involvement with the Taliban. Dr  Giustozzi  gave  a
    fully reasoned conclusion, citing  objective  sources,  as  to  why  he
    concluded the Appellant would be at risk on the basis  of  the  factual
    matrix of his claim which was  accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Further, in the refusal letter, the Respondent raised no  challenge  to
    the sustainability of the expert's findings but  did  not  accept  them
    because the expert's position on risk depended on  the  credibility  of
    the Appellant's account. The Judge therefore departed from the expert's
    conclusions in relation to the risk to the Appellant not on  the  basis
    of the Appellant's credibility but on the basis of objective  risk.  He
    effectively replaced the expert's conclusions with regard to  objective
    risk with his own. As asserted by Miss Patyna in her skeleton argument,
    it is well established, that while a judge is not bound to  accept  the
    conclusions of an independent expert, the tribunal "must have, and must
    give, exceptional reasons for rejecting such evidence" (Y  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362.

19.  The reasons  given  by  the  Judge  for  departing  from  the  expert's
    conclusions in relation to objective risk were, as recorded above, that
    the Appellant's personal involvement with the Taliban was very limited,
    his forced recruitment was for a very short time, 16 years  ago,  at  a
    period when such recruitment was widespread and there was  insufficient
    evidence  from  objective  sources  to  indicate  that   his   father's
    involvement with the Taliban would  place  the  Appellant  at  risk  of
    serious harm. I agree with the Appellant's argument that  there  is  no
    independent foundation for the assumption that because many people have
    fought for the Taliban in the past,  the  past  association  would  not
    constitute a risk category. I find that the Judge failed  to  give  due
    weight to the status of Dr Giustozzi's report as  independent  evidence
    and the fact that the expert had provided clear reasons, based  on  his
    analysis of the Afghan  socio-political  context,  explaining  why  the
    Appellant's profile would place him at risk in a report which was fully
    sourced and based on the expert's own expertise. The Judge also  failed
    to adequately explain why he  concluded  that  the  objective  evidence
    which he refers to without giving any details in [27] of  the  decision
    would allow him to depart from the conclusions of the expert.

20.  In the circumstances I find there was a material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that it must be set  aside.  I
    preserve the findings of fact made by the Judge at paragraphs 22 to 24.
    The parties agreed that in the circumstances I can remake the  decision
    on the basis of the findings of fact made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    without needing to hear any further evidence.

The Re-making of the decision

21.  The Appellant submits that in remaking the decision I should accept  Dr
    Giustozzi's conclusions as to the risk arising to the Appellant out  of
    his perceived association with the Taliban and make  the  finding  that
    because the risk of ill-treatment would arise at the hands of the state
    authorities, internal relocation would not be a viable option.  In  the
    circumstances, I am asked to allow the substantive appeal on asylum and
    human rights grounds. It is further submitted that the  Upper  Tribunal
    in AS (Safety of  Kabul)  CG  [2018]  UKUT  118,  which  postdates  the
    decision, did not make specific findings of all possible  risk  factors
    to  individuals  in  Afghanistan  and  did  not  deal   with   possible
    persecution by state agents.

22.  I have set out the conclusions of Dr Giustozzi as to the  risk  to  the
    Appellant as a result of his and his father's former  involvement  with
    the Taliban. It is clear from those findings that the expert  concluded
    that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  treatment  amounting  to
    persecution on return to Afghanistan. The  Respondent's  objections  to
    the expert's report as set out in the refusal letter of 8 May 2017  did
    not take issue with the expert's conclusions with regard  to  objective
    risk were the  Appellant's  case  found  to  be  credible,  but  rather
    rejected  the  report  on  the  basis  that  it  did  not  address  the
    fundamental adverse credibility factors. The Respondent has not pointed
    to any objective evidence that would undermine the expert's conclusions
    that it is common practice  to  detain  relatives  of  members  of  the
    insurgency, in the assumption that there is a high likelihood  of  them
    being involved in the insurgency too or in relation to the treatment of
    such individuals by the police. The expert concluded that the Appellant
    would be questioned on his background on return at  Kabul  airport,  at
    risk of arbitrary arrest even in the absence of  evidence  against  him
    personally and would not be able to remain in Afghanistan long  without
    being detected. The risk which is identified  derives  from  the  state
    authorities and at  [18]  of  the  2014  report  the  expert  concludes
    relocation outside Kabul would make little difference for the Appellant
    unless he took refuge in the mountains. It is clear therefore that  the
    expert found  that  the  risk  emanated  from  state  agents  and  that
    relocation was not a viable alternative.

23.  I have not been directed to any objective evidence  which  would  allow
    me to depart  from  the  conclusions  of  the  expert  in  relation  to
    objective risk to the Appellant on the basis of the facts as  found  by
    the First-tier Tribunal. In the circumstances I find that the Appellant
    has demonstrated to the lower standard of proof that  he  would  be  at
    risk  of  persecution  on  return  and  I  also  accept  the   expert's
    conclusions that relocation would not be a viable option given that the
    risk emanates from state agents. In AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  did  not  deal  with  the
    question of persecution by state agents and  the  conclusions  in  that
    case do not impact on the expert's findings.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on  asylum  grounds  and
under Article 3 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 26 September 2018
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murry
