
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05630/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 January 2019                           |On 15 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     OD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. E. Moll, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chana,  promulgated  on  25  June  2018,  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The grounds take issue with the judge's credibility findings.   It
         is argued that she wrongly proceeded on the basis that the HDP  was
         an illegal party, that she failed to make findings on  whether  she
         accepted that the appellant  was  arrested  and  detained  on  five
         occasions and that she reached conclusions which were contradictory
         to the country evidence and country guidance."

 4. The  Appellant  attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  brief  submissions,
    following which I stated that the decision involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  I set the decision aside.

Error of Law


 5. The Judge failed to refer to any of the background evidence provided by
    the Appellant regarding the current situation in Turkey, and  has  made
    her credibility findings without taking this evidence into account.


 6. At [24] the Judge refers to caselaw from 2004.  She states:

         "The appellant claims that he was released by  the  authorities  on
         all five occasions after his arrests.  On four  occasions  the  was
         [sic] released after one day and on the fifth occasion he was  kept
         for three days and released.  Therefore, the appellant was released
         on all five occasions.  In the case of Fatih Andic [2004] EWCA  Civ
         557 (Court of Appeal) and IAS 4 June 2004 the Court of Appeal  said
         that it was no flaw of reasoning to conclude from the fact that the
         applicant had been released without  charge  after  each  detention
         that the Turkish authorities had no further interest in him."

 7. The only other reference to background evidence is found at [30]  where
    the Judge states:

         "I consider the background evidence on Turkey  as  to  whether  the
         appellant's membership of the HDP will bring  him  to  the  adverse
         attention of the authorities in Turkey.  Background information  on
         Turkey states that the HDP is an illegal political party which  was
         formed in 2013."

    She then proceeds to outline in general terms some background evidence,
    but without specific reference.

 8. At [36] there is reference to the case of IK (Returnees - Records  IFA)
    Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312, and  the  assessment  that  needs  to  be
    conducted.  This case is dated 2004, and  is  therefore  over  fourteen
    years old.


 9. There is no reference in the decision to the fact that  in  July  2016,
    some 12 years after the cases on which the Judge relies,  there  was  a
    coup in Turkey.  There is  no  reference  to  the  background  evidence
    provided by the Appellant relating to the current situation in  Turkey.
    The  Appellant  provided  background  evidence  from  the  UNHCR,   the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty
    International (pages 13 to 66 of the Appellant's bundle), but there  is
    no reference to this evidence in the decision.

10. At the hearing before me I was referred to just two paragraphs of  this
    evidence which indicate that the situation has  changed  significantly.
    The report from the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  refers  at
    [2.2] to thousands of HDP militants and supporters being in custody  or
    incarcerated (page 15).  The report from the UNHCR on the situation  in
    south east Turkey refers to what has happened in the wake of  the  July
    2016 coup, and the number of people  who  were  arrested  and  detained
    (page 54).

11. Even if  the  Judge  was  not  referred  to  each  and  every  specific
    paragraph, there is no reference at all to the fact that  a  coup  took
    place  in  2016,  and  the  subsequent  treatment  of  HDP  supporters.
    Further, from what is said by the Judge at [30], it is clear  that  she
    has not properly considered the background evidence.  She  states  that
    the background information states that the HDP is an illegal  political
    party.  However, the HDP is a legal political party and was accepted as
    such by the Respondent.

12. The Judge's consideration of the Appellant's account of being  arrested
    and detained on five occasions is carried out with  reference  only  to
    the 2004 caselaw, rather than against the backdrop of the  evidence  of
    the current situation.  The Appellant's evidence is that two  of  these
    arrests and detentions took place after the 2016 coup, but there is  no
    reference to the changed situation in Turkey following the coup.

13. I find that the failure to consider the background  evidence  regarding
    the current situation in Turkey, the reliance on case  law  from  2004,
    and the mistake of  fact  regarding  the  legality  of  the  HDP,  have
    affected the Judge's credibility findings and amount to material errors
    of law.  I find that the credibility findings are flawed given that the
    Judge  considered  the  Appellant's  account  without  considering  the
    current situation in Turkey.  Her finding that the  Appellant  was  not
    credible or truthful, which is the only finding from which  it  can  be
    inferred that she did not accept his  account  of  being  arrested  and
    detained, cannot stand.

14. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
    law.  I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10  February
    2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error  has  been  to
    deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or
    other opportunity for the party's case to be put to and  considered  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.   The  credibility  findings  are  flawed  and
    therefore, given the nature and extent of the fact-finding necessary to
    enable this appeal to  be  remade,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

15. The appeal involves the making of a material error of law and I set the
    decision aside.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

17. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Chana.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


