
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA054842016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24th April 2017                    |On 17th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                      a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This  is  an  appeal,  following  permission  granted  upon  a  renewed
    application, from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page
    sitting at  Newport.  That  decision,  which  was  promulgated  on  9th
    November 2016, was to dismiss the Appellant's protection claim.

 2. The Appellant had previously made a protection claim based  essentially
    upon the same claimed facts.   That  too  had  been  refused.  On  that
    occasion she had appealed to Immigration Judge Goodrich  (as  she  then
    was) sitting at Taylor House. That appeal was dismissed in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5th January 2010.

 3. As I mentioned earlier,  the  essential  features  of  the  Appellant's
    protection claim had not changed between the time when it  came  before
    Judge Goodrich in 2010 and when it came before Judge Page in 2016.  The
    reason the Secretary of State was ultimately prepared to entertain  the
    appellant's second claim was because she had adduced fresh evidence  in
    support of it.  This had followed an application for judicial review in
    which she had challenged the Secretary of State's  earlier  refusal  to
    treat it as a 'fresh claim'.

 4. The essence of the appellant's protection  claim  can  conveniently  be
    summarised as follows.

 5. The Appellant's husband in Georgia was one of the  personal  bodyguards
    of the then Prime Minister of that country.  The  Prime  Minister  died
    suddenly in 2005. The official explanation for his death had been  that
    he died from accidental carbon  monoxide  poisoning.   The  reason  the
    Appellant claimed that she had been subjected to hostile interest  from
    the Georgian authorities was because her husband had told her that  the
    official version of the Prime Minister's death  was  untrue.   He  said
    that he had witnessed the Prime Minister's death and  that  he  had  in
    fact been murdered. The authorities were very anxious to cover  up  the
    true circumstances of the Prime Minister's  death,  so  they  initially
    concentrated on silencing  the  appellant's  husband.  In  due  course,
    however, their attention turned to  the  appellant  and  she  was  duly
    detained by the police. Initially,  she  was  simply  questioned  in  a
    reasonably appropriate manner. However, she was subsequently  detained,
    tortured, and raped. She then discovered that she  was  suffering  from
    breast cancer for which she attempted to  seek  treatment  in  Georgia.
    The authorities,  however,  ensured  that  she  did  not  receive  that
    treatment in an effort to prevent her from disclosing information  that
    would embarrass them concerning the death of the late  Prime  Minister.
    It was in these circumstances that she accepts using a  false  passport
    to enter Greece before making her way to the United Kingdom.

 6. The claim was rejected by the Secretary  of  State  on  both  occasions
    because her above account was not considered  credible.   Both  appeals
    therefore turned primarily upon her credibility as a witness of  truth.
    On both occasions, her claim was supported by medical evidence. On  the
    first occasion, this was in the form of an expert report  by  Professor
    Katana. The appeal before Judge Page was also supported  by  a  medical
    report from the Helen Bamber Foundation.

 7. In 2010, Judge Goodrich highlighted a number of what she considered  to
    be significant discrepancies in the account the appellant had given  of
    the events  that  I  have  summarised  at  paragraph  5  (above).   She
    concluded that those discrepancies were not satisfactorily explained by
    the medical evidence that was before her.  The  appellant  was  refused
    permission to appeal against that decision  and  so  it  was  that  she
    brought a fresh claim. This time she was armed with a report  from  the
    Helen Bamber Foundation, dated 16th October  2013.   The  Secretary  of
    State refused the fresh claim by placing substantial reliance upon  the
    findings of Judge Goodrich.  On appeal from  that  decision,  everybody
    sensibly agreed that the starting  point  was  the  decision  of  Judge
    Goodrich and that the question for Judge Page was  whether  the  report
    from the Helen Bamber Foundation merited a departure from the  findings
    of Judge Goodrich.  Judge Page concluded that it did not.

 8. The grounds granting permission to appeal against Judge Page's decision
    come to this.  The appellant had  attended  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Goodrich and had  given  extensive  evidence.  Indeed,  many  of  Judge
    Goodrich's adverse credibility findings were based  upon  replies  that
    she had given during the course of giving her oral testimony.  However,
    the appellant did not attend and thus did not give  evidence  when  the
    matter came before Judge Page. The first  ground  essentially  concerns
    what Judge Page made of her absence  from  that  hearing.   The  second
    ground can broadly be described thus.  Although Judge Page acknowledged
    that his attention had been drawn to various passages within the  Helen
    Bamber Foundation report he nevertheless  failed  to  engage  with  it,
    observing simply that, "[h]aving considered them, I do not believe that
    they justify a departure from the findings of Judge Goodrich."  I  will
    deal with the grounds in turn.

 9. Judge Page faithfully recorded, at paragraph 9  of  his  decision,  the
    reason that her representative had given for  the  appellant's  absence
    from the hearing:

         "The appellant did not attend the hearing.  Mr Dieu [who  was  then
         appearing for the appellant] informed me that she had informed  her
         solicitors that she "did not feel able to go through the process of
         an appeal as she did in January 2010 before  Judge  Goodrich".   Mr
         Dieu said that he was not asking for an adjournment and the  appeal
         should proceed by way of submissions only."

    That was undoubtedly an accurate statement of the reason that had  been
    given for the appellant's absence. However, at paragraph 12, Judge Page
    characterised it in the following way:

         "I  was  being  asked  to  make  these  findings  [a  reference  to
         overturning the findings of Judge Goodrich] in circumstances  where
         the Appellant had chosen not to attend the hearing  because,  as  I
         understand it, she could not be bothered to attend the hearing  and
         go through it all again."

    Ms Isherwood suggested that this was a  mere  infelicity  of  language.
    However, in my judgement it amounted to a  total  misrepresentation  of
    what the judge had been told.  I find it impossible to reconcile  being
    told that the appellant did not feel up to going  through  the  process
    again with being told that she  "could  not  be  bothered"  to  do  so.
    Moreover (and to this extent the first ground overlaps with the second)
    the judge appears to have overlooked the very  clear  medical  evidence
    contained within paragraph 242 of the Helen Bamber  Foundation  report,
    which states unequivocally that the appellant is, "... currently  unfit
    to give evidence." The finding that the appellant could not be bothered
    to attend the hearing was thus also contrary to the evidence. Moreover,
    the judge's observation concerning the  appellant's  absence  from  the
    hearing can reasonably be interpreted as having directly  affected  his
    view of her credibility. His decision must therefore be  set  aside  on
    this ground alone.

10. There is also considerable merit in the second  ground.   Ms  Isherwood
    drew my attention to those parts of the decision where the judge  dwelt
    at some length upon the contents of the Helen Bamber Foundation report,
    particularly at paragraph 25, and to his statement that  he  had  fully
    taken that report into account in arriving at his conclusions. However,
    there is one particular aspect of that report to which I  am  satisfied
    he cannot have had regard and which was moreover directly  relevant  to
    the reasons that Judge Goodrich had given for her earlier decision.

11. Paragraph 80 of Judge Goodrich's decision reads as follows:

         "The Appellant claims that she was rendered deaf in one ear due  to
         the violence she suffered.  Common sense tells me that this will be
         a relatively  unusual  injury  to  sustain.  There  is  no  medical
         evidence to support the Appellant's case that  blows  to  the  head
         caused her deafness."

    What had concerned Judge Goodrich, therefore, was the  absence  of  any
    medical evidence to support the claimed  mechanism  of  injury  to  the
    appellant's ear.  However, by the time  the  matter  came  for  hearing
    before Judge Page, this matter had been directly addressed at paragraph
    165 of the Helen Bamber Foundation report:

         "The right eardrum has  a  perforation  (a  hole  in  the  eardrum,
         diagram 2).  This  is  highly  consistent  with  [the  appellant's]
         account of a blow to the right ear.  It is recognised that blows to
         the ear may rupture the eardrum due to their pressure  (the  author
         at this points cites medical authority for  this  analysis).   [The
         appellant's] description of her  symptoms  following  the  blow  is
         clinically plausible, since perforation of the ear drum  can  cause
         bleeding from the ear.  It also makes the ear prone to  infections,
         leading to symptoms such as intermittent discharge from the ear, as
         [the appellant] described."

    It was not therefore the  case,  as  Judge  Page  suggested,  that  the
    entirety of the Helen Bamber Foundation report was simply "more of  the
    same" [paragraph 30] or that it was based solely upon an acceptance  of
    the  appellant's  account  of  events  without   independent   clinical
    assessment [paragraph 32].

12.   In my judgment, the above errors of law are so  fundamental  that  the
    entirety of the decision must be set aside with no findings  preserved.
    For the avoidance of doubt, I make it clear that the findings of  Judge
    Goodrich will continue to stand subject only to them being reviewed  in
    the light of the fresh evidence from the Helen  Bamber  Foundation  and
    any other evidence upon which the appellant may choose to rely  at  the
    further oral hearing that must now take place. Given the extensive fact-
    finding that will be required at that hearing, the  appropriate  course
    is to remit this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  complete  re-
    hearing at Newport before any judge save Judge Page.

Notice of Decision

  13. The appeal is allowed and the decision of Judge Page is set aside.

14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at  Newport,
    to be heard by any judge save Judge Page.

15. Any further directions concerning the conduct of the re-hearing are  to
    be made by the Resident Judge at Newport.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 12th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
