
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05033/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2016                             |On 6 October 2016             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Dieu instructed by Duncan Lewis, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (HM).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  ("DRC")
    who was born on November 1989.  On 4 September 2015, the  Secretary  of
    State made a decision to  deport  the  appellant  under  the  automatic
    deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.   This  followed  on
    from his conviction on 5 January 2015 of an offence  of  possession  of
    class B drugs with intent to supply to which  he  was  sentenced  to  a
    period of twelve months' imprisonment.

 4. On 26 November 2015, the appellant made a claim for asylum.  The  basis
    for that claim was that he feared persecution on return to the DRC as a
    gay man and that he feared persecution by the DRC authorities.

 5. On 3 May 2016, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for
    asylum, for humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The appellant appealed the refusal of his protection and  human  rights
    claims to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge
    Trevaskis on 13 July 2016.  In a decision promulgated on 25 July  2016,
    Judge Trevaskis allowed the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds  and
    under Art 8.  As regards the former, Judge Trevaskis accepted that  the
    appellant was a  gay  man  and  that  he  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution if returned to the  DRC.   As  regards  the  latter,  Judge
    Trevaskis found that the appellant fell within para  399A  (based  upon
    his  private  life  in  the  UK)  and  that  his  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his private life.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  Judge  Trevaskis'
    decision.  First, the  Secretary  of  State  argued  that  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal on asylum grounds was legally flawed.  The
    grounds challenge the judge's positive credibility finding and also his
    finding that as a gay man the appellant would be at risk on  return  to
    the DRC.  Secondly, the Secretary of State argued that  the  judge  had
    wrongly applied para 399A to the appellant, in  particular  in  finding
    that he had been "lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of  his  life"
    when, although he had been resident in the UK for most of his life,  it
    had not been lawful residence as he had  not  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain until 8 April 2005.

 8. On 17 August 2016, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Easterman)  granted
    the Secretary of State's  permission  to  appeal  only  on  the  ground
    challenging the judge's decision to  allow  the  appeal  under  Art  8.
    Judge  Easterman  refused  permission  in  respect   of   the   grounds
    challenging the asylum decision on the basis that they did not disclose
    any arguable error of law.

 9. The Secretary of State did not renew her application for permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the grounds upon which  permission  had
    been refused by Judge Easterman.  On 19 September 2016,  the  appellant
    filed a rule 24 response seeking to uphold Judge Trevaskis' decision.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

11. At the hearing, Mr Richards who represented  the  Secretary  of  State,
    acknowledged that permission had not  been  granted  to  challenge  the
    judge's decision to allow the appeal on asylum  grounds.   Mr  Richards
    accepted that the judge's  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds stood.  He indicated that he did not wish to pursue the  appeal
    except to the extent of inviting me to find that the judge had  clearly
    erred in law in applying para 399A and in allowing the appeal under Art
    8.

12.  Mr  Dieu,  who  represented  the  appellant,  acknowledged  that   the
    appellant's claim  under  Art  8  was  somewhat  redundant  as  he  had
    succeeded on asylum grounds.  He  accepted  that  Judge  Trevaskis  had
    erred in law in his approach to para 399A and, therefore,  in  allowing
    the appeal under Art 8 and that that aspect of his decision  could  not
    stand.  Mr Dieu indicated that, in the light of the appellant's success
    on asylum grounds, he no longer wished to pursue the appeal in  respect
    of Art 8 and was content that the First-tier Tribunal's decision should
    be upheld to the extent that  it  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.

13. In my judgment, both  representatives  correctly  accepted  that  Judge
    Trevaskis had misapplied para 399A as the appellant could not establish
    that he had been "lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of
    his life".  He had first entered the United Kingdom in 1992 when he was
    3 years of age.  At the date of the hearing before Judge Trevaskis, the
    appellant was 26 years of age.  He had, therefore, lived in the UK  for
    23 years.  However, it was not until 8 April 2015  that  the  appellant
    had any lawful basis for remaining  in  the  UK  when  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  As a consequence, it cannot be  said  that
    he has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his  life.   Judge
    Trevaskis  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the  appellant  met   the
    requirements of para 399A  and,  as  a  consequence,  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

14. That decision cannot, therefore, stand and is set aside.

15. However, as I have already indicated, Mr Dieu did not  seek  to  pursue
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8.  He was content that the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to allow the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds
    stood.

Decision

16. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

17. However, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds stands.

                                 Signed

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 6 October 2016
