
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/05871/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 December 2019                       |On 2 January 2020                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     oq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Frame, Jones Whyte Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. This is an appeal by a national of Afghanistan against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Buckwell,  who  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  6  June  2019,
    refusing the appellant's protection claim, which had  been  made  on  2
    December 2015.  The appellant had sought protection  based  on  adverse
    interest in him by the Taliban and apprehensions over his safety should
    he be returned to Kabul, where he previously lived.





 2. The appellant's  account  is  that  his  flight  from  Afghanistan  was
    triggered by the discovery, whilst working as  a  garage  mechanic,  of
    bomb materials in a car.  He   later observed from watching  television
    the next day that the car was used in a suicide  bombing  attack.   The
    appellant claims that he alerted his employer to his  discovery  whilst
    working on the car.  He also believed that his employer  was  complicit
    by virtue of his dealings with the Taliban.  The Taliban kidnapped  the
    appellant and detained him in order to discover whether he  had  passed
    on what he had learned.  The appellant was  able  to  escape  and  left
    Kabul and Afghanistan between December 2014 and  January  2015,  before
    reaching the United Kingdom approximately a year later, on  2  December
    2015.


 3. In the usual way, the appellant underwent a screening  interview  on  2
    December and interviewed substantively about  his  claim  on  22  March
    2017.  Prior to that he submitted a statement dated  11  February  2016
    which referred to aspects of his journey to the United Kingdom but made
    no mention of the events on which he now bases his asylum claim.


 4. That claim was briefly indicated in the screening interview as follows:-




         "I cannot return as I am scared I would be killed by Taliban  as  I
         found guns and bomb in a car used in  a  suicide  bombing.   I  was
         beaten and kidnapped but managed to escape.  I fled as I  would  be
         killed."




The appellant also revealed at the screening interview that he was a
mechanic.

 5. The appellant explained in his substantive interview that he  was  from
    Balkh Province.  Following completion of his schooling,  he  worked  at
    his father's shop and thereafter  started  working  as  a  mechanic  in
    Kabul.




 6. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's account of kidnap
    by the Taliban for reasons given in a refusal  decision  dated  6  June
    2019.  Nor did Judge Buckwell accept the account.  His reasons are  set
    out in a detailed decision which records the basis of  the  claim,  the
    reasons why it had  been  rejected  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    evidence given at the hearing and submissions leading  to  the  judge's
    findings that cover some four pages.  The judge identified  credibility
    to be "critical" and in the light of the nature of the challenge to the
    findings of fact it is necessary to set out the  relevant  passages  as
    follows:-



         "80. As credibility is so significant in this particular  appeal  I
             carefully consider the Appellant's account.   In  relation  to
             his claim to have worked as  a  mechanic  in  Kabul,  that  is
             entirely  plausible.   It  is  also  plausible  that   certain
             employers may have had sympathies towards the Taliban.  I find
             it far less plausible that the Appellant's employer, from whom
             the Appellant took specific instructions at work,  would  have
             allocated a tyre or wheel replacement task  to  the  Appellant
             when it is of course entirely obvious that a spare  tyre/wheel
             is ordinarily kept in the boot of a car.  The  car  concerned,
             on the account of the  Appellant,  had  in  the  boot  suicide
             jackets, vests, and explosive materials  and  therefore  items
             which would immediately become obvious to any  person  opening
             the boot.  I find it to be inconceivable that the  Appellant's
             employer, stated by the Appellant to be  a  supporter  of  the
             Taliban, would not have been aware of the particular  car  and
             indeed would not have been entirely  conscious  of  the  items
             which were placed within the boot, from where  access  to  the
             spare tyre or wheel would have had to have been gained.






         81.  It is on my finding neither plausible nor  credible  that  the
             Appellant's employer, who appears not to have raised the issue
             of his support for  the  Taliban  with  the  Appellant  at  an
             earlier stage, would  not  have  been  extremely  cautious  of
             enabling the Appellant to see that  there  were  lethal  items
             within the boot of the car concerned.  It is unlikely that the
             employer would that day have been preparing other vehicles for
             use in a suicide bomb for later that day.  The  Appellant  did
             not refer to such a scenario.   It  is  therefore  simply  not
             credible that the Appellant's employer  would  not  personally
             have been paying significant attention to what  was  happening
             to the bomb vehicle and to work being undertaken on it by  any
             third party, including the Appellant.  The employer would have
             known that that very vehicle was to be used later in that day.






         82.  Mr McCallum made the point that the Appellant appeared to have
             given certain differing versions as to what items he had found
             within the car boot.   I  accept  the  views  of  Mr  McCallum
             expressed in  that  respect.   Furthermore  the  Appellant  in
             relation to  other  questions  was  somewhat  evasive  in  his
             replies.  By way of example I refer to  what  is  recorded  at
             paragraph 47, above, in the remarks of Mr McCallum which  were
             apt.






         83.  The Appellant appears not to have attracted any attention from
             his employer even though he opened the boot and had had to  do
             so in order to access the spare tyre/wheel and a  wheel  brace
             to fit the particular car wheel nuts.  It seems  very  strange
             that the Appellant's employer would  not  at  any  stage  have
             realised that the Appellant would come to see the items in the
             boot.  As on the evidence of the Appellant  his  employer  was
             involved with the Taliban it must be that the  employer  would
             have been aware of what items were in the  boot  in  readiness
             for the destructive use of the vehicle.  That in itself  would
             surely have given rise to some attention  by  the  Appellant's
             employer  to  what  the  Appellant  was  doing.   However   no
             reference to that is within the account of the Appellant.   It
             is not plausible that his employer would  not  have  paid  any
             attention to the  actions  of  the  Appellant  whilst  he  was
             accessing the boot.






         84.  The Appellant maintains that he was so shocked and fearful  as
             a consequence of seeing what was in the car boot that he  felt
             obliged to speak to his employer, although he did  not  do  so
             until the  next  day.   On  the  basis  that  the  Appellant's
             employer apparently had not spoken to the Appellant himself on
             the day when the Appellant changed the  wheel  it  is  perhaps
             somewhat incredible that the  Appellant  had  taken  no  other
             action.  He did not inform that authorities and he returned to
             work.  He states now that he became aware only later that  his
             employer was then affiliated to the Taliban.  If that  was  so
             why would  the  Appellant  not  immediately  have  raised  his
             concerns with his employer on discovering what was in the  car
             boot?  However that was not done.






         85.  The Appellant states that he was kidnapped and detained out of
             the locality on his return to his home from work  on  the  day
             following his discovery of the items in the car boot.   It  is
             perhaps surprising that the employer himself had not taken any
             action against the Appellant but had left him to return  home.
             That is particularly so if the employer was as  involved  with
             the Taliban as the Appellant says that he later discovered him
             to be.






         86.  The Appellant states that he was  detained.   It  is  somewhat
             unclear  why  his  detention   occurred.    In   the   country
             circumstances it is clear that individuals  are  detained  and
             murdered almost at will in certain circumstances.   There  was
             nothing to be gained by those who detained the  Appellant  the
             day after he had discovered the items in the car boot.  It  is
             unclear what the Taliban representatives would have  hoped  to
             have gained by detaining the Appellant when,  it  is  assumed,
             they would have taken is life quite easily.






         87.  I find the account of  the  Appellant's  claimed  escape  from
             Taliban custody to be other than  credible.   His  replies  in
             interview failed to disclose whether  the  room  in  which  he
             stated he had been detained had had a locked door or not.   He
             did not fully explain how, with  his  hands  tied  behind  his
             back, he was nevertheless able  to  open  the  door  from  the
             inside (and it possibly being a door which was locked from the
             outside), but the Appellant asserts that he did so,  and  that
             with his hands tied behind his back he ran a long distance  to
             escape from the place where he  had  been  held.   As  he  was
             running he was able to untie the cloth  which  had  bound  his
             hands behind his back.  He then gives an  account  whereby  it
             appears that his location was to a degree at least  discovered
             and therefore he was advised by friend to leave the country."



 7. The judge also expressed concerns over the claim by the appellant as to
    the cost of his journey at paragraph [88] as follows:





         "88. In the statement which the Appellant put forward to  the  Home
             Office it appears that he paid agents a sum of US$1,600.  This
             Tribunal does not profess to have any specialist  evidence  as
             to sums which are paid to traffickers to ensure an  individual
             transfers successfully from Afghanistan to the United Kingdom,
             but based on the experience of this Tribunal the amount stated
             by the Appellant seems to be significantly  low.   Considering
             the journey of the Appellant, during which he indicates he was
             assaulted by an agent at nearly every stage,  at  least  until
             reaching Calais, the sum is low and beyond comparable  figures
             of which this Tribunal has been made  aware  by  other  asylum
             claim appellants in the  past.   That  does  not  add  to  the
             plausibility or credibility of the Appellant's account."




 8. In concluding paragraphs thereafter, the judge expressed his conclusion
    on risk as a  consequence  of  the  negative  credibility  findings  in
    paragraph 91 as follows:-




         "91. For the  reasons  stated  above  it  is  not  found  that  the
             Appellant has a  genuine  and  current  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution for a Geneva Convention reason if he  were  to  be
             returned to Afghanistan.  In that respect I do not accept that
             current guidance establishes that any individual is at risk as
             to the appropriate degree just  by  his  or  her  presence  in
             Afghanistan."





 9. Five grounds of appeal have been relied on, and I take each in turn.  I
    am grateful to Mr Frame and Mr Govan for their detailed submissions and
    engagement with each of these grounds.  The first  four  challenge  the
    correctness of aspects of the judge's credibility findings (but do  not
    assert  irrationality).   The  final  ground  challenges  the   judge's
    approach to the country evidence, in  particular  a  report  by  Global
    Peace Index which had not been considered in  AS  (Afghanistan)  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 873.  This report ranked Afghanistan  as  the  lowest  in  the
    world as to the state of peace.






Ground 1





10. It is contended that the judge erred  in  finding  that  the  appellant
    appeared to have given differing versions as to the items he had  found
    within the car boot.  It is argued the judge ought to have  found  that
    the appellant had been consistent, having amended his asylum  interview
    on the basis  that  an  answer  had  been  misinterpreted  and  he  had
    clarified the  timeframe  within  which  he  had  found  the  explosive
    devices, a position that was maintained in cross-examination.





11. As will be seen from the above extracts, the differing versions  as  to
    the items the appellant had found within the car boot are briefly dealt
    with in paragraph [82], in the context however of  a  number  of  other
    aspects of the account which troubled the judge.


12. I have cited above the relevant extract from the  screening  interview.
    In the substantive interview in response  to  Question  [49]  when  the
    appellant was asked about the incident he explained:-


         "I worked in a garage in Kabul, I was working, my bosses  name  was
         called S, while I was working there I noticed  armed  men  used  to
         come and bring their vehicles for repair.




         After about 8 months or so working in the garage, 1  day  the  boss
         told me that there is a car that we need to fix.  When I jacked the
         back of the car, I noticed there were explosions under the vehicle.






         I was too scared to say  anything  to  the  boss,  and  those  guys
         basically left in the vehicle.  That night when I was watching  the
         news I heard that in Wassim Akbar district of Kabul there had  been
         an explosion.




         I recognised  the  vehicle  on  tv,  I  recognised  the  colour,  I
         mentioned it to my boss the  following  morning,  I  said  did  you
         listen to the news, he said why what have you seen, I explained  to
         him that the vehicle I had looked at yesterday was involved  in  an
         explosion, he said just get  on  with  your  job  there  is  always
         explosions happening in Kabul.




         That day I was no my way home, a vehicle nearly hit me, then 3  men
         got out and put their hand on my mouth, and they kidnapped me.




         I lost consciousness and when I woke up I realised  my  hands  were
         tied and I was blindfolded."


13. After explaining further  details  in  relation  to  the  incident  the
    appellant was asked at Question 58: "Why did you not  say  anything  to
    your boss when you found the explosions on the car".




    To which the appellant relied:




         "As soon as I jacked the car up, I noticed that, he said to me  you
         go to the shops, send me on a message,  he  attended  the  vehicles
         himself."




    In the amendments and addition to  the  interview,  under  the  heading
    Question 49, the appellant explains:




         "Top of page 9, paragraph 1: I did not say "armed men", I said  men
         with turbans and beards.




         Paragraph 2:  I said that when I opened the boot to  get  the  jack
         and tyre brace. I could not find them there, instead  I  saw  there
         were two explosive vests and explosive devices.  I did not say they
         were under the vehicle, this had been misinterpreted."




14. At interview the appellant was asked the date when  he  had  found  the
    explosions under his car and had  responded  that  it  was  a  Tuesday,
    giving a month and year in the Afghan calendar.  In the  additions  and
    amendments, under the heading Question 50, the appellant explains:




         "To clarify, the explosions weren't "under" the car, they  were  in
         the boot.  This is due to the misunderstanding with the interpreter
         in question 49."




15. In respect of the answer given to Question 58, the appellant explains:




         "My answer has been misinterpreted here again.  I was busy at  work
         when the car arrived, my boss told me to change the cars tyres.   I
         opened the boot to take the spare tyre, jack and tyre brace out but
         when I opened it  I  noticed  the  explosive  vests  and  explosive
         materials.  My boss shouted at me (while he was talking to the men)
         to ask why I was in the boot as he wanted me to go to the  shop  to
         get the jack and tyre brace.  Then he fixed the car himself."





16. In his witness statement the appellant states at paragraph 6:






         "About 7 to 8 months into this job, we had  a  car  come  into  the
         shop.  My boss told me to fix it.  The car  was  a  little  further
         away from the shop, parked outside.  I walked over to the car,  and
         I noticed that they had a flat tyre so I proceeded to do the  usual
         work for this.  I opened the boot of the car to get a  jack  and  a
         wheel brace out and when I opened the boot I saw two suicide  vests
         with bombs attached to them, and some  explosives  with  wires.   I
         have seen such things on television many times, and what  I'm  sure
         that what I saw were suicide bomb vests.   I  didn't  say  anything
         about this to my boss at this stage."






17. The judge notes the explanation for referring to guns at the  screening
    interview as that the appellant had been  very  tired  and  was  unsure
    exactly as to what had  happened.   He  speculated  that  he  had  made
    mistakes in that interview.  The judge also  records  the  exchange  in
    cross-examination on the consistency between the accounts.






18. In my judgment it is not arguable that the appellant gave a  consistent
    account of what he discovered on or in the car.  He is recorded to have
    been adamant  that  he  had  spoken  of  two  suicide  jackets  and  of
    explosions at the substantive interview, and when it  was  put  to  him
    that such remarks had not been recorded,  he  ascribed  this  to  there
    having been some interruption to the video-link which had been used.  I
    see no indication of such an interruption in the record  of  interview.
    Furthermore, the appellant is noted to have confirmed he understood the
    interpreter and was content for matters to be  interpreted  from  Dari.
    The amendments to the record of interview are different in substance as
    to where and how the appellant saw the bomb material.  It is not  clear
    why the appellant felt compelled to change his account but  it  is  not
    evident that the need to do so was driven by misinterpretation.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge was entitled to  accept  the  submission  that
    different  versions  had  been  presented  as  part  of   the   overall
    credibility assessment and did not err in doing so.



Ground 2



19. It is argued that  the  judge  erred  by  engaging  in  speculation  by
    reference to the employer having been aware of the items that  were  in
    the boot.  It is contended that no evidence was led as to what  was  in
    the mind of the appellant's employer and that the  judge  had  made  an
    assumption that the employer was aware of the  contents  of  the  boot,
    thereby engaging in speculation.  With reference  to  the  response  to
    Question 58 set out above, Mr Frame accepted that it could be  inferred
    (from the employer's conduct)  that  the  employer  was  aware  of  the
    contents of the car but submitted that no evidence had been led on this
    aspect at the hearing.  With reference to the amendment to Question  58
    (set out above),  he  considered  that  the  amended  answer  could  be
    interpreted as meaning that the employer  was  unaware  and  asked  the
    appellant to go and buy  a  jack.   Although  such  a  scenario  in  my
    judgment would be odd, bearing in mind the nature of the work  and  the
    repair shop, nevertheless, even  if  another  interpretation  could  be
    given, it does not follow that this resulted in error by the judge.  In
    my judgment there was a  proper  evidential  basis  for  the  judge  to
    conclude that the employer would have been aware of the  items  in  the
    boot.






Ground 3



20. It is argued that the judge failed to  take  note  of  the  appellant's
    position as set out  in  his  statement  and  in  cross-examination  in
    observing that  it  was  somewhat  unclear  in  paragraph  86  why  the
    detention had occurred.  It is contended the appellant's  position  was
    clear in that his kidnappers demanded to know whether he had passed  on
    any information as to what he had witnessed.  Mr Frame referred  me  to
    passages in the witness statement which indicated  that  the  appellant
    had been tortured to extract information.  Mr Govan accepted the  judge
    had erred as to why the detention had occurred but contended the  point
    could not be taken in isolation of the other credibility  concerns,  in
    particular with reference to paragraphs 84 and 85 and the  plausibility
    of the appellant being able to leave the premises having seen the  bomb
    material.






21. In paragraph [86] the judge  appears  to  have  been  troubled  by  the
    absence of any precipitate action  by  the  Taliban.   The  appellant's
    account is that he was detained in order to be questioned and I readily
    accept that might well be an explanation for such detention but  having
    regard to the context of this paragraph, it  is  clear  the  judge  was
    concerned as to why the Taliban, which included his employer,  did  not
    promptly deal with the risks that the appellant posed by virtue of  his
    discovery there and  then.   Paragraph  [86]  might  have  been  better
    expressed but I am not persuaded the judge strayed into error.  This is
    particularly so in the light of the factors considered in paragraph  87
    which are not the subject of any challenge.



Ground 4



22. It is argued that the judge had erred by speculating in paragraph  [88]
    as to the plausibility of the sum paid  for  the  appellant's  journey.
    Having stated that he did not have any specialist evidence as  to  sums
    which are  paid  to  traffickers,  the  judge  then  drew  on  his  own
    experience of such matters without explaining the figure-work that  led
    to this conclusion.  It is not evident that the point was  put  to  the
    parties nor was it raised, as acknowledged by Mr Govan in  the  refusal
    letter.  It is an error for a judge to make  a  finding  which  is  not
    evidence based.  Nevertheless, having regard to the care with which the
    judge otherwise approached his factual findings,  I  am  not  persuaded
    that this aspect alone is sufficient to alloy the correctness of  those
    findings which related to the core  of  the  account  rather  than  the
    peripheral matter of the journey.





Ground 5


23. This ground is one on which Mr Frame argued with some  force  that  the
    judge had not provided adequate reasons.  He was  the  advocate  before
    Judge Buckwell but did not have with him his note  of  the  hearing  as
    these had remained with the  solicitors  for  whom  he  had  previously
    worked and who had previously represented the  appellant.   The  Global
    Peace Index 2019 is a lengthy document.  From memory Mr Frame  recalled
    that he did not go into detail in his submissions but  merely  referred
    to the beginning of the report and the overall graph.  He also referred
    the judge to a passage on page 12 setting out the five most  and  least
    peaceful countries by domain.






24. The executive summary explains that  the  Global  Peace  Index  is  the
    world's leading measure of global peacefulness covering  99.7%  of  the
    world's population.  It refers  to  Afghanistan  now  being  the  least
    peaceful country in the world and replacing Syria.



25. The judge referred to the documentation before him in the decision  and
    in particular the four articles from  the  public  domain  relating  to
    country conditions in Afghanistan in the appellant's bundle as well  as
    the CPIN Report and AS (Afghanistan).  At [70] he explained:



         "70. Mr Frame encouraged  me  to  find  that  the  account  of  the
             Appellant overall had been consistent.  The Appellant's burden
             therefore had been discharged.  In  relation  to  Humanitarian
             Protection  Mr  Frame  guided  me  to  the  reports  provided.
             Country circumstances were also relevant although  I  remarked
             that the country guidance case had not  established  that  the
             presence of an individual in itself might put that  person  at
             risk in Afghanistan.  It was agreed that the  decision  in  AS
             (Afghanistan) (above) was subject to appeal."



26. The focus of submissions before me was on the Global Peace  Index.   Mr
    Frame reminded me that it post-dated the decision in AS  (Afghanistan).
    By way of response Mr Govan argued that this was a general document and
    contrasted the position before the Tribunal in AS  (Afghanistan)  which
    looked at a number of sources and areas specifically relating to Kabul.
     In my judgment this  is  an  important  point.   The  Tribunal  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) was charged with considering whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh for relocation to Kabul and was not considering Afghanistan as  a
    whole.  In reviewing that decision on appeal,  Lord  Justice  Underhill
    was concerned with two grounds.  The first related to  the  correctness
    of the statistics relied on by the Upper Tribunal as to the  extent  of
    violence and the second  ground  related  to  the  correctness  of  the
    Tribunal's approach by proceeding on the basis simply  that  conditions
    that the appellant would experience in Kabul would be normal  for  many
    people.  The Upper Tribunal was found to have erred in respect  of  the
    statistics but dismissed the appeal on ground 2.  The case was remitted
    to the Upper Tribunal:


         "... on the basis that it need to reconsider its  conclusions  only
         on the question of the  extent  of  the  risk  to  returned  asylum
         seekers from security incidents of the kind considered at para  190
         - 9 of its Reasons.  Although of course the relevance of that  risk
         is to the overall issue of whether  it  is  reasonable  for  asylum
         seekers to be expected to relocate to Kabul, it is  in  practice  a
         self-contained element within that assessment, and  since  I  would
         hold that there was no error of law in the Tribunal's  approach  to
         the other elements I see no reason why those elements require to be
         reconsidered".  (Per Underhill LJ at [80])


27. AS (Afghanistan) remains a  country  guidance  decision  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal database.  If the consequence of the Court of Appeal  decision
    is that it is no longer to be relied  on  as  Country  Guidance  regard
    needs to  be  had  to  the  country  guidance  in  AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC).  The decision of the Tribunal  in
    AS (Afghanistan) was that AK remained unaffected by its decision and in
    my judgment since the appellant's last place of residence was in Kabul,
    Judge Buckwell was tasked with considering whether the appellant  could
    safely return there, having found that he would not be at specific risk
    from the Taliban based on the negative credibility findings.



28. Practice Direction 12 of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber with regard
    to Country Guidance determination provides:

         "12.2    A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the
                IAT  bearing  the  letters  "CG"  shall  be  treated  as  an
                authoritative  finding  on  the   country   guidance   issue
                identified in the determination,  based  upon  the  evidence
                before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT  that
                determine the appeal.  As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been
                expressly  superseded  or  replaced  by   any   later   "CG"
                determination, or is inconsistent with other authority  that
                is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case  is
                authoritative in any  subsequent  appeal,  so  far  as  that
                appeal:


                 a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and


                 b) depends upon the same or similar evidence."





         ..."






29. The Tribunals in AS (Afghanistan) and in AK undertook  a  survey  of  a
    wide range of evidence with  a  particular  focus  in  each  case,  the
    earlier being relevant to this appellant's case that  he  would  be  at
    risk by virtue of the unrest in Kabul.  I accept  that  Judge  Buckwell
    did not provide detailed reasons why he was  not  persuaded  to  depart
    from Country Guidance in the light of the  Global  Peace  Index.   That
    report however is not sufficiently  specific  or  focussed  to  justify
    departure from Upper Tribunal Country Guidance and in my  judgment  any
    error by Judge Buckwell was not material.






30. Having concluded that none of the grounds is made out, this  appeal  is
    dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date 19 December 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


