
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/05353/2018
                                                PA/05357/2018, PA/05385/2018
                                                PA/05387/2018, PA/06303/2018
                                                               PA/05825/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 8 November 2019                   |On 3 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                           M G P (FIRST appellant)
                         M F P M (SECOND appellant)
                          A V G M (THIRD appellant)
                          W G P (FOURTH appellant)
                          J E P M (FIFTH appellant)
                          M J G M (SIXTH appellant)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms E Rutherford, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These  are  the  appeals  brought  by  the  Appellants  above  who  are
    nationals of Colombia.  They appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Bristow dated 11 December 2018.  The appeal was
    involved, taking place over one and a half days at the Birmingham Civil
    Justice Centre on 4 and  5  December  2018.   The  Appellants  appealed
    against  the  decisions  made  in  relation  to  them  refusing   their
    applications for protection.

2.   The basis of the Appellants' appeals  were  that  they  feared  serious
    harm from the armed military group FARC  in  Colombia.   The  first  to
    fifth Appellants had arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2015 and
    claimed asylum.  The sixth Appellant arrived in  December  2016.   They
    are all related as set  out  at  paragraphs  1  to  8  of  the  judge's
    decision.  The Appellants gave accounts in their protection claims that
    some of them individually, and various members of their extended family
    had been seriously harmed by the  FARC  group.   The  family  had  been
    obliged to  pay  protection  money  to  FARC  which  was  a  method  of
    fundraising for the organisation to fund their military activities.  It
    was accepted by the Respondent that a  number  of  persons  within  the
    Appellants' extended family had been killed.  It  was  not  necessarily
    accepted that this had happened at the hands of FARC.   The  third  and
    fourth Appellants  had  also  themselves  stated  that  they  had  been
    seriously harmed in or around 2013,  suffering  an  attack  which  they
    asserted had taken place as an act  of  retribution  for  them  seeking
    protection against FARC from the relevant authorities in Colombia.   It
    was part of the Appellants' case that another family  member  had  been
    killed by FARC in 2015 which had been the cause of their departure from
    Colombia to travel to the United Kingdom, and that the sixth  Appellant
    had been attacked in 2016 prior to her departure.

3.   In  a  lengthy  and  careful  determination,  the  judge  set  out  his
    findings.  It was noted at  paragraph  20  that  various  matters  were
    agreed as between the parties.  This involved the nature in  which  the
    Appellants were related to one another.  It was noted that one relative
    of the family, G, was recorded as  dying  of  "severe  anaemia  -  lung
    injury - bullet firearm",  and  another  relative,  J,  had  died  from
    "severe anaemia, abdominal vascular injury - gunshot wounds".   It  was
    also accepted that the Victims Support Unit in Colombia had  recognised
    the Appellants' family as victims following an application  by  one  of
    the family members following the death of G.  It was accepted that  the
    third and fourth Appellants had injuries consistent with  their  stated
    injuries, the third Appellant having been shot and the fourth Appellant
    having been injured by a knife.

4.   Matters that remained in dispute between the parties were  set  out  at
    paragraph 21.  These included whether a relative W had originally  been
    recruited into FARC; whether a relative D  had  been  killed  in  2015;
    whether those members of the Appellants' family who were known to  have
    died had been murdered by FARC; and whether  the  third  Appellant  was
    shot, and the  fourth  Appellant  stabbed  after  they  approached  the
    Colombian authorities for protection, and it was to be  determined  who
    had been responsible for the attack upon them.  Further,  even  if  the
    Appellants'  historical  accounts  were  reliable,  it  needed  to   be
    determined whether FARC had now  abandoned  violence  and  whether  the
    Appellants remained at any real risk of serious harm; whether effective
    protection would be  available  to  the  Appellants;  whether  internal
    relocation from Bucaramanga to Bogota was possible  and  would  relieve
    the Appellants of any risk of harm; and  whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the Appellants to relocate from Bucaramanga to Bogota.

5.   The judge made further findings of fact at paragraph  26  onwards.   At
    paragraph 39 the judge made the following findings:

    (i)  The first Appellant had not provided sufficient  detail  to  prove
         that W had been recruited to FARC.  The  judge  was  not  satisfied
         that it had been proven that W was  recruited  to  FARC  (paragraph
         39).

    (ii) G was killed as a result of a gunshot injury (paragraph 41) on  30
         September 1993.

    (iii)    J died on 19  June  1994  as  a  result  of  a  gunshot  wound
    (paragraph 42).

    (iv) A further relative C died on 27 February 2005 (paragraph 43).

    (v)  Another relative GG was killed on 2 December 2006 as a result of a
         gunshot wound (paragraph 44).

    (vi) The third Appellant showed a gunshot wound to his  chest  and  the
         judge found that this injury was caused 'in  the  way  he  asserts'
         (paragraph 46).

    (vii)    The fourth Appellant showed scars typical  of  injury  with  a
         knife and the judge found that the injuries were caused 'in the way
         he asserts' (paragraph 47). It is to  be  noted,  however  that  in
         respect of the third and fourth Appellants Ms Rutherford  was  only
         able to assert that the judge had  accepted  the  manner  in  which
         these injuries were caused; by unknown persons shooting  the  third
         Appellant and injuring the  fourth  Appellant  with  a  knife.   Ms
         Rutherford did not assert that there was any evidence regarding the
         appearance of the assailants in these attacks, or  in  anything  in
         what they may have said, which would identify who they were or what
         motivated  them.   The  third  and  fourth  Appellants  had  merely
         inferred that these attacks, taking place shortly  after  they  had
         sought protection from the police against FARC,  had  been  carried
         out by FARC. There is nothing within paragraph 47 which  represents
         a finding that the attacks upon the  third  and  fourth  appellants
         were by FARC.)

    (viii)   The attacks on the third and fourth Appellants happened at the
         time they asserted in about June 2013 (paragraph 48).

    (ix) The relative D had not been killed in February 2015 and it had not
         been established that he is deceased (paragraphs 49 to 52).

    (x)  The sixth Appellant was not attacked in 2016 (paragraph 53).

    (xi) Dr Robert A Karl and  Professor  Mio  Aguilar,  who  had  prepared
         reports in the appeal, were both experts in relation to the country
         situation in Colombia (paragraphs 56 and 57).

6.   The judge himself summarised his findings thus far at paragraph  59  as
    follows:

         "59. I summarise my findings at this stage of my  analysis  of  the
         evidence as follows:

         (a)  it has not been proved that (W) was recruited by FARC;

         (b)  several members of the Appellants' family have died  violently
             in Colombia over a period of years;

         (c)  the third and fourth  Appellants  have  suffered  violence  in
             Colombia in June 2013;

         (d)  it has not been proved that (D) died in 2015.  On that point I
             note Dr Karl's opinion in paragraph  24  of  his  report  that
             detailed death certificates can  be  difficult  to  obtain  in
             Colombia.  My finding that the Appellants have not proved that
             (D) is dead is not based on the lack  of  information  in  the
             civil  registry  of  death  document,  it  is  based  on   the
             significant inconsistency and the first  Appellant's  evidence
             and the fact that the sixth Appellant did not tell her partner
             about the death; and

         (e)  it has not been proved that the sixth Appellant  was  attacked
             by the FARC or at all".

7.   The judge directed himself that it remained  for  him  to  resolve  the
    issue as to whether the Appellants' deceased relatives were murdered by
    FARC and  whether  the  violence  suffered  by  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants was suffered at the hands of FARC (paragraph 60).   However,
    the judge noted at paragraph 61 to 64 the fact that the first Appellant
    and his immediate  dependent  family  left  Colombia  on  a  number  of
    occasions between  2000  and  (it  is  not  clear)  approximately  2009
    travelling to Spain, and  then  to  Holland  twice,  on  each  occasion
    returning to Colombia.  On the last occasion that the  first  Appellant
    travelled to Holland he did so to pursue an asylum claim  but  did  not
    remain in Holland to await the outcome of that because "they told me  I
    had to wait so I left".  The judge did not find it  credible  that  the
    first Appellant would return to Colombia, expose himself  to  the  risk
    that he asserted and to pass up the chance to obtain asylum in  a  safe
    country.  At paragraph 66  the  judge  also  noted  that  the  asserted
    problems experienced by the family had been occurring over a period  of
    some 27 years before they left in 2015 and the  judge  found  that  the
    delay in  the  family  finally  leaving  Colombia  to  seek  protection
    diminished the credibility of the claim to fear serious harm.

8.   The judge held as follows at paragraph 69:

         "69. I now return to  the  issue  as  to  whether  the  Appellants'
             deceased relatives were murdered by the FARC and  whether  the
             violence suffered by  the  third  and  fourth  Appellants  was
             suffered at the hands of the FARC.  The Appellants must  prove
             to the lower standard that the FARC was responsible.  I do not
             find for the reasons  given  the  Appellants  to  be  credible
             witnesses.  The claim that the FARC were  responsible  depends
             in very large part on the evidence of the Appellants.  I  find
             that I can attach little weight to their  assertion  that  the
             FARC were responsible".

9.   The judge was not satisfied that G had  been  murdered  by  FARC.   The
    judge noted a document from the Public Prosecutors  Office  within  the
    Appellants' bundle which records that the perpetrators were unknown and
    it did not mention  FARC.   A  further  document  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellants, being a letter from the Commission for Justice  and  Peace,
    referred  to  "illegal  organised  groups".   Although  FARC  could  be
    described as an illegal organised group, the judge found that  document
    still did not name them.  The judge was not satisfied that J  had  been
    murdered by FARC.   Although  the  document  from  the  Commission  for
    Justice and Peace relied upon by the Appellants stated that  J's  death
    was attributed to illegal organised groups, the judge placed weight  on
    the fact that this did not mention FARC (paragraph 72).  The judge  did
    not find it proved that C had been murdered by FARC; a  civil  register
    of death did not record any mechanism of  death  (paragraph  73).   The
    judge was not satisfied that  GG  had  been  murdered  by  FARC,  as  a
    criminal  proceedings  record  referred  to  him  being   attacked   by
    unidentified subjects, and FARC was not mentioned.  At paragraph 75 the
    judge found that it was speculation on the part of the third and fourth
    Appellants that they had been attacked by FARC in June 2013  and  there
    was no evidence to suggest that there was  some  sort  of  relationship
    between the police and FARC whereby the fact that they had  sought  the
    protection of the police would become known to FARC.

10.  It is appropriate to set out the whole of paragraph 76:

         "76. Dr Karl's report as a whole is clear that FARC is not the only
             guerrilla or paramilitary  group  operating  in  Colombia.   I
             accept his opinion on that too.  It is clear  that  there  are
             other violent groups and individuals in Colombia who might  be
             instead be responsible  for  the  deaths  in  the  Appellants'
             family and the violence  suffered  by  the  third  and  fourth
             Appellants.  In coming to my decision that  it  has  not  been
             proved that the FARC are responsible. I have borne in mind  Dr
             Karl's opinion that 'the nature of the  threats  and  comments
             made against the members of the family by their attackers also
             suggests a single  collective  actor,  namely  the  FARC,  was
             responsible for the violence against the family'.  It does not
             change my decision.  The other evidence points away  from  the
             conclusion".

11.  The judge held at paragraph 77 that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellants had a well-founded fear of persecution from FARC  by  reason
    of their membership of a particular social group of their family.

12.  At paragraph 80 to 87 the judge considered the potential  for  risk  on
    return to Colombia, stating that he would consider the risk  on  return
    in case he was wrong, and the Appellants had been persecuted  by  FARC.
    The judge referred to the evidence of Dr Karl that in August  2016  the
    Colombian Government and FARC  concluded  five  years  of  negotiations
    intended to end their decades-long hostilities and that a peace  accord
    was signed in November 2016 and FARC completed their demobilisation  as
    an armed group in June 2017.  The judge noted that  these  events  took
    place after the first to fifth Appellants had left Colombia.

13.  The judge noted at paragraph 83 that  the  current  security  situation
    and the resilience of the peace accord was mixed.  The judge  noted  Dr
    Karl's evidence that between one and one and a half thousand of  FARC's
    approximately eight thousand pre-demobilisation fighters  had  declared
    themselves dissidents in the peace  process  and  continued  to  extort
    money.

14.  The judge noted at paragraph 84 that the  objective  evidence  provided
    by the Appellants painted a mixed picture  and  set  out  a  number  of
    quotes within that paragraph from the objective evidence:

         "84. The objective evidence provided by the Appellants particularly
             that at tab B of the  bundle  dated  28  November  2018  again
             paints a mixed picture.  For  example,  the  article  'British
             delegation concerned over the Colombian peace accord and state
             of detainees'  indicates  that  a  UK  delegation  'urged  the
             Colombian authorities to guarantee imprisoned FARC ...  rights
             to a fair hearing' and criticised the  implementation  of  the
             peace  accord  as  'slow  and  still  failing  to  reach  many
             communities in  former  conflict  zones'.   The  same  article
             reported that the Colombian president 'campaigned on a tougher
             stance towards the peace agreement, frequently promising  that
             members of the FARC would not be exempted from punishment  for
             their actions'.

         85.  The Washington Post article 'Colombia's president on a  wobbly
             peace with the FARC' which was in the format of a question and
             answer session with the  president  confirms  the  president's
             view that members of the  FARC  have  gone  back  to  fighting
             though he did not accept the number was 2,700.   He  described
             that they had gone back to 'criminal activities' and confirmed
             that they would be prosecuted.  The president  also  confirmed
             his desire that people  who  have  committed  crimes  will  be
             brought to justice and would not be  granted  amnesty  on  the
             basis that they are political crimes.

         86.  Weighing Dr Karl's and the objective evidence together I  find
             that  the  security  situation  in   Colombia   has   improved
             significantly  since  the  Appellants  left.   The  FARC  have
             completed demobilisation.  Some FARC fighters  are  dissidents
             but the number is not particularly significant  in  a  country
             with a population of around 49,000,000.  The situation is  far
             from perfect but the political will seems to be to fortify the
             peace accord and bring  justice  to  those  who  commit  crime
             whether they are associated with the FARC or  not.   The  fact
             that the Appellants have family  remaining  in  Colombia  also
             indicates that the situation there is  satisfactory.   I  find
             that any risk to the Appellants on return is acceptable.  This
             all of course assumes that the Appellants have previously been
             the victims of extortion and persecution by the  FARC  (and  I
             have not found it proved that they were).  In the  absence  of
             such persecution I find that they would be at even  less  risk
             on return".

15.  The judge also addressed the issue of internal relocation at  paragraph
    88 as follows:

         "88. I also find that internal relocation would be  an  option  for
             the Appellants.  They could  move  away  to  another  area  of
             Colombia.  They have family in Colombia who could assist  with
             this.  They are a family who have been mobile within  Colombia
             and internationally.  They have demonstrated the fortitude and
             personal resources to seek to  relocate  to  the  UK  and  had
             travelled to  the  UK.   With  the  exception  of  the  fourth
             Appellant, all told me that they were in good  health  and  in
             the case of the fourth Appellant he told me that he  had  been
             able to obtain treatment for his condition in Colombia (he had
             some mental health problems).  If the Appellants are  at  risk
             (and I have not found that they area) then they could relocate
             to an area where the peace accord is  functioning  adequately.
             In all the circumstances I do not find that it would be unduly
             harsh  to  expect  the  Appellants  and  their  relations   to
             relocate".

16.  The appeal was dismissed.

17.  The Appellants appeal against the judge's decision in  renewed  grounds
    of appeal dated 20 March 2019.  The grounds argue that the judge  erred
    in law, in summary, as follows:

    (i)  failing to make specific findings in relation to the  evidence  of
         the second, third, fourth and fifth Appellants;

    (ii) in considering the family's delay in leaving Colombia, failing  to
         take into account an explanation given by the Appellants that  they
         were only able to leave after certain visa restrictions imposed  on
         Colombians in the Schengen travel area were eased;

    (iii)    further, that when the first and second appellant were outside
         of the country as  noted  by  the  judge  there  was  a  degree  of
         protection available from harm  from  FARC  because  the  remaining
         family in Colombia continued to pay protection money to them;

    (iv) in rejecting the proposition that some  family  members  had  been
         harmed by FARC, and in relying  on  documentation  in  relation  to
         those incidents referring only to 'illegal organised  groups',  the
         judge approached  the  evidence  irrationally  or  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for finding that the  assailants  were  not  FARC,
         given that they were an illegal organised group;

    (v)  proceeding  unfairly  and  determining  a  matter  of  credibility
         without regard to country  expert  evidence,  having  concluded  at
         paragraph 6 that his view that "this does not  change  my  opinion"
         and that the judge had completed his credibility assessment  before
         properly turning his mind to the relevant evidence (see  Mibanga  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367);

    (vi) in finding that there had been a material change of conditions  in
         Colombia such that any risk of harm had now diminished,  the  judge
         failed to have any or adequate regard for the  country  information
         brought to his attention and had given inadequate reasons  for  his
         findings;

    (vii)    in particular, failing to  have  regard  to  evidence  in  the
         reports of both Dr Karl and Professor Aguilar that  FARC  continued
         to have a presence in Colombia and that  some  of  those  who  were
         members of FARC had joined other organisations such as the ELN  and
         were continuing in criminal activities such as extortion;

    (viii)   in finding that there was sufficient protection  and  internal
         relocation available to the Appellants  the  judge  had  failed  to
         consider properly the views of the experts who had expressed  their
         opinions that sufficiency of  protection  and  internal  relocation
         were not viable options.

18.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson  in  a
    decision dated 22 August 2019 finding that the grounds of  appeal  were
    arguable.

19.  I have heard the submissions from both parties  today.   Ms  Rutherford
    relied upon  her  grounds  of  appeal  and  expanded  upon  them.   She
    helpfully drew my  attention  to  a  number  of  documents  within  the
    Appellants'  bundle  that  emanated  from  the  Colombian   prosecution
    authorities and to various extracts within Dr Karl's  evidence  and  in
    the country information.  Her arguments were essentially  the  same  as
    those set out above.

20.  Mr Mills resisted the appeal arguing that there had been  no  error  of
    law in the judge's decision that it was not established that  FARC  had
    been responsible for the deaths in the family or for the  attacks  upon
    the third and fourth Appellants.  Further and  in  any  event,  it  was
    clear  that  there  had  been  a  significant  improvement  in  country
    conditions in recent years in Colombia and the findings  of  the  judge
    made in the alternative (even assuming that  they  had  had  historical
    problems with FARC) was that the risk of serious  harm  had  diminished
    and in the further alternative that effective protection  and  internal
    relocation were available to the Appellants, and that  the  Appellants'
    attack upon those findings was simply not made out.

    Discussion

21.   Sympathy  must  be  extended  to  the  Appellants  who  have   clearly
    experienced a number of traumatic incidents, including  the  deaths  of
    various family members.  However, I find that the grounds of appeal are
    not made out.

22.  It is right to  acknowledge  that  the  specific  adverse  findings  on
    credibility were directed to  the  evidence  of  the  first  and  sixth
    Appellants.  I agree with a point made by Mr Mills that this was a case
    involving a number of different Appellants and voluminous evidence  and
    it cannot be expected that the judge make a finding of  fact  on  every
    item  of  evidence  before  him.   Such  an  approach  would  also   be
    inconsistent with the approach seemingly recommended by the appellant's
    representative before the judge: 'Miss Rutherford agreed that I  should
    approach the question of the appellant's account as a  whole.  That  is
    the approach I have taken' (paragraph 77). I agree with Mr  Mills  that
    the judge had  determined  the  appeal  in  a  careful  and  structured
    decision setting out matters that were accepted, matters which remained
    in dispute and then went about determining the matters that remained in
    dispute in a coherent way.  The fact that there is no specific  finding
    as to whether the judge found the  evidence  of  the  second  to  fifth
    Appellants credible or not credible is not material to the  outcome  of
    these appeals.

23.  Further, insofar as it is suggested that the judge is  deemed  to  have
    commented on the credibility of  the  second  to  fifth  Appellants  at
    paragraph 69 "I do not find for the reasons given the Appellants to  be
    credible witnesses", without adequate reasoning, no material  error  is
    disclosed.  It is accepted on behalf of the Appellants that  the  third
    and fourth Appellants were unable  to  give  any  evidence  identifying
    their assailants in  June  2013.   Their  evidence  has  in  fact  been
    accepted.  What has been rejected was the nature of the inference which
    they had drawn from their experiences.  That is not  in  fact  to  have
    rejected any part of their evidence and their  evidence  has  not  been
    dismissed by the judge.  Rather, the judge had for reasons given in the
    decision found that the Appellants had not made out their  case  as  to
    what inferences ought to be drawn from their factual account.   I  find
    no material error in the judge having stated at paragraph 69  that  the
    Appellants were not credible.

24.  I find that the judge was entitled to take into account  the  movements
    of the various family members over extended periods, with the first and
    second Appellants departing from Colombia and  returning  a  number  of
    times, whilst other members of the family remained  in  Colombia.   The
    Appellants have not demonstrated that the judge  was  not  entitled  to
    take that pattern of behaviour into  account  as  suggestive  that  the
    family was not at real risk of serious harm at the relevant times.

25.  The Appellants' submission that  the  judge  erred  in  rejecting  that
    various attacks had taken place at  the  hands  of  FARC,  and  such  a
    finding was inconsistent with certain documents suggested that  attacks
    had taken  place  by  'illegal  organised  groups',  is  in  essence  a
    rationality challenge.  I do not find it irrational for  the  judge  to
    have rejected the proposition that the documents established  that  the
    attacks had taken place at the hands of FARC.  I do not find  that  the
    judge gave inadequate reasons for the finding that the attacks were not
    carried out by FARC.

26.  I agree with Mr Mills that the  Appellants'  argument  that  Dr  Karl's
    evidence  was  only  considered  after  the  judge  had  concluded  his
    deliberations is not made out.  The judge considered Dr Karl's evidence
    at various stages in the decision  and  even  after  he  had  made  the
    comment at paragraph 76 that Dr Karl's evidence  'does  not  change  my
    decision', the judge referred again to Dr Karl's evidence and re-stated
    that he had taken all the evidence into account in the round.  There is
    no adequate basis, considering the decision as a whole, to suggest that
    the  judge  had  closed  his  mind  to  any  particular  matter  before
    considering the expert evidence.

27.  The Appellants' final submission, that the judge had erred  in  law  in
    relation to his assessment of the  current  risk  faced  by  FARC,  the
    availability of effective protection  and  internal  relocation  is,  I
    find, a mere disagreement with the judge's conclusions.   It  is  clear
    that  the  judge  considered  the  country  information  regarding  the
    diminished position of FARC.  Ms Rutherford drew to my attention during
    the course of the hearing to the passage within Dr Karl's  evidence  as
    follows:

         "19.  Given  the  ongoing  presence  of  remaining  FARC   elements
             throughout Colombia  and  their  ties  with  other  armed  and
             illegal groups I believe that there is a  real  and  continued
             risk of serious harm for Mr (GP) and his family  if  they  are
             returned to Colombia.  I also believe that internal relocation
             within Colombia is not an option".

    Ms Rutherford informed me  that  Dr  Aguilar  had  come  to  a  similar
    conclusion although she did not quote any  passage  from  Dr  Aguilar's
    evidence at all during the course of her submissions.

28.  I find that the statement by Dr Karl at paragraph 19 is something of  a
    broad-brush  statement  which  lacks   particularity   supporting   his
    proposition that the Appellants would remain at risk  of  serious  harm
    from FARC at the present time.  Further, his  assertion  that  internal
    relocation was not an option is given without any reasoning whatsoever.
     The judge's findings that  effective  protection  was  available,  and
    internal relocation  was  also  available,  were  findings  which  were
    clearly open to him on the evidence.  There is nothing within paragraph
    19 of Dr Karl's evidence, drawn to my attention by  Ms  Rutherford,  to
    demonstrate  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  current   country
    conditions  was  erroneous.   The  evidence  was   rather   vague   and
    unsubstantiated.  I find  that  the  evidence  which  is  drawn  to  my
    attention does not demonstrate that the judge erred in any way  in  his
    assessment of the current risk posed by FARC in Colombia.

29.  I therefore find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision did not involve the making of any material error of law.

    I do not set aside the judge's decision.

    The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.


Signed   Date 17.12.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 17.12.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
