








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05297/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated              |
|On: 4 September 2018                 |On: 25 September 2018                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                    [N P]

                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mrs F Mustapha, solicitor, Wai Leung Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.  This  direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge R L Walker promulgated on 5 June 2018,  dismissing
      the appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
      appeal.


   3. Judge Walker summarised his  findings  at  [37].  He  found  that  the
      appellant employed deception when he had earlier claimed an  incorrect
      age and the deception extended to his having an elder brother  in  the
      UK and not having any contact with the family in Afghanistan.


   4. He found that the appellant would be returning as  an  adult.  He  had
      already shown considerable  personal  fortitude  in  relocating  to  a
      country where he did not have any ties or speak the language, and when
      a minor. He has so far spent at least 12 years living  in  Afghanistan
      as opposed to the six years in the UK. He has acquired language skills
      and is able to speak very good English. He  will  not  have  lost  his
      ability to speak Pashtu. He has been educated and has acquired  skills
      here. He would be able to use them to his advantage in gaining  lawful
      employment [41].


   5. He found that even if his former foster carer's property in Kabul  was
      not available to the appellant, it is clear  that  his  former  foster
      carer, Mr Muzafry, has contacts and friends in Kabul and  these  would
      be used to assist the appellant [42]. With regard to  the  problem  of
      appearing to be  Westernised,  he  found  that  the  appellant  is  an
      intelligent young man who will have the common sense as to how to  act
      and dress in various parts of Kabul. He will not  have  forgotten  his
      culture and customs and will not be returning as a  single  individual
      with no support network, family or otherwise.


   6. On 29 June 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison granted the
      appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that
      it is arguable that the Judge misdirected himself  by  making  adverse
      findings in respect of the appellant's credibility based partly on  an
      age assessment report of November 2015,  when  there  was  no  dispute
      between the parties that he was a minor at the  time,  without  giving
      him an opportunity to address any concerns that the Judge  had.  As  a
      result, this may have affected his findings in  respect  of  paragraph
      276ADE of the Rules and the country guidance decision in AS (Safety of
      Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC).


   7. Before the Upper Tribunal Ms Mustapha, who represented  the  appellant
      before the First-tier Tribunal, sought to introduce a  new  ground  of
      appeal. In her written application for the  "additional  ground",  she
      submitted that the Judge erred at [11] in applying the wrong  standard
      of proof applicable to an asylum appeal.  Mr Whitwell did  not  oppose
      the proposed additional ground and contended that it was  without  any
      merit.


   8. I find that the application is misconceived.  It  is  clear  that  the
      Judge has properly set out the burden and standard of proof applicable
      in this case at [10]. He expressly stated that the lower  standard  of
      proof should be applied. At [11] he stated that in  immigration  cases
      the  burden  of  proof  lies  on  the  appellant  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities.  Ms Mustapha subsequently conceded that the  Judge  had
      properly directed himself.


   9. Ms Mustapha relied on her written grounds in support  of  the  appeal.
      She noted that the 'matter of the appellant's age was never  an  issue
      in the appeal'. The appellant accepted his assessed age at the time of
      his assessment in 2015, some three years after he arrived in the UK.


  10. She submitted  however  that  the  Judge  erred  in  relation  to  his
      credibility findings which  "are  perverse  and/or  irrational  and/or
      procedurally unfair." She also contended that the findings in  respect
      of paragraph 276ADE were inadequately reasoned. Nor did the Judge have
      any  regard  to  the  country  guidance  decision  in  AS,  supra:  in
      particular, he failed to give effect to paragraph 230 of that decision
      in his assessment and failed to give reasons why it was not applicable
      to the circumstances of the appellant.


  11. She submitted that although the appellant's age was not  at  issue  in
      the appeal, the Judge had had regard to the  asserted  inconsistencies
      arising from the report. She complained that neither  the  appellant's
      nor  the  respondent's  representatives  at  the  hearing   made   any
      submissions regarding the report at the hearing. Nor was the appellant
      cross-examined on the contents  of  the  report.  The  Judge  did  not
      address any questions  to  the  appellant  relating  to  its  content.
      Nevertheless, the Judge made copious reference to the  report  in  the
      decision in his assessment of the appellant's credibility relating  to
      the claims on appeal.


  12. Ms Mustapha referred to an article by  Pat  Munro  -  Age  Assessment;
      Practice and Pitfalls, where  the  author  noted  that  the  role  and
      purpose of an age assessment, as opposed to eliciting and testing  the
      asylum grounds, is to take a life  history,  including  a  history  of
      persecution which may be relevant to establish the chronological  age.
      The  practise  of  testing  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  children's
      credibility, based in part on  the  asylum  claim  and  in  particular
      drawing inferences about the UASC's age from the perceived credibility
      of the asylum  claim,  is  plainly  not  within  the  social  worker's
      competence.


  13. She submitted therefore that before relying on  the  content  of  that
      report the appellant should have been given  an  opportunity  to  deal
      with the adverse points raised in the report. General  credibility  as
      assessed by others is not determinative, as the  primary  jurisdiction
      of  the  Tribunal  is  to  determine  the  asylum,  human  rights  and
      humanitarian protection claims.


  14. She also submitted that the finding at [42] that the appellant can  be
      supported in Afghanistan by his former foster carer  is  'irrational'.
      The carer is not a blood relative. He is  a  registered  foster  carer
      with the Kent  local  authority.  He  has  no  legal  responsibilities
      towards the appellant. He has accordingly made unwarranted assumptions
      which constitute a material error.


  15. She submitted that  the  Judge's  findings  in  respect  of  paragraph
      276ADE(vi) were inadequately arrived  at.  The  appellant  could  only
      succeed by reference to that paragraph if he demonstrated  that  there
      were very significant obstacles to his integration on his return.


  16. The Judge's findings in that respect are set out at [50] and contain a
      bare assertion, unsupported by any reasoning that  the  appellant  has
      failed to demonstrate that there are very significant obstacles to his
      integration. However, the appellant arrived in the UK  in  2012  as  a
      child of 12 years old - his assessed age - and has been in the UK  for
      almost six years after that. There was significant evidence of private
      life established in the  UK.  Further,  there  were  very  significant
      obstacles to his integration on his return.


  17. Ms Mustapha submitted that the Judge did not have regard at all to the
      country  guidance  decision  in  AS,  supra.  She  referred   to   the
      appellant's bundle where the full decision in  AS  was  produced  from
      pages 209-210. She informed the Tribunal that she had made submissions
      relating to AS and had referred to paragraph 230 of the decision.


  18. She also referred to paragraph 47 of her skeleton argument before  the
      First-tier Tribunal in which  she  set  out  at  the  various  factors
      identified by the panel at [230] of AS. Those factors include the  age
      at which  a  person  left  Afghanistan;  the  nature  and  quality  of
      connections to Kabul and/or Afghanistan; physical and  mental  health;
      language, education and vocational  skills.  The  country  information
      indicated that to relocate to Afghanistan,  one  requires  social  and
      financial support  in  the  area  of  potential  relocation.  She  had
      submitted to the first-tier tribunal that in Kabul the appellant would
      be unemployed and has no family in Kabul to whom he can  look  to  for
      the necessary support. He has no skills; he  was  barely  educated  in
      Afghanistan, having  had  just  two  years  of  basic  primary  school
      education before he fled Afghanistan.


  19. She submitted that the Judge was required to consider whether,  having
      regard to the appellant's circumstances, it would be  unreasonable  or
      unduly harsh for him to relocate to Kabul.  That  assessment  was  not
      properly carried out.


  20. Mr Whitwell submitted that the Judge has given sustainable reasons for
      his findings. He referred to a Rule 24 response by the respondent.  It
      is contended that whilst age was not an issue in the appeal, the Judge
      was entitled to consider the observations  contained  within  the  age
      assessment as it formed part of the evidence. Accordingly,  the  Judge
      was able to find that there were a number of other credibility  issues
      [31-37] which cumulatively led the Judge to find that his account  was
      not credible.


  21. It was further submitted that the principles set out at paragraph  230
      of AS have been applied. The Judge considered that he was a minor when
      he left Afghanistan. He also had regard to the  relevant  factors  set
      out in the internal relocation consideration.


  22. In reply, Ms Mustapha referred to paragraphs  43-51  of  her  skeleton
      argument before the First-tier Tribunal. She submitted that there  was
      merely a 'sweeping statement' in relation to paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi).
      She repeated that the findings in relation to relocation to Kabul were
      also flawed.


      Assessment


  23. The Judge was satisfied, having regard to the age  assessment  report,
      that the appellant purposely claimed that  he  was  younger  than  his
      correct age and it also called into  question  other  aspects  of  his
      claimed history. In  that  respect  the  Judge  identified  in  detail
      relevant extracts from the report at [29].


  24. There was before the First-tier Tribunal detailed submissions set  out
      in Ms Mustapha's skeleton argument, including the UNHCR guidelines  on
      policies and procedures in dealing with unaccompanied children seeking
      asylum, as well as the respondent's own policy guidance. The effect of
      the authorities is that a child may well give what  is  essentially  a
      true account of past events, which may appear to an adult to be  false
      because it does not satisfy adult  notions  of  narrative  chronology,
      plausibility and consistency.


  25. Notwithstanding these submissions before the First-tier Tribunal,  the
      appellant was not given any opportunity to deal with what was said  to
      be important adverse points arising  from  the  report.  Nor  was  the
      appellant ever cross examined on the report. Nor did the Judge himself
      put any questions to the appellant relating  to  the  content  of  the
      report.


  26. I find in these circumstances that the reference to and  use  made  of
      the  report  in  the  decision  -  which  also  informed  the  Judge's
      credibility findings - was procedurally unfair.


  27. I also find that the Judge's consideration of internal relocation with
      reference to the decision in  AS,  was  inadequate  and  not  properly
      reasoned. Although the Judge referred to the country guidance decision
      in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163,  it  does  not
      appear that he considered the more recent country guidance case in  AS
      which was referred to him and which was set  out  in  some  detail  at
      paragraph  43  and  44  of  the  skeleton  argument  before  him.   In
      particular, as already noted, paragraph 230 was referred  to  and  set
      out at paragraph 47 of the skeleton.


  28. There has been no proper consideration or assessment  of  the  factors
      set out at paragraph 230. In particular, it had  been  contended  that
      the appellant has lived all of his teenage years in the  UK.  He  came
      here as a child when he was pre-adolescent. He continued to live  here
      during his adolescent years and is now a young adult.


  29. Those factors were relevant to the assessment of  whether  or  not  it
      would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to
      Kabul  or  whether  he  would  face  very  significant  obstacles   to
      integrating into Afghanistan pursuant to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
      the Immigration Rules.


  30. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      resulted in the making of material errors of law. I set it aside.


  31. The parties agreed that in those circumstances,  the  case  should  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.


  32. I am satisfied that the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision to  be  re-made  is  extensive.  I
      accordingly find that it is a proper case to remit to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.






      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. It is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a
      fresh decision to be made before another Judge.


      Anonymity direction continued.









      Signed: Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
            Date:      22 September 2018





