
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/05117/2016

                                                     PA/05110/2016
     PA/05144/2016
     PA/05148/2016
     PA/05151/2016
     PA/05155/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |             Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 24th January 2018                  |             On 25th January 2018     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                    A h n
                                     N I
                                     N O
                                     A O
                                     M O
                                     H O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Mr T Hussain (instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellants,  with
    permission, in relation to a Decision and  Reasons  of  Judge  Farrelly
    following a hearing at North Shields on 20th June 2017.  In a  Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 27th June 2017 the appeals were dismissed on
    all grounds.

 2. The Appellants are a mother and her children who claimed asylum on  the
    basis that they were undocumented Bidoons from Kuwait.

 3. The grounds argue that the Judge  erred  in  refusing  to  adjourn  the
    appeal to obtain a new interpreter.  I have read the note  of  evidence
    of Counsel for the  Appellants  at  that  hearing  and  note  that  the
    interpreter difficulties were minor and did not warrant an adjournment.

 4. The grounds argue that the Judge made adverse findings on the basis  of
    a mistaken view of the evidence given.  While the Judge may  have  been
    mistaken about some of the evidence, that related to peripheral matters
    only and not the core findings.

 5. Where the Judge did err however, as accepted by Miss Petterson, was  in
    failing to make any findings about the fact that the  main  Appellant's
    husband and his brother had been granted Refugee status in  the  UK  as
    undocumented Bidoons from Kuwait.  The Judge needed to  reconcile  that
    with her finding that the Appellants  were  not  from  Kuwait  and  not
    undocumented Bidoons.  It was accepted that they  were  the  pre-flight
    family of the husband and  therefore  his  status  would  have  had  an
    important bearing on their claims. His status had not  been  challenged
    by the Home Office Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. That error goes to the heart of the appeals and means that the Decision
    and Reasons must be set aside in its entirety.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  Decision
and Reasons is set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for a full rehearing on all issues by a Judge, other  than  Judge  Farrelly,
at the Bradford hearing centre.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings




Signed                              Date 24th January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


















