
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05414/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2019                   |On 14 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     a m
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court  proceedings.  This
direction has been made in order  to  protect  the  Appellant  from  serious
harm, having regard to  the  interests  of  justice  and  the  principle  of
proportionality.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Thomas, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis and
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge E M M Smith (the judge),  promulgated  on  24  September
    2018,  in  which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 11 April 2018,  refusing  his  protection  and
    human rights claims.

 2. In essence, the Appellant's claims were put forward  on  the  following
    bases. First, that he had been specifically targeted by a  gang  in  St
    Kitts and would, if he returned, be at risk of  serious  violence  once
    again. Second, and  in  any  event,  he  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration into  society  of  his  home  country,  with
    reference to Article 8 in general and paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules in particular.



The judge's decision

 3. The judge found that the Appellant provided a credible account of  past
    events in St Kitts [23]  and  [26].  He  specifically  found  that  the
    Appellant had been threatened by the gang in question, and indeed  shot
    at prior to his departure from that country in 2011 [26].

 4. The judge then goes on to address the issues of  the  future  risk  and
    state protection at [26]-[35], ultimately concluding that  there  would
    be no risk on return, or, if there was,  a  sufficiency  of  protection
    would exist.

 5.  Article 8 is dealt with in brief terms at [41]-[44].




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The first ground of appeal attacks the judge's findings and conclusions
    on the protection issue. It is said  that  the  judge  failed  to  deal
    adequately with the unchallenged expert report before  him,  failed  to
    have proper regard to a letter from the Deputy  Prime  Minister  of  St
    Kitts, and made factual errors.

 7. The second ground goes to the Article 8 issue.  It  is  said  that  the
    judge failed to address the numerous factors present in the Appellant's
    case to show that he would face very serious obstacles in reintegrating
    into the society of St Kitts. These factors included his mental  health
    problems and his status as a so-called "deportee".

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Blundell
    on 18 October 2018. His focus was on the challenge  to  the  Article  8
    point, regarding it as arguable that the judge had failed to deal  with
    the relevant factors put forward by the Appellant. He saw less merit in
    the challenge to the protection issue, but nonetheless did not restrict
    the grant of permission.




The hearing before me

 9.  Mr Thomas relied on the grounds of appeal.

10. Mr Clarke relied on statistics contained  at  G1  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle and page 102  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  (within  the  expert
    report) to show that the incidence of homicides in St Kitts was in fact
    very low, and  that  the  authorities  did  take  action  against  gang
    members. The judge had dealt adequately with the letter from the Deputy
    Prime Minister and the same was true in respect of the expert report as
    it related to the issue of state protection.

11. There appeared to have been two letters from  the  Appellant's  mother,
    the first from 2018 and the second from 2015. In respect of the former,
    she had said nothing about any continuing threats made by the  gang  to
    her son (or indeed to her). The  2015  letter  appeared  to  relate  to
    matters occurring when the Appellant was still in  St  Kitts  in  2011.
    Ultimately, the judge was entitled to conclude that there had  been  no
    actual threats against the Appellant since he left the country in 2011.

12. Mr Clarke acknowledged that the judge had made  a  factual  error  when
    stating that the gang leader had been  shot  dead.  With  reference  to
    questions 35 and 36 of the asylum interview, the Appellant had  not  in
    fact said this.  Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  this  factual  error  was
    immaterial.

13. In respect of the Article 8 issue, Mr Clarke submitted that even if the
    judge had dealt fully with the factors put forward, the Appellant could
    not have succeeded in any event.

14. In reply, Mr Thomas emphasised the point that the  assessment  of  risk
    was not concerned with the situation whilst the Appellant was still  in
    the United Kingdom, but what might happen once he returned to St Kitts.

15. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Decision on error of law

16.  This  has  not  been  an  easy  case  to  decide  but,  after  careful
    consideration and by a relatively narrow margin, I conclude that  there
    are material errors of law in the judge's decision. My reasons for this
    are as follows.

17. I have endeavoured to read the  judge's  decision  holistic  and  in  a
    sensible manner. I fully appreciate that not each and every  aspect  of
    the evidence need be dealt with in detail when reaching a decision. The
    corollary of this proposition is that relevant aspects of the  evidence
    going to core issues must be dealt with clearly and with  sound  in  my
    view reasoning.

18. In my view the judge has failed to adequately address the expert report
    on the issue of risk to the Appellant on return to St Kitts (as opposed
    to whether threats had been made  against  him  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom) and whether or not  he  could  be  afforded  sufficient  state
    protection.

19. It is  significant  to  note  that  the  detailed  expert  report  went
    unchallenged by the Respondent at the hearing [24]. The expert  was  of
    the view that the authorities of the St Kitts were, "not fully  capable
    of providing the level of full-time protection required to sufficiently
    protect a person from attacks or persecution  by  gang  members."  (see
    pages 119 and 132 of the  Appellant  bundle).  This  conclusion  (which
    followed a not insubstantial  analysis  of  source  materials)  is  not
    entirely unambiguous: on its face, it may be  said  that  it  does  not
    reflect the correct legal test for state protection  set  out  in,  for
    example, Horvath [2000] UKHL 37 or Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ  1605.
    Yet, that was the expert evidence before the judge.

20. The judge deals with this in [28]. He appears to  significantly  reduce
    the value of that evidence on the  basis  of  two  considerations.  The
    first is that the expert had apparently conducted her research within a
    limited timeframe. The problem with  this  reason  is  that  the  tight
    restrictions within which the expert may well have been operating  does
    not, of itself, justify a significant production of weight. The  expert
    has  not  said  that  her  conclusions  were  tentative  or  that   the
    information  considered  was  inadequate.  It  may  be  the  case  that
    additional time would have permitted additional  research,  but  in  my
    view the judge was bound to deal with the unchallenged expert  evidence
    as he found it and not to speculate as to what might have been said  if
    more time had been available.

21. The second point made by the judge in [28] is that a  single  newspaper
    article from January 2018 made reference to  a  senior  police  officer
    asserting that homicides in St Kitts had been decreasing and that large
    numbers of firearms had been removed from the streets. Whilst the judge
    was entitled to take this single  item  of  evidence  into  account,  I
    conclude that this, even in combination with  the  first  consideration
    discussed in the preceding paragraph, did  not  provide  an  adequately
    reasoned basis upon which to effectively disregard or so  substantially
    diminish the importance of the expert's conclusions.

22. In respect of the evidence from the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Richards,
    the judge  drew  the  conclusion  that  the  absence  of  any  specific
    reference to a lack of state protection meant that such protection  was
    available. To an extent, the judge is correct in pointing out  that  no
    express mention is made of state protection  in  the  letter  dated  11
    September 2018. However, the letter does state that  if  the  Appellant
    returned to St Kitts, having fled "in fear for his life", he would meet
    a "similar fate". There is a clear implication here that the  Appellant
    would in fact be harmed by the gang. Although not referred  to  by  the
    judge in his decision, I note that Mr Richards had previously written a
    letter in support of the Appellant  in  March  2015  in  which  he  did
    specifically state that the authorities did not have the  resources  to
    offer protection two young men who are threatened by gangs (C22 of  the
    Respondent's bundle).

23. I conclude  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  adequately  consider  Mr
    Richards' evidence. He has drawn an inference from  it  without  having
    due regard to what was in fact stated therein.

24. Mr Clarke has correctly accepted that the judge made a factual error in
    [29] as regards the  leader  of  the  gang  who  would  threatened  and
    attacked the Appellant in  the  past.  Although  not  of  the  greatest
    significance, the judge has clearly taken account of a factor that  did
    not exist.

25. Mr Clarke has relied on statistics to show that the  underlying  merits
    of the Appellant's protection claim were always  very  poor.  I  accept
    that on their face these figures indicate a small number  of  homicides
    in St Kitts in proportion to  the  population  as  a  whole,  and  that
    prosecutions by the authorities  are  undertaken.  However,  the  judge
    himself has not considered this aspect  of  the  evidence  and  in  any
    event, the  Appellant's  case  was  highly  fact-specific.  Whilst  the
    overall number of homicides may be low, it may also be that there is  a
    relatively high proportion of gang-related deaths (a  possibility  that
    would be of course much more relevant to  the  Appellant's  case).  The
    point is that none of this appears to have been  canvassed  before  the
    judge and in my view it cannot properly be said  that  the  Appellant's
    case was effectively unwinnable from the outset.

26. The issue of the mother's evidence clearly did present an  obstacle  in
    the path of success for the Appellant.  Having  looked  at  the  expert
    report and the reference to a letter from the mother contained  therein
    (page 121 of the Appellant bundle) it is unclear as to whether she  had
    received threats relating to her son or indeed directed towards herself
    after the Appellant left St Kitts in 2011. It is the case that  in  her
    more recent letter, the Appellant's mother made no mention of any  such
    threats (76-77 of the bundle). In light of this, the  judge  was  fully
    entitled to  conclude  that  no  such  threat  had  been  made  in  the
    intervening period.

27. This conclusion would clearly have pointed against there being  a  risk
    on return.  However,  the  absence  of  continued  threats  whilst  the
    Appellant was not even in St Kitts had to be weighed up in the  context
    of whether there was a prospective risk once the Appellant returned  to
    his home community within what is, on any view, a  very  small  country
    indeed. In my view, when this is taken in conjunction  with  the  other
    matters I have set out above, the absence  of  specific  threats  since
    2011 could not have been a decisive factor.

28. Bringing all of the above together, the assessment of risk  on  return,
    including of course state protection, is materially flawed.

29. I turn to the Article 8 issue. In my view the judge has  simply  failed
    to engage with relevant evidence. A number of  factors,  including  the
    Appellant's mental health and status as a "deportee" were  put  forward
    and supported by expert evidence. What the judge says at [44] is,  with
    respect, inadequate. I disagree with Mr Clarke's  suggestion  that  the
    Article 8 claim was bound to fail in any event.

30. I set the judge's decision aside.



Disposal

31. The default route for disposal is for me to remake the decision in this
    appeal, but in this particular case I have decided that remittal is the
    appropriate course of action.

32. There is a fairly significant amount of fact-finding to be  undertaken,
    both in relation to the protection and Article 8 claims. As regards the
    former, the issue of  the  Appellant's  situation  on  return  and  the
    ability and/or willingness  of  the  authorities  to  offer  sufficient
    protection must be fully addressed. In terms of Article 8,  there  have
    been no findings about the Appellant's mental health and  the  position
    of so-called "deportees" in St Kitts.

33. I am always very wary of preserving any findings of fact when remitting
    an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Having said that, this is a  case
    in which two findings can, and should, be preserved. There  is  nothing
    wrong with the judge's finding that the Appellant had  been  threatened
    and attacked by the relevant gang when in St Kitts, the same is true of
    the finding that no threats had been made against the Appellant or  his
    mother since 2011.

34. Preserving these two findings does not in my view present an artificial
    barrier to the further consideration of this appeal by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

        1) the appeal is remitted to the first-tier Tribunal;


        2) the remitted appeal shall not be heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge E M M Smith;

        3) the two findings of fact referred  to  in  paragraph  33  of  my
           decision, above, are to be preserved;

        4) the issues for  consideration  by  the  first-tier  Tribunal  on
           remittal shall be:


                    i. will the Appellant face a real  risk  of  persecution
                       and/or Article 3 ill-treatment on return to St Kitts?
                   ii. if so, will the  authorities  there  be  able  and/or
                       willing to provide sufficient protection against such
                       a risk?
                  iii. assuming that the protection  claim  fails,  can  the
                       Appellant succeed by reference to article 8, both  in
                       respect of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Rules  and
                       in its wider context?


Signed      [pic]            Date:  7 February 2019

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


