
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05671/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 21 February 2020                  |On 16 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr S Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who has  appealed  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FtT'), dated 24 May 2019,  in
         which his appeal was refused on human rights and asylum grounds.

      2. I have maintained the anonymity direction made by the FtT  as  this
         decision refers to the appellant's minor children and family  court
         proceedings relating to them.

Background and procedural history

      3. The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  ('UK')  in  2013  as  a
         visitor.  He was arrested on 24 December 2015 as an overstayer  and
         served with a removal decision.   He was convicted of possession of
         identity documents with intent, possession of articles for  use  in
         fraud  and  possession  of  obtaining  another  person's   identity
         document and sentenced by the same court on 29 January  2016  to  a
         total of twelve months' imprisonment made  up  of  three  different
         sentences.

      4. A decision to deport was made on 9 February 2016 and the  appellant
         submitted a human rights claim together with an asylum claim.

      5. In a  decision  dated  24  May  2019  the  respondent  refused  the
         appellant's human rights and protection claim.

      6. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (FtT).  He relied upon his fear of persecution in  Nigeria
         but I do not need to say anything more about that for the  purposes
         of this decision.

      7. As far as Article 8 was concerned, he relied upon his  relationship
         with  four  children.   Those  four  children  are   specified   in
         correspondence and I refer to them as 'A' born  in  May  2011,  'B'
         born in June 2016, 'C' born in July 2016 and 'D' born  in  December
         2018.  Each child has a different mother.   The  appellant  claimed
         that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  each  child
         and it would breach his Article  8  rights  to  be  deported.   The
         respondent's decision letter clearly and unambiguously disputed the
         claim that the appellant had genuine and  subsisting  relationships
         with any of his children.  It was with this in mind that  when  the
         FtT hearing was first  listed  in  July  2019  that  the  appellant
         successfully  obtained  an  adjournment   in   order   to   provide
         information from family court proceedings in relation to one of the
         children and an independent social worker report,  in  relation  to
         all the children.

      8. The procedural history that followed that  initial  adjournment  is
         lengthy and complicated but I do not need to  go  into  it  in  any
         detail, save to say that the matter was listed to be heard  by  the
         FtT on 15 November 2019.  The appellant  has  been  represented  by
         solicitors throughout  these  proceedings.   They  applied  for  an
         adjournment of that hearing on 12 November 2019.  In their  written
         application the solicitors clarified that the family court had  not
         responded to their request for permission for  disclosure  and  the
         independent social worker report would not  be  available  until  3
         December.  They also added that they  were  waiting  on  a  country
         expert report.  On 13 November the Tribunal refused the adjournment
         request and said this.

             "The decision in this case was taken in May 2019.   This  case
             has been adjourned on a number  of  occasions.   The  Tribunal
             fails to see what can be assisted by an expert  report.   With
             regard to contact the appellant can give evidence on  contact.
             The Family Court has decided the best interests  are  for  the
             appellant to have contact.  The judge can determine  in  light
             of  that  whether  the   deportation   order   should   stand.
             Application refused".

      9. On 14 November 2019 the appellant's solicitors sent a letter before
         action to the First-tier Tribunal again asking that the  matter  be
         adjourned.   On  14  November  2019  the  FtT  responded  to   that
         application in this way:

             "The Designated Judge Mr McClure maintains  his  position  and
             the appeal remains listed for tomorrow 15 November 2019.   The
             appellant can give evidence about the contact he has with  his
             child.  If the appeal goes ahead  and  the  appellant  is  not
             satisfied with  the  decision  he  can  appeal  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal".

         The hearing went ahead on 15 November 2019, before FtT Judge McAll.
          At that hearing the appellant did not attend, and neither did  his
         solicitors.  The FtT noted  that  there  had  been  an  adjournment
         application on the papers  and  issued  a  further,  more  detailed
         decision comprised of some 21 paragraphs in which  the  application
         for an adjournment was again refused.  That must be  read  together
         with a separate decision refusing the  substantive  aspect  of  the
         appeal, that is the asylum appeal and the human rights appeal.

     10. The appellant's  solicitors  challenged  the  initial  decision  to
         refuse the adjournment by way of judicial review.  That came before
         Judge Kopieczek on 15 November 2019 and he refused the  application
         for interim relief  to  prevent  the  FtT  from  promulgating  it's
         decision.  This was renewed at an oral hearing before Judge Stephen
         Smith at a hearing on 25 November 2019 and he said this:

             "1.  This is a renewed  application  for  interim  relief  and
             order preventing the respondent from promulgating  a  decision
             and reasons in the applicant's appeal against the Secretary of
             State for the Home Department's  decision  to  deport  him  to
             Nigeria  pending  the  provision  and  admission   of   linked
             documents from the Family Court and to enable the applicant to
             obtain an independent social worker's report  in  relation  to
             the impact of his deportation on the children involved in  the
             case.  The respondent heard a substantive appeal  against  the
             deportation order on 15 November 2019.  The respondent refused
             to adjourn these proceedings in order to obtain the  documents
             set out above.  A separate application for judicial review has
             been  brought  in  relation  to  that  decision.   Mr   Bazini
             submitted 'unless I grant interim relief in the  terms  sought
             that  application  for  judicial  review  will   be   rendered
             academic'.




             2.   Permission was refused on the papers  by  Upper  Tribunal
             Judge Kopieczek on 15 November 2019 in these terms.

                  'Having considered the grant in support of the application
                  for interim relief and  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
                  judicial review claim as well as the reasons given by  the
                  respondent for refusing to adjourn the hearing  I  am  not
                  satisfied that a grant of interim relief is merited.   The
                  First-tier Tribunal is seized of the appeal which has  now
                  been heard.   The  appropriate  course  is  to  await  the
                  outcome of the appeal and seek permission to appeal to the
                  Upper  Tribunal  if  there  is  dissatisfaction  with  its
                  decision'.

             3.   I entirely agree with and  adopt  the  reasons  given  by
             Judge Kopieczek  for  refusing  the  application  for  interim
             relief on the papers.  The applicant has an alternative remedy
             available to him  namely  an  application  for  permission  to
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the First-tier Tribunal's
             consideration  of  his  appeal.    Judicial   review   is   an
             exceptional  jurisdiction  to  be  used  where  there  is   no
             alternative  remedy.   In  the  present  matter  there  is  an
             alternative remedy.  Under the circumstances  therefore  there
             is no reason for me to exercise  my  discretion  to  take  the
             exceptional and highly unusual step of prohibiting the  First-
             tier Tribunal from promulgating a decision in an  appeal  that
             has already been heard.  Decisions on  adjournment  and  other
             interlocutory matters are excluded decisions for the  purposes
             of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 Section 11(1)
             see Article 3N of the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009.
              Parliament has decided therefore that satellite litigation of
             this sort is not to contaminate proceedings before the  First-
             tier Tribunal.  Whilst I do not rule out the possibility  that
             in  some  exceptional  cases  relief  of  this  sort  may   be
             appropriate this is not one of those cases".

     11. The FtT's decisions refusing the  adjournment  and  dismissing  the
         appeal were both promulgated on 27 November 2019.

     12. In grounds of appeal dated 11 December 2019 it was submitted on the
         appellant's behalf that the FtT materially erred  in  refusing  the
         application to adjourn the proceedings pending the disclosure  from
         the Family Court with respect to the contact between the  appellant
         and one of his children.

     13. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Bulpitt in a decision
         dated 30 December 2019.   This included the following observation:

             "There are a number of unanswered questions which  arise  from
             the application for permission to appeal.  These  include  why
             the appellant and  his  representatives  did  not  attend  the
             hearing and why there was a delay  between  the  Family  Court
             making an order  permitting  disclosure  of  documents  on  29
             October  2019  and  the   disclosure   of   those   documents.
             Notwithstanding these questions and the  judge's  careful  and
             detailed decision to refuse  the  adjournment  request  it  is
             arguable that  the  decision  to  refuse  the  application  to
             adjourn knowing that the independent  social  worker's  report
             was due  to  be  completed  on  3  December  2019  and  as  an
             application to the Family Court was outstanding  deprived  the
             appellant  of  a  fair  hearing  and  amounted  to  procedural
             unfairness."

     14. There  has  been  no  respondent's  notice  in  this  appeal.   The
         appellant has  however  provided  a  skeleton  argument  which  has
         attached to it witness statements from the solicitors with  conduct
         of this appeal and relevant exhibits to that statement.



Submissions

     15. At the hearing before me Dr Chelvan, who appeared on behalf of  the
         appellant, and who also drafted the grounds of appeal but  who  did
         not appear in the judicial review oral application said that he had
         had an opportunity to discuss  the  matter  with  Mr  McVeety,  the
         Senior Home Office Presenting Officer representing  the  respondent
         and that Mr McVeety agreed that  the  FtT  acted  unfairly  in  the
         particular circumstances of this case by not adjourning the  appeal
         when the evidence from  the  family  court  was  imminent  and  was
         directly relevant to one of the disputed matters in the appeal.

     16. I was concerned that the appellant and his solicitors made a number
         of  regrettable  decisions  and  may   have   contributed   to   an
         unsatisfactory state of affairs by the time the matter came  before
         Judge McCall on 15 November 2019.  I therefore gave Mr McVeety time
         to reflect on his concession.  Having done so, Mr McVeety  made  it
         clear that there the appeal had been poorly conducted on  the  part
         of the appellant and his solicitors in certain respects,  but  that
         when he stood back and  considered  the  matter  holistically,  the
         respondent accepted it was unfair not to adjourn the  hearing.   He
         highlighted that the decision letter made it very  clear  that  the
         respondent was of the view  that  this  appellant  had  no  contact
         whatsoever with his children and in those  circumstances  this  was
         one of those rare  cases  where  there  needed  to  be  independent
         evidence of contact.

Error of law discussion

     17. In many deportation cases, where a relationship between the foreign
         national parent and child is  relied  upon,  the  respondent  often
         concedes a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship.   As  Mr
         McVeety observed, what is more often in dispute is  the  impact  of
         the separation of the parent from the child, upon  that  child  and
         whether it reaches the  high  threshold  required  by  the  'unduly
         harsh' test.  This is not one of those cases, or at  least  at  the
         time of the FtT hearing it  was  not  one  of  those  cases  -  the
         respondent disputed the appellant's claim to have any  relationship
         with any  of  his  children.   Indeed,  Judge  McCall  specifically
         observed there was no supporting evidence of  contact  between  the
         appellant and his children and found  an  absence  of  any  genuine
         parental relationship.

     18. Mr McVeety pointed out that it should have been clear  to  the  FtT
         that  independent  evidence  supporting  the  appellant's   claimed
         relationships with his children had been  requested  and  would  be
         available shortly after 15 November 2019.  Indeed, the family court
         documents were disclosed on 22 November 2019 and the ISW report  is
         dated 3 December  2019.   In  these  circumstances,  I  reluctantly
         accepted the concession on behalf of the SSHD that  the  FtT  acted
         unfairly in failing to adjourn the hearing.   That reasons for that
         reluctance were made clear  to  Dr  Chelvan,  and  I  gave  him  an
         opportunity to address me before making the observations I now do.

Observations

     19. Given my decision that the FtT erred in law in not  adjourning  the
         hearing as conceded by the respondent  in  this  case,  I  strictly
         speaking do not need to say anything else,  save  that  the  matter
         needs to be considered by the FtT at a de novo hearing.  However, I
         it is important  that  I  make  some  brief  observations  for  the
         appellant and his legal representatives to reflect upon.

     20. The first relates  to  the  detail  contained  in  the  adjournment
         application  on  the  papers.   When   refusing   the   adjournment
         application in  a  detailed  written  decision,  Judge  McAll  drew
         attention  to  certain  omissions  and  inadequacies   within   the
         application - see paragraphs 12 to 13 of the adjournment  decision.
         I agree that the written application could have been more  detailed
         and more helpful.  It would have been helpful to explain why  there
         was no other type  of  evidence  that  could  be  provided  in  the
         interim.  For example, supporting evidence from one or more of  the
         mothers and why it was actually necessary  for  that  family  court
         order to be seen.  The FtT Judge also pointed out that he  was  not
         told why there had been a delay in the ISW's report  and  it  would
         have been helpful to have been provided with a reason for  that  or
         even a letter from the ISW explaining the reason for the delay  and
         / or a summary of the ISW's conclusion, that could have  taken  the
         form of a short email.

     21. The second and perhaps much more significant matter of  concern  is
         the appellant's failure to attend the hearing on 15 November  2019.
         I invited Dr Chelvan to  take  instructions  on  whether  with  the
         benefit of hindsight, it was accepted  that  the  appellant  should
         have attended the hearing.  His  response  to  this  was  that  the
         solicitors stood firm by their  position  that  the  appellant  was
         entitled to not attend that hearing  and  that  they  were  "proved
         right".   This  is  a  regrettable  position  to  adopt  and   very
         concerning indeed.

     22. It is well  established,  and  I  do  not  need  to  refer  to  the
         authorities, that where an application is made on  the  papers  the
         Tribunal or the appropriate court is always willing  to  reconsider
         that application when it is put orally on the day of  the  hearing.
         This  includes  applications  for  adjournment  from  litigants  in
         person, if that is what the appellant would have been  because  the
         appellant's solicitors claim they  would  not  have  been  able  to
         attend in good faith bearing in the mind legal aid limitations.  As
         Judge McAll observed at paragraph 15 of the  adjournment  decision,
         this appellant was educated to degree level and clearly  articulate
         enough to be able to advance his position out  of  respect  to  the
         Tribunal in person, orally.  By simply failing  to  attend  he  not
         only showed the Tribunal discourtesy but he also gave the  Tribunal
         the impression that he was not as willing to assist the Tribunal as
         he might in fact  have  been.   In  cases  such  as  these,  it  is
         important that where applications are refused on the papers,  every
         effort must be made to attend the oral hearing, and if  appropriate
         renew the application.  It is wholly wrong to assume or proceed  on
         the basis that the Tribunal will not be persuaded by a renewed oral
         application.

     23. Dr Chelvan submitted that the decision of the FtT demonstrates that
         the appellant's  attendance  would  have  made  no  difference.   I
         entirely disagree.  The decision of the FtT  demonstrates  that  it
         was concerned by the very fact that the appellant  did  not  attend
         the hearing and that was a factor that the FtT was entitled to take
         into account when refusing the adjournment.  In  this  respect  the
         representatives have not been "proved right".  I  have  reluctantly
         found that notwithstanding the appellant's failure to attend, there
         was an error of law.  I have already  indicated  nonetheless  there
         was enough on the papers in the unusual facts of this case  because
         of the level of dispute  between  the  parties  at  the  time  that
         necessitated an adjournment.  However,  much  public  expense  (the
         appellant is legally aided) has been expended  in  this  case  that
         could have been entirely  avoided  if  the  appellant  attended  in
         person to explain that the ISW report would  be  available  shortly
         and so forth.  This hearing and the use of public funds in relation
         to judicial review applications may have well been avoided  if  the
         appellant had attended the hearing and been successful in  applying
         for an adjournment.

     24. The third and final concern that I have is in relation to  judicial
         review proceedings being undertaken in a case such as this.  I have
         therefore included the decision of Judge  Stephen  Smith  in  full.
         This explains the position properly  and  I  do  not  need  to  say
         anything further about it.

     25. These concerns are made simply as observations  in  order  for  all
         concerned to reflect upon them, they in no way mean  that  the  re-
         hearing of this  appeal  before  the  FtT  should  be  in  any  way
         affected.   These  observations  are  offered  so  that  the  legal
         representatives  involved  can  pause  to   reconsider   the   most
         appropriate course of action, should these matters arise  again  in
         the future.

Disposal

     26. For the reasons that I have already given but particularly  bearing
         in mind the concession made by Mr McVeety that there was unfairness
         in the particular facts of  this  case,  I  allow  the  appellant's
         appeal.  The matter will be remitted to the FtT to be re-decided de
         novo to be heard by a judge other than Judge McAll.

     27. As this matter is remitted, it will be  case-managed  by  the  FtT.
         However, Dr Chelvan raised the prospect of further adjournments  to
         obtain disclosure from  the  family  court  in  relation  to  other
         children.  Given that there is now an ISW  report,  I  queried  the
         necessity  of  this.   Both  parties  agreed  that  the  evidential
         landscape has evolved and it would assist the FtT for the following
         agreed directions to be made, after which the  FtT  could  consider
         listing a  directions  hearing  or  final  hearing,  as  considered
         appropriate.

               1) The appellant shall file and serve a  schedule  describing
                  the nature and extent of contact he has with each  of  his
                  children, attaching to that a paginated and indexed bundle
                  of all evidence relied upon in  relation  to  his  claimed
                  relationships with his children before 11 March 2020.

               2) The respondent shall file and serve a  position  statement
                  clarifying whether or not she accepts the claimed  contact
                  and the appellant's  claim  to  have  a  genuine  parental
                  relationship with each of his children,  before  25  March
                  2020.

Decision

     28. The two decisions of the FtT contain errors  of  law  and  are  set
         aside.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Dated: 5 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
