
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05060/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely by Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th November 2020                        |On 9th February 2021          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     HC
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Frost, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


ANONYMITY


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), and as
this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless
and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, HC is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies amongst others to all
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
court proceedings.


Remote Hearing


   1. The hearing before me on 24th November 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected. I was
      satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
      with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because
      of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to
      avoid delay.  The appellant attended the hearing remotely and was
      initially assisted by an interpreter arranged by the Tribunal.  Both
      the appellant and the interpreter confirmed to me that they understood
      each other and were able to communicate without any difficulty.
      However, the interpreter arranged by the Tribunal was released when it
      became apparent that the appellant would not be giving evidence. The
      appellant continued to be assisted by an interpreter that had been
      arranged by his representatives who continued to translate what was
      being said during the course of the hearing, to the appellant.  The
      appellant was also accompanied throughout the hearing by Mr Raj
      Chahal, a Leaving Care Worker employed by Derbyshire County Council.


   2. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was addressed by the
      representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been if the
      parties had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that this
      constituted a hearing in open court; that the open justice principle
      has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar
      as there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is
      justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that a
      remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly
      in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


Background


   3. The appellant is a national of Vietnam. He was born on 11th November
      1999.  He claims to have left Vietnam by car on 4th August 2016.  He
      claims to have travelled to China from where he was able to take a
      direct flight to Qatar and from there, to Serbia.  He remained in
      Serbia for a period of about three weeks, following which he travelled
      through a number of European countries before arriving in the UK on
      4th September 2016.  He was encountered in the UK on 4th January 2017
      and a referral was made to the 'National Referral Mechanism' ("NRM")
      on 23rd January 2017 because the appellant was considered to be a
      potential victim of human trafficking.  A positive 'conclusive
      grounds' decision was reached by the Competent Authority on 1st March
      2019.


   4. Thereafter, the respondent considered the appellant's claim for asylum
      and humanitarian protection and refused that claim for reasons set out
      in a decision dated 16th May 2019.  The respondent accepted the
      appellant is a national of Vietnam and accepted that the appellant had
      been a victim of trafficking during the period of time that he was in
      Serbia. The respondent noted the appellant had provided a broadly
      consistent and detailed account of the events that led to his
      departure from Vietnam. The respondent accepted the appellant had come
      to the adverse attention of non-state actors.  The respondent went on
      to consider the appellant's claim that he will be at risk upon return
      to Vietnam from the same gang members that previously targeted him.
      The respondent concluded the appellant's subjective fear is not
      objectively well-founded.  The respondent concluded the appellant
      would not be at risk of being a victim of trafficking in Vietnam and
      there is a sufficiency of protection available to the appellant.
      Alternatively, the respondent concluded the appellant can internally
      relocate.


   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Obhi for reasons set out in a decision promulgated
      on 20th August 2019.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal
      by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 9th October 2019.


   6. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi was set aside for
      reasons set out in a decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
      promulgated on 19th February 2020.  A copy of his error of law
      decision is attached to this decision.  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
      King TD noted that there is no significant challenge to the
      credibility of the appellant and the focus at the resumed hearing is
      likely to be upon the risk upon return taking into account the country
      guidance decisions and the expert evidence. He concluded that the
      decision can be remade in the Upper Tribunal.


The appeal before me


   7. The appellant has appealed under s82(1) of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision of the respondent
      to refuse his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. The
      appellant claims to be a refugee whose removal from the UK would
      breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the 1951 Refugee
      Convention and Directive 2004/83/EC of 29th April 2004 on minimum
      standards for the qualification and status of third country nationals
      or stateless persons as refugees (the Qualification Directive).


   8. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Frost reminds the Tribunal that the
      appellant is a recognised victim of trafficking and the Tribunal was
      invited to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness.  Mrs Aboni did
      not object.  In considering the appellant's evidence I have had regard
      to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010: Child,
      Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance, and my assessment
      of the appellant's evidence has been considered in the round, taking
      due account of the medical evidence that is before the Tribunal.
      Throughout the hearing I was conscious to ensure the appellant was
      able to participate without undue distress or difficulty.  At the end
      of the hearing, I was entirely satisfied that all reasonable
      adjustments had been made to accommodate the appellant's
      vulnerability.


   9. The appellant did not give evidence although he was present
      throughout.  Mr Frost confirmed that he was happy to call the
      appellant to adopt his witness statements if needed.  On behalf of the
      respondent, Mrs Aboni confirmed the respondent accepts the appellant
      has provided a broadly consistent and detailed accounts of the
      incidents he experienced whilst in Vietnam.  She confirmed the
      credibility of the appellant is not in issue and the risk upon return
      can be determined on the submissions made by the parties and a
      consideration of the background material. I heard submissions from
      both Mr Frost and Mrs Aboni.  I reserved my decision and informed the
      appellant that I will give my decision in writing, with reasons, and
      that I now do.


  10. In reaching my decision I have had regard to the documents provided in
      the respondent's bundle and the consolidated bundle prepared by the
      appellant's solicitors in accordance with directions issued by Upper
      Tribunal Judge Hanson.  In reaching my decision I have considered all
      the evidence that is before the Tribunal, whether it is expressly
      referred to in this decision or not.  In particular, I have considered
      the evidence of the appellant that is set out in the 'Comments on the
      Home Office Refusal',  the appellant's witness statement dated 29th
      January 2019 and his witness statement dated 18th May 2017 that are to
      be found pages [A/1] to [A/26] of the appellant's bundle.  I have also
      carefully read the medico legal report of Dr Silvana Unigwe dated 26th
      October 2017, and the expert report of Christine Beddoe that is relied
      upon by the appellant, together with the background material set out
      in section B of the appellant's bundle. I have also considered the
      written submissions made by Mr Frost on behalf of the appellant in the
      skeleton argument settled by him and dated 16th November 2020.


The appellant's claim


  11. The appellant was born on 11 November 1999 and lived in Hai Duong.
      His mother moved abroad when the appellant was about three years old
      and he was raised by his maternal grandmother.  As the respondent does
      not challenge the credibility of the appellant and accepts the
      appellant has provided a broadly consistent and detailed accounts of
      the incidents he experienced in Vietnam, I adopt the short summary set
      out in paragraph [8] of the 'error of law' decision of Deputy Upper
      Tribunal Judge King:


           "There was an incident at his school when he was 15 years old in
           2015 which caused one of the pupils to be injured.  It was the
           account of the appellant that thereafter groups of men were
           motivated to attack him in March 2015, June 2015, September
           2015, March 2016 and May 2016. On the last incident an attack
           upon the house where he lived with his grandmother caused the
           death of his grandmother. It was his account that a man
           contacted him in Vietnam and arranged for his journey to China,
           to Qatar and to Serbia where he was put to work."


      The incident that occurred at the school and each of the attacks that
      the appellant was subjected to, is described in some detail in
      paragraphs [15] to [43] of the appellant's witness statement dated
      18th May 2017.  In paragraphs [44] to [53] of that witness statement,
      the appellant sets out details of his journey from Vietnam to the UK.
      It serves no purpose to repeat that evidence, which is not challenged,
      in this decision.


  12. The appellant arrived in the UK on 4th September 2016 and he was
      arrested by police on 4th January 2017 working in a nail bar.  A
      referral was made to the National Referral Mechanism and the appellant
      made a claim for international protection. In a decision dated 27th
      January 2017, the Competent Authority concluded that there are
      reasonable grounds to believe that the appellant has been a victim of
      modern slavery (human trafficking).  In a subsequent decision dated
      1st March 2019, the appellant was informed that following further
      investigations, the Competent Authority had concluded the appellant is
      a victim of human trafficking, in relation to forced labour in Serbia.


The respondent's decision


  13. The respondent addressed the appellant's claim for international
      protection in a decision dated 16th May 2019. The respondent noted the
      appellant was 17 years and three months old at the time he made his
      claim for asylum. The claim made by the appellant and his responses
      during interview, were therefore considered in light of his age and
      level of developmental maturity.


  14. The respondent noted the claim advanced by the appellant that he fears
      persecution by the same gang members who had targeted him previously
      and his claim to be a member of a particular social group as the
      victim of trafficking. The respondent concluded that victims of
      trafficking in Vietnam do not form a particular social group within
      the meaning of the Refugee Convention.


  15. The respondent accepted the appellant is a national of Vietnam and
      referred extensively in the decision, to the various attacks the
      appellant had been subjected to in Vietnam. The respondent also
      considered the medical report of Dr. Silvana Unigwe that was relied
      upon. The respondent accepted the appellant had come to the adverse
      attention of non-state actors.  The respondent accepted the appellant
      has demonstrated a genuine subjective fear of return to Vietnam but
      was not satisfied the appellant would be at risk upon return to
      Vietnam from the same gang members that he had previously encountered
      problems with, and concluded the appellant's subjective fear, is not
      objectively well-founded.


  16. The respondent considered whether the appellant would be at risk upon
      return to Vietnam as a victim of trafficking but concluded the
      appellant would not be at risk, and there is in any event, a
      sufficient protection available to the appellant in Vietnam.
      Alternatively, the respondent concluded the appellant can relocate to
      another area such as Thanh Pho Ho Chi Minh, which has an estimated
      population of 6,642,000 and is approximately 1501km away from Hai
      Duong or to Da Nang, an area that is 783km away from Hai Duong.


  17. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mrs Aboni accepted, as set out
      in paragraph 2.3.1 of the respondent's CPIN 'Vietnam - Victims of
      trafficking' version 4.0 published in April 2020, that victims of
      trafficking from Vietnam form a particular social group within the
      meaning of the 1951 Refugee Convention.


The report of Christine Beddoe


  18. Christine Beddoe was instructed to comment specifically on whether the
      appellant would be at risk of re-trafficking in Vietnam, regardless
      that his previous ordeal of trafficking took place not in Vietnam, but
      in Serbia. She was also asked to provide an updated opinion as to the
      availability of sufficient protection and internal relocation in
      Vietnam. In her report Christine Beddoe sets out her experience in
      relation to human trafficking and modern slavery, and more
      particularly her experience working in Vietnam and her keeping up to
      date with current issues in Vietnam.


  19. Christine Beddoe refers to the downgrading of Vietnam in June 2019 to
      'Tier 2 Watch List' status, by the US State Department and the
      maintenance of that status in its Trafficking in Persons report
      published in June 2020.  The downgrading was due to decreased efforts
      in the protection of victims and prosecution of traffickers since an
      earlier report in 2018. She notes the USSD points out the difficulties
      in obtaining a formal trafficking identification and referral to
      services in Vietnam, which directly impact on victims of trafficking
      returning from abroad without family support.  She also refers to the
      decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nguyen (Anti-Trafficking Convention:
      Respondents Duties) [2015] UKUT 170 that is referred to by the
      respondent but notes the situation for young adult males who have no
      family to support them economically or socially, and who were
      trafficked for criminal exploitation, is markedly different to the
      risks faced by an adult female victim of trafficking.


  20. Christine Beddoe refers to the positive conclusive ground decision
      made by the Competent Authority, but states that does not provide an
      automatic gateway for trafficking support in Vietnam. She states that
      in order to obtain state-based support in Vietnam, trafficking victims
      must have an official victim certificate issued by the State after an
      investigation.  In her opinion, the appellant will not be eligible for
      a victim certificate and therefore will be unable to rely on the state
      for protection as a victim of trafficking if he is forced to return to
      Vietnam.  She refers to the evidence of the appellant's social worker
      and the medical expert who agree the appellant's mental health will
      deteriorate when he confronts his past, and in her opinion, the
      appellant is extremely vulnerable to re-trafficking either by persons
      known or unknown.  She notes the care that has been provided by the
      local authority here in the UK, and she expresses the opinion that any
      ability to navigate daily life in the UK is because the appellant has
      support from safeguarding professionals, but he will not have access
      to this type of support in Vietnam.  She believes the appellant will
      face a cliff edge without the likelihood of mental health counselling
      if forcibly returned.  She does not believe internal relocation
      provides the required protection, and notes there are no specific
      shelters in Vietnam for male victims of trafficking. In her
      experience, vulnerable young victims like the appellant do not have
      the resilience to navigate a pathway to safety on their own.


  21. In her report, Ms Beddoe refers extensively to the appellant's witness
      statement dated 18th May 2017 in which he sets out at some length the
      events leading to the appellant's departure from Vietnam and his
      journey to the UK.  She addresses the appellant's journey from Serbia
      to the UK and the events between the appellant's arrival in the UK and
      his being found by the police in 2017. She expresses an opinion at
      paragraph [41] that there is probably more that the appellant will
      disclose over time about his journey when he feels it is safe to do
      so.  She concludes, at paragraph [44] of her report, that whether the
      appellant was trafficked from Vietnam or during the time that he was
      in Serbia is immaterial, since "..it will not increase his chances of
      protection Vietnam because anyone over 16 years of age leaving Vietnam
      without evidence of force is not considered a victim of trafficking
      under Vietnamese law..."


  22. In section D of her report, Christine Beddoe addresses the protection
      available in Vietnam, but notes the gateway to victim support
      including trafficking is access to a victim identification certificate
      issued by the police.  It does not follow that an individual
      recognised as a victim in a destination country (i.e. the UK), as a
      victim of trafficking, will be accepted as a victim in Vietnam. She
      notes that Vietnamese law is not consistent with international law on
      human trafficking. She states that before a trafficking identification
      process would even be considered, the appellant would be required to
      give the authorities his government identification papers, which he
      would first need to acquire by going through a separate bureaucratic
      process. In her opinion the appellant would not be able to access even
      the most rudimentary level of state protection offered in Vietnam, and
      he does not have the wherewithal to advocate and fight his case with
      the authorities to gain the necessary identification that is the
      gateway to state services. The difficulty is compounded here, because
      even if the appellant was recognised as a victim of trafficking, there
      is no specialist shelters for young men who are victims of trafficking
      and who continue to require specialist support and protection.


  23. In section E of her report, Christine Beddoe addresses the risk of re-
      trafficking.  She notes that the vulnerability factors that were
      present in 2016 when the appellant left Vietnam, have escalated
      because the appellant now also faces stigma, he has no identity
      documents, and would have no job. She states the appellant will need
      to go through a complex administrative process on his return to obtain
      the correct documentation, and these factors will impact on his
      ability to find work and to secure  accommodation. She expresses the
      opinion that he will be an easy target for traffickers even if they
      are not related to the criminal networks who first exploited him.  In
      her opinion, considering the personal profile of the appellant as an
      individual that had been bullied and attacked previously, she believes
      he is likely to acquiesce to avoid conflict and avoid any contact with
      the authorities.  In considering the protection available, she notes
      that Vietnam has passed updated legislation to prosecute traffickers,
      but the current objective evidence is that Vietnam is still falling
      well short in matters related to the protection of victims and the
      prevention of trafficking.  She states that the criminal activities of
      traffickers within and out of Vietnam have not been curbed.  She
      refers to research conducted in Vietnam with returning victims of
      trafficking that illustrates that far from being reintegrated into
      society, many victims face an uphill struggle that only serves to
      increase their vulnerability to re-trafficking. In summary, she
      concludes the appellant cannot rely on the police to provide
      protection from re-trafficking because there are so many gaps in the
      State's protection infrastructure, implementation of the law is weak,
      and corruption amongst police at a local level is high.


  24. Finally in section G of her report, Christine Beddoe addresses the
      suggestion in the respondent's decision that the appellant can
      internally relocate to Than Pho Ho Chi Minh or Da Nang.  She states
      internal migration is highly regulated in Vietnam.  She states that
      although laws do not prohibit spontaneous internal migration, the
      system of household registration inherently discriminates against
      vulnerable young people moving to and from main cities, to escape the
      threat of traffickers or others who seek to harm them, and it bars
      them from equal access to basic state services in health care,
      education and employment, in a place where they wish to remain
      anonymous to keep themselves safe.


  25. The report of Christine Beddoe concludes as follows:


           "144.  Whether [the appellant] is deemed a child victim of
           trafficking in Serbia, or a child victim of trafficking from
           Vietnam does not change his predicament with access to
           protection in Vietnam. He is not eligible for a victim
           certificate because he left Vietnam believing he would be taken
           for a better life, instead he was pushed into labour
           exploitation in Serbia and ultimately ended up in the UK. He
           cannot return to his home location because that is the source of
           his trafficking and attacks by non-state actors.  The push
           factors of widespread corruption, the stigma of 'victimhood',
           the household registration system and the inadequate state
           welfare and support infrastructure for male victims in Vietnam
           create an environment where not all victims are treated equally
           under the law..... There is no evidence that if he is returned
           to Vietnam, he will get protection as a victim of trafficking or
           specialist support, including shelter and mental health care.
           Internal relocation does not provide a solution and it can
           potentially cause [the appellant] further legal and
           administrative problems if he is forced to relocate without the
           correct registration papers to find safety. The specific factors
           in [the appellant's] situation, including the psychological and
           physical trauma of repeated attacks single him out as a target
           for corrupt officials and others, even if they are different to
           the traffickers he has already encountered."


The submissions


  26. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Frost accepts that there was no
      apparent debt owed by the appellant, but his grandmother had made some
      arrangements prior to her death, so that the appellant could leave
      Vietnam.  The appellant was a child at the time.  He refers to the
      opinion expressed by Christine Beddoe that there was no distinct break
      in the chain of control between the appellant's recruitment in Vietnam
      and transportation to Serbia for labour exploitation.  The appellant
      was handed over by those that had assisted in his departure from
      Vietnam, to the individuals that they were met by, at the airport in
      Serbia.  The meeting in Serbia with those that subjected the appellant
      to forced labour was not a co-incidence, but it was all part of one
      trajectory.  He submits it is very likely that if the appellant was
      trafficked from Vietnam, he would be at greatly increased risk of re-
      trafficking upon return to Vietnam.  He submits the appellant would
      not be a victim of trafficking for the purposes of Vietnamese domestic
      law, because they would consider that he was "trafficked voluntarily"
      or with consent.  However, the appellant was a child and so he could
      not consent.  In any event, he refers to the opinion expressed by
      Christine Beddoe and submits that many of the risk factors (stigma of
      victimhood, no identity documents, no job and no housing) exist
      irrespective of the scope of the appellant's trafficking experience.
      He refers to the personal characteristics of the appellant such as his
      age, education and lack of a family support network and submits the
      appellant is clearly at a high risk of being exploited and being re-
      trafficked.


  27. Mr Frost submits the appellant has shown fortitude with his mental
      health, but he remains very young and there is the potential of
      difficulties further down the line.  The expert says that given the
      appellant's profile and lack of support, he will be very vulnerable.
      His claim is supported by Mr Raj Chahal, his support worker at
      Derbyshire County Council.  He relies upon the opinion of Christine
      Beddoe that whether the appellant is deemed a child victim of
      trafficking in Serbia, or a child victim of trafficking from Vietnam
      does not change his predicament with access to protection in Vietnam.
      The appellant will not be eligible for a victim certificate because he
      left Vietnam believing he would be taken for a better life but was
      instead pushed into exploitation in Serbia.  Mr Frost submits the
      background material and the expert evidence that is before the
      Tribunal establishes that the appellant would be at risk of re-
      trafficking and there would not be sufficient protection for the
      appellant from potential traffickers.


  28. In reply, Mrs Aboni relies upon the respondent's decision, and
      although she concedes that victims of trafficking form a particular
      social group, she maintains the appellant's subjective fear is not
      objectively well-founded, and he does not qualify for protection under
      the Refugee Convention.  She submits the appellant was an economic
      migrant when he left Vietnam and was not trafficked for exploitation.
      On his own account, the appellant was contacted after the death of his
      grandmother in response to an arrangement that had been made by his
      grandmother prior to her death, so the appellant could have a better
      life.  The evidence of the appellant as set out in his witness
      statement points to a journey that had been arranged and paid for, by
      the appellant's grandmother.  It has not been established that the
      appellant owes anyone money in Vietnam and Mrs Aboni submits the
      appellant has not established that he was trafficked from Vietnam and
      has not established that he would be at risk upon return in Vietnam
      from the individuals that arranged his departure.  Mrs Aboni submits
      the trafficking occurred in Serbia and was not linked to events in
      Vietnam or the arrangements made for the appellant to leave Vietnam.


  29. Mrs Aboni refers to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nguyen (Anti-
      Trafficking Convention): respondent's duties [2015] UKUT 170 (IAC),
      and submits that although Christine Beddoe seeks to distinguish that
      case, the appellant there had additional vulnerabilities as a woman
      with children.  The appellant here is now a healthy young adult, and
      there is no up-to-date evidence before the Tribunal regarding his
      mental health.  She submits the appellant had attended school in
      Vietnam and will have gained further life skills since, and he now has
      an awareness of trafficking that will alert him to the possible risks.
       She submits that although the appellant was subjected to attacks
      before by non-state actors, he has not established that the
      individuals will seek him out on return and will target him again.  In
      any event, he can approach the police and it is clear that in the past
      they were willing to record the events and investigate.  She submits
      the appellant has not established that he would be at risk upon return
      to his home area, and he could obtain the documents required to
      internally relocate if that were necessary.


Findings and Conclusions


  30. It is common ground between the parties that the appellant was a
      victim of human trafficking in relation to the forced labour that he
      was subjected to, in Serbia.  I first consider whether the appellant
      was, as Mr Frost submits, a victim of trafficking when he left
      Vietnam, or alternatively whether he was, as Mrs Aboni submits, an
      economic migrant when he left, and only became a victim of trafficking
      following his arrival in Serbia.


  31. There is some force in the submission made by Mrs Aboni that the
      arrangements for the appellant's departure from Vietnam had been made
      by his grandmother prior to her death, and that the family home in Hai
      Duong had been sold so that some of the money could be used to send
      the appellant abroad because of fears for his safety.  However, taking
      all the evidence together and considering it in the round, I am
      persuaded, to the lower standard, that the arrangements for the
      appellant's departure from Vietnam, his arrival in Serbia and his
      treatment in Serbia, all formed an unbroken chain of events.


  32. The respondent does not challenge the appellant's account of events as
      set out in his witness statement dated 18th May 2017. At paragraphs
      [44] to [53] of that witness statement, the appellant gives a detailed
      account of his journey from Vietnam to the UK.  The chain of events
      began prior to the death of the appellant's grandmother. It is
      uncontroversial that the appellant had been subjected to a number of
      attacks in Vietnam. I accept that in January 2016, the appellant's
      grandmother informed the appellant that she was going to sell the
      house in which they lived and use some of the money to send the
      appellant abroad, because she was worried about his safety.    I
      accept that the house was sold in January 2016, and the appellant and
      his grandmother moved to Hui, a village on the outskirts of Hai Duong,
      about 10 km away.


  33. The respondent accepts the appellant was attacked in March 2016 and
      again in May 2016.  On 31st May 2016, masked men mounted an attack
      against the appellant and his grandmother as set out in paragraphs
      [39] to [41] of the witness statement.  The appellant's grandmother
      was knocked unconscious and sadly passed away about an hour after the
      masked men left the property.  I accept the appellant's evidence that
      about two months after his grandmother's death, the appellant received
      a call on his mobile phone from an individual whose voice he did not
      recognise, and who informed the appellant that he was ringing to help
      get the paperwork required for the appellant to go abroad.  On the
      lower standard, I accept that phone call was linked to the
      arrangements that the appellant's grandmother had already begun to
      make for the appellant's departure from Vietnam. I accept the
      appellant's account of the arrangements that were then made for the
      appellant to meet the gentleman to obtain some form of visa.  I have
      carefully considered the appellant's account of his journey from
      Vietnam to Qatar and then to Serbia, and I accept that throughout that
      journey the appellant was under the control of the same group of
      individuals.


  34. I also accept the appellant's evidence that upon arriving in Serbia
      there was a minibus waiting for the group outside the airport, and
      following a journey of four to five hours, the appellant and others
      that he had travelled with, were handed over by the leader of the
      group to what the appellant describes as "two white men".  The
      appellant describes that the group were taken to a warehouse and the
      following day, they were required to carry bags, sacks and wood onto
      lorries, which were parked up at the warehouse.  I do not need to say
      any more regarding the appellant's treatment in Serbia because the
      Competent Authority has already concluded, on a balance of
      probabilities, that the appellant was a victim of human trafficking in
      relation to the forced labour that he was subjected to in Serbia.  In
      my judgement, the account given by the appellant, which I accept,
      demonstrates an unbroken chain of events, during which the appellant
      was under the control of a group of individuals working together and
      in concert.  I accept the submission made by Mr Frost that it is not
      simply co-incidence that having arrived in Serbia, the appellant was
      unfortunate to find himself being subjected to forced labour.  The
      appellant was under the control of the same individual throughout his
      journey from Vietnam to Serbia and upon arrival in Serbia, he was
      immediately placed into the hands of accomplices, in what I am
      satisfied to the lower standard was a pre-arranged arrangement.


  35. In any event, as Mrs Aboni appeared to accept, the appellant has been
      found to have been a victim of trafficking in Serbia and he will
      return to Vietnam as a victim of human trafficking.  I therefore turn
      to consider whether the appellant would be at risk upon return to
      Vietnam.  To that end, I have carefully considered the report of
      Christine Beddoe and the respondent's CPIN 'Vietnam - Victims of
      trafficking' version 4.0 published in April 2020 ("the CPIN"), in
      particular.


  36. The respondent's CPIN that is relied upon by Mrs Aboni stresses that
      the risk of trafficking must be considered according to the facts of
      each individual case and the individual vulnerability.  It will be for
      the appellant to demonstrate to the authorities in Vietnam that he is
      a victim of trafficking.


  37. As set out in the report of Christine Beddoe and the respondent's
      CPIN, trafficking in human beings is illegal in Vietnam but it remains
      a serious problem and is increasing. Paragraph 2.4.3 of the CPIN
      confirms domestic legislation criminalises labour and sex trafficking
      but requires a demonstration of force, fraud or coercion in order to
      constitute a trafficking offence. The domestic definition does not
      fully correspond with the internationally accepted definition of
      trafficking.  Paragraph 2.5.5 of the CPIN confirms that whilst
      legislation exists and prosecutions occur, the government does not
      systematically refer victims to services as the government's
      definition of trafficking does not fully correspond with the
      internationally accepted definition. Paragraph 2.5.7 confirms that the
      Ministry of Labour, Invalids, and Social Affairs (MOLISA), provides
      protection and reintegration support for a range of vulnerable
      individuals, but not specific for victims of trafficking, and in order
      to access these government services victims must be in receipt of a
      victim certificate, which can be difficult to obtain if the government
      is of the opinion that the person was compliant in their illegal
      migration.  It also confirms that there are no shelters designated
      exclusively for male or child victims of trafficking, although
      existing shelters provide assistance to all kinds of vulnerable
      profiles as needed.  Paragraph 2.5.8 states that access to government
      run services and shelters are unlikely to be available for those
      returning from the UK as they would not be in receipt of a victim's
      certificate.


  38. The appellant was a child when he left Vietnam voluntarily and I find
      to be lower standard, that he is likely to be seen as an individual
      who was compliant in his illegal migration. Overall, the evidence of
      Christine Beddoe, which I accept, is to the effect that the appellant
      would face extreme difficulties in persuading the authorities to
      accept him as a trafficked person, and indeed even if that succeeded,
      there is little by way of practical support that would be given or
      could be given to him in the circumstances.


  39. The appellant's ability to internally to relocate to another area,
      particularly to another city as is suggested by the respondent has
      been considered by Christine Beddoe and at paragraphs [126] to [137]
      of her report she refers to the Ho Khau household registration system
      that is aimed at controlling population mobility, and especially
      spontaneous influxes of rural residents. She notes that the
      registration system is a complex area of public policy which is
      undergoing change.  The government passed Resolution 112 in 2017 to
      simplify administrative procedures and documents regarding residency
      management, under the authority of the Ministry of Public Security,
      and although the system appears to have simplified procedures, the
      system has not been abolished, and residents still have to carry out
      procedures related to residence management.  Christine Beddoe states
      that to obtain any legal protection as a citizen, the appellant will
      have to engage with the complex household registration administrative
      process and navigate it on his own. He will have to tell police and
      officials why he has been abroad and how he left Vietnam, then obtain
      identification documents and that will almost certainly require him to
      return to his home district, an area in which he was subjected to a
      number of attacks. Christine Beddoe acknowledges it is possible, but
      not legal or safe, for the appellant to relocate without some form
      registration.  Although the constitution of Vietnam confirms the
      freedom of all citizens to move with their equal economic, social and
      political rights secured, regardless of their whereabouts, at the
      lower level, different laws, ordinances, decrees, decisions and
      circulars create a strong barrier to spontaneous migrants accessing
      critical resources, services and support programs.  A shared feature
      of social protection policies in Vietnam is their residence-based
      principal by which a person is entitled to housing ownership and
      various economic and social entitlements only when they are permanent
      residents of the locality. She states the appellant will require his
      identity papers to register for a residence permit and being an
      internal migrant without papers places him at greater risk of
      intimidation and bribery from corrupt police or officials. She
      concludes that internal relocation is a complex and stratified process
      in Vietnam and although the laws do not prohibit spontaneous internal
      migration, the household registration system inherently discriminates
      against vulnerable young people moving to and from main cities to
      escape the threat of traffickers or others who seek to harm them.  It
      bars them from equal access to basic state services and healthcare,
      education and employment in a place where they wish to remain
      anonymous to keep themselves safe.


  40. It is necessary for the appellant to show that he falls within one of
      the categories of individuals under the Refugee Convention and would
      face a real risk of persecution by reason of such matters, upon
      return.  Mrs Aboni accepts that victims of trafficking from Vietnam
      form a particular social group within the meaning of the Refugee
      Convention.


  41. It is clear that in the past the appellant has been subjected to a
      number of brutal attacks and suffered physically abusive and degrading
      treatment.  He has also suffered as a victim of human trafficking and
      forced labour.  He has been violently assaulted and has been put in
      fear of his safety. His very identity has been put in question by the
      nature of the forced labour that he was subjected to. The focus of my
      consideration must therefore be, applying the appropriate burden and
      standard of proof, as to whether there is a real risk that such an
      experience will be repeated if he returns to Vietnam. I find that it
      would.


  42. In reaching my decision I have had particular regard to the
      appellant's vulnerabilities as a young adult male who would have no
      family support, few educational or vocational skills, no identity
      documents, and as an individual who has previously experienced
      repeated physical and psychological trauma in Vietnam followed by
      trafficking and forced labour.  I have also had regard to the opinions
      expressed in the medico legal report of Dr Silvana Unigwe, dated 26th
      October 2017.  I acknowledge there is no up-to-date medical evidence
      before the Tribunal regarding the appellant's mental health.


  43. The appellant had already been subjected to a number of attacks in Hau
      Duong.  He left the area with his grandmother in or about January 2016
      when he was a child.  Following the death of his grandmother, there is
      an absence of any family for the appellant to return to.  There will
      be no support network to assist him and he has little or no education
      or vocational skills to turn to.  It is clear from the background
      material and the matters set out in the report of Christine Beddoe,
      which I accept, that any access to official documentation to assist
      his status would be lengthy and protracted, if indeed successful. His
      situation would of necessity cause him to need to contact police or
      officials and to return to the area from which he was originally
      trafficked, and he would be vulnerable to re-trafficking.  Given his
      past experiences, I find the appellant would find it difficult to
      integrate within the community and would readily be perceived as an
      outsider and therefore somebody who would be an obvious target to be
      re-trafficked.   His need to be supported emotionally, is just the
      sort of need that can be exploited by potential traffickers who may
      seek initially to befriend him and then use him for their own
      purposes.


  44. The appellant would also face the cumbersome process in place in order
      to have his trafficked status recognised. It is clear from the
      evidence of Christine Beddoe, which I accept, that it is a cumbersome
      process, and one that involves considerable engagement with
      authorities. The appellant's mental condition as is apparent from the
      medical evidence before me, although now somewhat dated, and the
      letter in support from Raj Chahal indicates that he would not manage
      that process very well or give any good account of himself in the
      process.  Mr Chahal states in his letter dated 12th July 2019 that the
      appellant is a very private person and does not speak of his past and
      has not done so with other workers in the past. He chooses not to
      engage when the subject is brought up, and there is a concern that he
      is isolating himself, although signs of emotional weakness are now
      starting to show. There is concern in the evidence before me that the
      appellant has not yet addressed his past, and when he does, the
      correct support needs to be in place.


  45. Given the length of time that he has been absent from his home area,
      it seems to me to be speculative as to whether or not the appellant
      will achieve any recognition of his trafficked status. Even if he
      does, it does not seem from the background material that there is any
      particular protection or assistance that would be available to him, as
      a young adult male.


  46. I accept that during the process of the investigation there will be no
      particular benefits or protections available to the appellant and he
      would therefore remain vulnerable. He would, in the absence of having
      the proper documentation, be unable to access healthcare,
      accommodation, work or support, and that can only exacerbate what is
      his fragile mental state, to his detriment.


  47. Although I accept that the authorities in Vietnam are actively seeking
      to counter trafficking, it is to be noted that there have been few, if
      any, prosecutions and that the number of those recognised as being
      trafficked has decreased. There is nothing to lead me to the
      conclusion that there would be any sufficiency of protection to the
      appellant were he to return to his home area. I also bear in mind the
      corruption that is endemic which clearly supports those who have
      influence, but not those who have no standing or influence. For these
      reasons I conclude that there is indeed a very real risk that the
      appellant will be re-trafficked, were he to return to his home area.


  48. In considering whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to
      internally relocate, I bear in mind the decision in Januzi [2006] UKHL
      5. It has to be established that the appellant would be able to
      conduct his life with access to work, accommodation and to survive in
      an economic manner as a citizen. In light of the background material,
      the vulnerabilities of the appellant that I have already set out, and
      the conclusions set out in the report of Christine Beddoe I cannot
      find that  in the particular circumstances of the appellant, internal
      relocation is realistic.  I find the appellant is likely to encounter
      difficulties securing the certificate of registration that is required
      and the appellant would remain very much on the margins of society.
      Once again the mental state of the appellant is of utmost relevant to
      his ability to interact in a community sense.  Because of his
      particular vulnerabilities, I find that he is likely to be seen very
      much as a vulnerable individual to be exploited.  I am quite satisfied
      that whether he returns to his home area or elsewhere, he remains very
      much at risk of being re-trafficked.  I do not find that the efforts
      of the authorities, would offer him any safety or protection.


  49. In my judgement, the appellant would be at risk upon return to Vietnam
      and it follows that his appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Notice of Decision


  50. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


  51. An anonymity direction is made.





Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date          20th January 2021


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia










