
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05546/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 10 January 2018                        |On: 15 January 2018            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Mr Wilkins, Counsel
For the respondent:    McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as HM.


    1. In a decision dated 3 October 2017 I found that the decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law and set it  aside.   I
       gave directions for the appeal to be reheard by me, on a later date,
       which took place on 10 January 2018.


    2. In this decision, I refer to the appellant's  four  British  citizen
       children as follows: his step-children D (born in 2003) and A  (born
       in 2005) and his younger biological children, L (born in  2011)  and
       M, (born in 2012).  The children's mother  remains  the  appellant's
       partner.  They got married in an Islamic ceremony in 2012,  and  for
       this reason I refer to her as his wife in this decision.

Background history

    3. Although much of the background history was set out  in  my  earlier
       decision, for completeness I repeat the relevant background  history
       in this decision.  I only summarise the relevant history as much  of
       it is of some vintage and no longer pertinent to the issues  for  me
       to decide.


    4. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  He came to the  United  Kingdom
       ('UK') on 17 September  2003  and  applied  for  asylum.   This  was
       refused but he did not become appeals rights exhausted until  August
       2006.  Shortly after this, the  appellant  made  an  application  to
       remain pursuant to the SSHD's 'Rashid' policy.  This was refused  in
       May 2007.  At around that time, in September 2007 the SSHD indicated
       that there were to be no enforced returns to Iraq.  At the beginning
       of 2008, the appellant made  an  application  to  remain  under  the
       'legacy' policy but this was also refused.


    5. On 14 August 2009, the appellant was convicted of  possessing  false
       identity documents and sentenced to six months imprisonment  with  a
       recommendation for deportation.   At  this  stage,  the  SSHD  acted
       promptly and the appellant was served with a deportation order on 10
       September 2009, in relation to  which  he  lodged  an  appeal.   The
       appellant met his wife in  April  2010.   In  a  decision  dated  12
       November 2010 the First-tier Tribunal disbelieved  the  entirety  of
       the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  as   well   as   his   claimed
       relationship.    The appellant again became appeals rights exhausted
       on 25 February 2011 and the deportation order was signed on  25  May
       2011.  L was born at around this time.

    6. On 6 June 2011, the appellant  applied  to  revoke  his  deportation
       order and successfully obtained a stay on his removal at that  time,
       alongside a number of Iraqis the SSHD proposed to  deport  to  Iraq.
       His revocation application was refused and certified in August  2011
       and he challenged  this  by  way  of  judicial  review.  There  then
       followed  extensive   litigation   regarding   the   lawfulness   of
       deportations to Iraq, including that of this appellant.  During that
       time in 2012, M was born.


    7. The decision refusing permission in the appellant's judicial  review
       claim was not made until 6 March 2014 - see the decision of  Ouseley
       J of that date.

    8. On 16 October 2014, the appellant  made  a  further  application  to
       revoke the deportation order.  No decision was made on this until 11
       May 2016, when the appellant was  granted  an  in-country  right  of
       appeal.


    9. In 2017 a  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
       against the refusal to revoke his deportation  order  on  protection
       and human rights grounds.

Hearing

Issues in dispute

   10. At the beginning of the hearing both representatives agreed that the
       above chronology of events correctly set out the relevant background
       to the appeal.  They also agreed that  the  only  ground  of  appeal
       before me concerns Article 8 of the ECHR.


   11. Given the mistaken assumption on the part of the First-tier Tribunal
       that the appellant is a 'foreign criminal' and  the  application  of
       the wrong legal framework in order to determine Article  8,  it  was
       agreed that it was important to clarify with  care  the  appropriate
       legal  framework  appertaining  to  a  case  such  as  this.    Both
       representatives  agreed  that  the  appellant  is  not  a   'foreign
       criminal' but in determining whether his deportation order should be
       revoked, weight to must be attached to the public  interest  in  his
       deportation together with the SSHD's  policy  as  contained  in  the
       relevant Immigration Rules and  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').


   12. Both representatives also agreed that some of the  factual  findings
       made by the 2017 First-tier Tribunal should be preserved:


                    i) The First-tier Tribunal accepted the detailed account
                       of  close and  committed  relationships  between  the
                       appellant and all four  children  and  his  wife,  as
                       described in a report dated 21 December  2017  of  Ms
                       Brown, an independent social worker ('ISW').


                   ii)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  accepted  that  the
                       appellant committed a single offence,  at  the  lower
                       end of the scale and that he had not reoffended.

   13. The 2017 First-tier Tribunal  made  a  number  of  adverse  findings
       regarding the appellant's immigration history and conduct whilst  in
       the UK at [34].  Both representatives agreed  that  there  was  more
       detailed information available to me, which cast considerable  doubt
       upon the chronology outlined by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  the
       circumstances, it was agreed that I should revisit this issue  on  a
       de novo basis by reference  to  the  chronology  I  have  summarised
       above.

Evidence

   14. Ms Brown was instructed to prepare an updated report on the family's
       circumstances but was unable to do so in time for the hearing.   She
       was however able to visit the family the day before the hearing  and
       spent 2� hours at the family home.   Ms Wilkins explained  that  the
       conclusions in the report remained the same  and  proposed  that  Ms
       Brown give brief oral evidence to that effect.   Mr  McVeety  agreed
       that in all the  circumstances  it  was  appropriate  to  hear  oral
       evidence rather than adjourn the case for a formal report.


   15. Ms Brown explained that she met every member of the family when  she
       visited the day before save for D  who  was  at  an  apprenticeship.
       There was no significant  material  change  to  the  overall  family
       dynamics.  She described the family as "a little chaotic  but  in  a
       delightful way".  Ms Brown said that  she  spent  considerable  time
       with A, who was articulate and candid.  She described a  very  close
       and happy relationship with the appellant, who she regards to be and
       refers to as her dad.  Ms Brown also explained  that  the  appellant
       has started taking the children to  the  mosque.   She  expressed  a
       concern that an understanding of the children's mixed  heritage  was
       likely to be lost if the appellant is deported.

   16. Mr McVeety asked  Ms  Brown  one  question  only  i.e.  whether  the
       children were being forced to attend the mosque.  She made  it  very
       clear that the children viewed the mosque as a largely social affair
       and were very happy to attend.  Ms Brown was not asked  any  further
       questions.

   17. After the completion of Ms Brown's  evidence,  Mr  McVeety  candidly
       acknowledged that the underlying factual matrix to  the  appeal  was
       not disputed and as such he did not wish to ask  the  appellant  and
       his  wife  any  questions.   They  were  therefore  not  called   as
       witnesses.


Submissions

   18. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the British citizen children  and  wife
       could not  be  expected  to  reside  in  Iraq  given  the  difficult
       conditions there.  He described the key question in this case to  be
       a straightforward one given the absence of any dispute regarding the
       factual matrix or legal framework.  He  described  the  question  in
       these terms: is the appellant's single low  level  criminal  offence
       sufficient to tip the balance in the SSHD's  favour  such  that  the
       public interest outweighs the  interference  with  the  very  strong
       family life between the appellant and his children and wife?


   19. Mr McVeety acknowledged that apart from his criminal offending there
       was no clear public interest in  the  appellant's  deportation.   In
       particular, he accepted that the appellant has  spent  much  of  his
       lengthy time in the UK reasonably pursuing applications and awaiting
       their final resolution.  He therefore  distanced  himself  from  the
       findings made by the 2017 First-tier Tribunal at [34].   Mr  McVeety
       invited me to determine the appeal as I considered appropriate.

   20. Ms Wilkins relied upon her helpful skeleton argument and invited  me
       to find that the best interests of the children and the very  strong
       family life are such that the interference with that family would be
       a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

   21. After hearing from both representatives, I  allowed  the  appeal  on
       Article 8 grounds. I now provide my written reasons for doing so.

Legal framework

   22. By section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, a person who is  not
       a British citizen is liable to deportation if  the  SSHD  deems  his
       deportation to be conducive to the  public  good;  and,  by  section
       5(1), in respect of a person liable to  deportation,  the  SSHD  may
       make a deportation order requiring him to leave and prohibiting  him
       from entering the UK. Section 5(2)  gives  the  SSHD  the  power  to
       revoke a deportation order 'at any time'.


   23. The appellant's application  is  to  revoke  the  deportation  order
       signed on 25 May 2011.  This  was  based  upon  his  conviction  and
       sentence of six months imprisonment for possession of false identity
       documents on 14 August  2009  and  the  court's  recommendation  for
       deportation.

   24. The relevant Immigration Rules relevant to an application for
       revocation are found at paragraphs 390-391A, which provide as
       follows:


           "390. An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
           be considered in the light of all  the  circumstances  including
           the following:
                    i) the grounds on which the order was made;
                   ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
                  iii)  the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                       maintenance of an effective immigration control;
                   iv)  the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                       compassionate circumstances.


           390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does
           not, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
           public interest in maintaining the  deportation  order  will  be
           outweighed by other factors.


           391. In the case of a person who  has  been  deported  following
           conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
           deportation  order  against  that  person  will  be  the  proper
           course...


           391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
           be authorised unless the situation has been materially  altered,
           either by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or
           by fresh information coming to light which was  not  before  the
           appellate authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage  of
           time since the person was deported may also in itself amount  to
           such a change of circumstances as to warrant revocation  of  the
           order
           ...
           396. Where a person is liable  to  deportation  the  presumption
           shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in
           the public interest to deport where the Secretary of State  must
           make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK
           Borders Act 2007.


           397. A deportation order  will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
           removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
           Convention. Where deportation would not  be  contrary  to  these
           obligations, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
           the public interest in deportation is outweighed."


   25. The well-known provisions of paragraph 398 as reflected  in  section
       117C of the 2002 Act do not apply as the appellant does not meet any
       of the criteria.  Paragraph 391 does not apply as the appellant  has
       not actually been deported.


   26. In cases involving representations  made  on  human  rights  grounds
       under Article  8,  the  heart  of  the  assessment  is  whether  the
       deportation decision strikes a fair balance between the  due  weight
       to be given to the strength of the public  interest  in  deportation
       and the impact of the decision on the individual's private or family
       life. In assessing whether the decision strikes  a  fair  balance  I
       must give appropriate weight to Parliament's and  the  Secretary  of
       State's assessment of the strength of the general public interest in
       the deportation of foreign offenders as expressed  in  the  relevant
       rules and statutes: see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.

   27. As pointed out in KE (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1382,  the
       statutory provisions in sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act  are  the
       relevant drivers in cases which concern the application  of  Article
       8(2), and they apply to  the  consideration  of  the  revocation  of
       deportation orders.   The statutory provisions in sections 117A-117D
       are law and together with the relevant  Immigration  Rules  set  out
       policy, in the sense that they provide a general assessment  of  the
       proportionality exercise that has to be performed under Article 8(2)
       where there is a public interest in deporting a foreign criminal but
       countervailing Article 8 factors.  The statutory provisions  provide
       a particularly strong statement of public policy,  such  that  great
       weight should generally be given to  it  and  cases  in  which  that
       public interest will be outweighed, other than  those  specified  in
       the statutory provisions and Rules themselves, are likely  to  be  a
       very small minority, particular in non-settled cases  -  see  KE  at
       [30].


   28. Where Article 8 is invoked, there is therefore  a  presumption  that
       the  public  interest  requires  deportation  but  if  after  having
       undertaken the full assessment by  reference  to  the  statutes  and
       Immigration Rules, to deport the appellant would result in a  breach
       of Article 8, it should be revoked.


   29. In considering the public interest question for the purposes of  the
       Article 8 proportionality assessment in this case,  regard  must  be
       given to the considerations listed in section 117B of the 2002  Act.
       The additional considerations in section  117C  do  not  apply  here
       because  the  appellant  is  not  a  'foreign  criminal'  for  these
       purposes.

   30. As the Article 8 family life equation involves children, section  55
       is immediately engaged - see ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

Article 8 assessment

Family life

  31. Having considered all the detailed evidence in the round, I accept the
      evidence as corroborated by Ms Brown, that the appellant  has  a  very
      close relationship with his  children  and  wife.   I  note  that  two
      previous First-tier Tribunals found the appellant to be  dishonest  in
      his account  of  his  circumstances  in  Iraq.   The  2010  First-tier
      Tribunal also rejected his claim to be in a relationship with his  now
      wife.  Notwithstanding this, the 2017 First-tier Tribunal was prepared
      to accept  the  genuineness  of  the  family  relationships.   I  have
      considering all these findings, together with  the  detailed  evidence
      before me and entirely accept the description of the family  unit  and
      relationships within it in the statements of  the  appellant  and  his
      wife, and in Ms Brown's report, as updated by oral evidence.


  32. For the avoidance of doubt, although the two older  children  are  the
      appellant's step-children, I accept the evidence that everyone in  the
      family regards the relationships as being akin to  father  and  child,
      and there  is  no  real  distinction  between  the  step-children  and
      biological children.  The step-children cannot recall  ever  having  a
      relationship with their respective fathers and have grown up  over  an
      extended period and at particularly formative stages of their lives (7-
      14 and 5-12 respectively) with the appellant playing a full and active
      fatherly role.  They refer to him as 'Dad' or 'Daddy'.


  33. The appellant's relationship with all four  children  is  particularly
      close because he is not permitted to work and  his  wife  works  night
      shifts as a care assistant twice  a  week.   The  appellant  therefore
      plays an important role in general household duties,  caring  for  the
      children when ill (D has been hospitalised  because  of  his  asthma),
      school drop offs  and  collections.   As  observed  by  Ms  Brown  the
      appellant's relationship with each child includes very close emotional
      and physical bonds.  Each child has  developed  significant  emotional
      attachments to the appellant.  The  older  children  have  experienced
      separation in 2011 when the appellant was  detained  with  a  view  to
      removal and Ms Brown has  described  the  considerable  distress  this
      caused them.  Ms Brown explained that this distress was also  manifest
      in A when she spoke  to  her  about  the  2017  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision.

  34. I must consider the best interests of the four children concerned as a
      primary consideration. The appellant plays a very active part in their
      daily lives. He is a caring and loving father.  The  children  benefit
      from his attention, care, love and  involvement  in  their  respective
      lives. These benefits are overwhelming for each of  them.   Given  the
      nature and depth of the relationships, the  use  of  modern  means  of
      communication would not come even close to replacing  or  compensating
      for the appellant's absence from the family,  particularly  given  the
      ages of the younger children.  To the credit of the appellant and  his
      wife they  have  together  built  a  large  happy  integrated  family,
      notwithstanding the constraints caused by very limited finances.


  35. I therefore find that by a significant measure the best  interests  of
      the children require their father to continue to play an  active  role
      in their lives in the UK.


  36. I also accept that the relationship between the appellant and his wife
      is genuine and they work together as a team to care for the  children.
       I note that she relies upon the appellant to be the primary carer for
      the children at least two nights a week to enable her  to  work  as  a
      care assistant (when she works from 9pm to 7.30am and must  sleep  the
      next day) and that for the remainder  of  the  week  they  both  takes
      active roles in parenting.  I accept that  the  appellant's  wife  may
      have to give up her  employment  and  rely  to  a  greater  extent  on
      benefits without  the  appellant's  assistance.   I  also  accept  her
      evidence that she would find it very difficult to cope with  the  four
      children on her own.


  37. In making these findings I bear in mind that  the  family  lives  very
      near to maternal relatives, including grandparents  and  the  extended
      family members are all close.  I accept that the children  spend  time
      with their extended family and they will be able to  offer  assistance
      in  the  appellant's  absence.   That  assistance  however  will  have
      practical limitations.  The grandfather is in ill-health and is  cared
      for by the grandmother, who also works.  As noted by Ms Brown the time
      is fast approaching when the grandparents' care needs will have to  be
      met at least partly by  the  appellant's  wife.   In  any  event,  the
      dependency upon the appellant on the part of  his  wife  and  children
      goes well beyond the practical.  Ms Brown describes a  high  level  of
      emotional dependency in considerable detail.   The  children  turn  to
      their father for hugs, play-time, love, attention  and  support  on  a
      daily basis.  I therefore accept that there is a large extended family
      able and  willing  to  assist  but  they  are  entirely  incapable  of
      replacing or substituting for the appellant.

Private life

   38.  I  acknowledge  that  appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
       Immigration Rules can be of no assistance to the  appellant  as  the
       suitability requirements disqualify anyone subject to a  deportation
       order.  I must still consider the appellant's private  life,  albeit
       little weight should be given to it because it was established  when
       his immigration status  was  either  precarious  or  unlawful.   The
       appellant has undoubtedly resided in the UK for  a  lengthy  period,
       over 14 years and has strong links  to  the  community  through  his
       children and his local Mosque.

Interference with family and private life

  39. The appellant's deportation from the  UK  will  entail  a  substantial
      interference with the right to respect for family life enjoyed by  the
      appellant, his wife and their four children.  The  SSHD  accepts  that
      the family  members  cannot  be  expected  to  go  to  Iraq  with  the
      appellant.


  40. Having found that there will be an interference with  family  life  of
      the nature rehearsed above, I record that it is not disputed that such
      interference will  be  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  pursues  a
      legitimate aim.  Thus,  the  central  question  to  be  addressed  and
      determined is that of the  proportionality  of  the  interference,  in
      circumstances where the sentence of  imprisonment  concerned  is  less
      than 12 months and the appellant is not a 'foreign criminal'.

Public interest


   41. As this is a case in which the deportation order  has  already  been
       signed  I  acknowledge  there  is  a  presumption   in   favour   of
       deportation.  The appellant remains liable  to  deportation,  having
       already unsuccessfully appealed  against  the  decision  to  make  a
       deportation order against him - see the decision of the 2010  First-
       tier Tribunal.


   42. In my judgment, there have been material and fundamental changes  to
       the  appellant's  circumstances  since   the   First-tier   Tribunal
       dismissed his appeal against the decision  to  deport  in  2010  and
       since the deportation order was signed in May 2011.  At  that  time,
       the appellant's relationship with his  wife  and  step-children  was
       relatively new (they  only  met  a  few  months  before  the  appeal
       hearing).  At the time the deportation order was  signed,  L  was  a
       young baby and M had not been born.  The  situation  has  materially
       altered since then.  As summarised above, the picture of family life
       in January 2018 as described by Ms Brown after  spending  over  five
       hours on two  separate  occasions  with  the  family  is  undeniably
       entirely different.


   43. In addition, the appellant's conviction of a single offence in  2009
       was relatively recent when the deportation order was signed.  It  is
       accepted that the offence is at  the  lower  end  of  the  scale  of
       seriousness.  He was sentenced to six months for identity fraud  and
       served three months.    The  appellant  does  not  dispute  that  he
       committed  the  offence  out  of  desperation  to  obtain   hospital
       treatment and that what he did was wrong.  With the passage of  time
       the appellant has been able  to  demonstrate  his  devotion  to  his
       family and his commitment to leading a law-abiding life.  Mr McVeety
       did not dispute that he is now fully rehabilitated with a negligible
       risk of re-offending.  Notwithstanding this, there remains a  public
       interest in deportation: that is the SSHD's policy.   I  acknowledge
       that in order to deter others and to elicit public confidence in the
       system, the public interest in deporting those  who  have  committed
       criminal offences and consequently  a  deportation  order  has  been
       signed against them remains, even though as here, the offending  was
       not serious and is of some vintage.


   44. I now turn to the public interest considerations applicable  in  all
       cases at section 117B.  The maintenance of immigration  controls  is
       in the public interest.   The  appellant  has  never  had  leave  to
       remain.  His immigration status has been precarious for the  greater
       part (but unlawful at times) as much of  his  time  has  been  spent
       awaiting the conclusion of applications reasonably open to him.   In
       broad terms: between 2003-6  he  was  pursuing  his  initial  appeal
       process against  the  refusal  of  asylum;  between  2006-9  he  was
       pursuing various  applications  to  remain  in  the  UK  based  upon
       policies at the time; after  his  conviction  and  the  decision  to
       deport  him  in  2009  he  was  again  pursuing  appeals  until  the
       deportation order was signed in 2011; between 2011-14 the  appellant
       was involved  in  lengthy  litigation  involving  the  viability  of
       removal of Iraqi citizens;  in  2014  the  appellant  made  a  fresh
       application, which was not decided until 2016; this led to a further
       appeal process which continued from 2016 to the present day.


   45. That summary  of  the  relevant  chronology  demonstrates  that  the
       appellant is not culpable in seeking  to  unreasonably  prolong  his
       stay in the  UK  and  as  Mr  McVeety  accepted  has  been  pursuing
       applications entirely open to him for most of his time  in  the  UK.
       The chronology also demonstrates that contrary to my initial  views,
       there has been little material serious  delay  attributable  to  the
       SSHD.


   46. The appellant is less likely to be a burden on tax payers  and  more
       likely to integrate as he  speaks  English  well.   The  appellant's
       discipline and acceptance of family responsibilities  together  with
       his voluntary activities at the mosque support my view that there is
       every reason to believe that he is capable of employment, around the
       needs of his children and his wife.  I therefore find  that  if  the
       appellant remains, the family has the potential  to  be  financially
       independent, whereas if he is deported there is  a  likelihood  that
       the appellant's wife will find it too  difficult  to  work  and  the
       family may find themselves depending upon the  state  to  a  greater
       extent.


   47. Little weight should be given to the appellant's private life as  it
       was developed when he was in the UK unlawfully or  when  his  status
       was precarious.


   48. Little weight should also be given to the  appellant's  relationship
       with his wife in so far as it was established when he was in the  UK
       unlawfully.  The chronology makes it clear that  the  appellant  met
       his wife in 2010 at  a  time  when  he  was  appealing  against  the
       deportation decision.  Although he did not have leave to  remain  at
       this time he would have  benefitted  from  temporary  admission  and
       cannot be said to have been in the UK unlawfully.  Shortly after the
       deportation order was signed the appellant submitted a  fresh  claim
       and commenced judicial review proceedings, which  continued  for  an
       extended period until 2014.  Shortly after the  final  determination
       of those proceedings the appellant lodged  a  further  fresh  claim.
       Whilst  there  were  short  periods  during  the   course   of   the
       relationship, that the appellant was in the UK unlawfully, for  most
       of the time he was entitled to be in  the  UK  in  order  to  pursue
       extant applications.  When the chronology is considered as a  whole,
       I do not  find  that  the  relationship  was  established  when  the
       appellant was in the UK unlawfully.   Even  if  it  was  and  little
       weight must be attached to the relationship, my  decision  would  be
       the same given my findings as to the strength  of  the  relationship
       and dependency between the appellant and the children.


   49. It has been agreed that section 117B(6) does not apply here  because
       the appellant is liable to deportation.


   50. I have no hesitation in  concluding  that  the  public  interest  is
       outweighed by the strength of the appellant's family life in the  UK
       and the impact the interference with this will have  upon  his  four
       children and the family unit.


   51. Although the application of the Immigration Rules to the appellant's
       case is such that he is not required to demonstrate that the  impact
       of his deportation upon his wife and children reaches the  threshold
       of being 'unduly harsh', I  find  that  in  any  event  and  in  the
       particular circumstances of this case that this  demanding  test  is
       met.  Given their ages and relationship with their father  all  four
       children will be bereft and traumatised by  his  absence.   For  the
       reasons provided by Ms Brown,  which  I  entirely  accept,  this  is
       likely to last for a considerable period and do lasting  and  severe
       emotional harm.  Their best interests will be adversely impacted  in
       a significant manner notwithstanding  the  availability  of  support
       from their mother and the maternal family.  Taking into account  all
       the circumstances of the case, including  the  appellant's  criminal
       offence and immigration history, the consequences for  the  children
       and the family unit will be excessively harsh.

Decision

   52. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal on Article  8  of  the
       ECHR grounds.



Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 12 January
2018
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
