
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05378/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th November 2018                    |On 27th November 2018              |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                miss I. E. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 23rd April 1984 is a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   The
    Appellant had made application  for  asylum  on  24th  March  2018  the
    Respondent refused that application.  She appealed  that  decision  and
    her appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Trevaskis
    sitting at Newport on 6th July 2018.  He had dismissed  her  appeal  on
    all grounds.  Application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  17th
    July 2018.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Buchanan on 31st July 2018.  It was said that it was arguable that  the
    judge had failed to give reasons why he concluded that she had not been
    a victim of domestic violence.

 3. Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal to firstly decide whether
    an error of law had been made in this case and the matter comes  before
    me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. It was submitted that there was no reasoning by the judge to  show  why
    the Appellant was not a victim of domestic violence.  The judge has set
    out the background to domestic violence and had looked at whether there
    was still a risk on  return.   It  was  said  there  was  an  error  at
    paragraph 55 for the judge to conclude that  there  was  no  longer  an
    interest from the ex-partner as no reasons  had  been  given  for  that
    conclusion.  It was submitted that there is an error in  assessing  the
    credibility of ritual sacrifice and there have  been  comments  in  the
    country material that the judge should have regarded.

 5. It was submitted the judge had accepted that the rule of  law  was  not
    enforced in Nigeria and  therefore  there  was  not  necessarily  state
    protection.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 6. Mr Howells relied upon the Rule 24 response dated 13th  September.   It
    was submitted  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  essentially  related  to
    credibility points only and that even if  there  were  errors  in  this
    respect  it  was  not  material  because  the  judge  had  found   that
    alternatively there was a sufficiency of protection and in the  further
    alternative there was the  prospect  of  relocation.   However  it  was
    submitted that findings on credibility were sufficient  and  whilst  it
    may be that there had not been a significant number of reasons given as
    to why she was not a victim of domestic violence it  was  not  material
    because in paragraph 55 the judge had  noted  that  the  Appellant  was
    still in contact with family members and her ex-husband  had  not  made
    steps to find her and further the Twitter account demonstrated  he  had
    no further interest in her.

 7. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the documents  and
    evidence submitted.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. The Appellant's claim was that in March 2016 she met her former partner
    who told her that  he  had  political  ambitions  and  that  he  needed
    spiritual sacrifices to achieve power.  He was a controlling individual
    and she had been a victim of domestic violence.  She had given birth to
    a baby.

 9. The judge had identified the key issues in this case and  had  in  mind
    country materials.  It was a case where the assessment  of  credibility
    was central and at paragraph 47 the judge had reminded himself  of  the
    proper approach to credibility as set out in MA v UT [2014] CSIH 111.

10. The judge had considered the Appellant's claim to fear for herself  and
    child as a result of the ex-partner's implied threats against  them  to
    use the baby as sacrifice in a ritual.  At  paragraphs  51  to  52  the
    judge  had  given  an  adequacy  of  reasons  for  not  accepting  that
    assertion.

11. In respect of the allegation of former domestic violence the  judge  at
    53 had noted that there was no supportive evidence in respect  of  that
    assertion.  He did however accept that  country  material  demonstrated
    that had she gone to the police it is unlikely they would have assisted
    and therefore it would be credible not to  expect  supportive  evidence
    from that particular source.  At paragraph 53 the judge did not  appear
    to either  accept  or  reject  her  claim  of  domestic  violence.   At
    paragraph 56 the judge finds inter alia that she has not been a  victim
    of sexual violence.  At paragraph 57 he noted that there was a lack  of
    enforcement of legislation prohibiting domestic violence but  again  he
    found that he was not satisfied that she had been in a  victim  in  the
    past nor that she was a real risk of being  a  victim  if  returned  to
    Nigeria.

12. There is a lack of reasoning in respect of the judge's conclusion  that
    she had not been a victim of domestic violence in the past.   There  is
    however an adequacy of reasoning (paragraph 55) as to why he finds that
    there is not a real risk of her being a victim of domestic violence  on
    return to Nigeria.

13. In any event the  judge  had  found,  leaving  aside  his  findings  on
    credibility, that she was able to relocate internally.  (Paragraphs  58
    to 59).  Those were reasonable findings with adequate reasons provided.

14. The Appellant in this case was a highly educated young woman who was  a
    trained lawyer, with family in the judiciary and a godfather who was  a
    judge in Nigeria.  She had been granted in the past a five  year  multi
    entry visa to the UK on 2nd September 2015.  She had met her partner on
    her account in March 2016.  In July/August 2016 she  had  travelled  to
    the UK and stayed for a few weeks.  She had then returned to the UK  in
    June 2017 when she made her asylum claim.   The  judge  had  adequately
    reasoned and made findings in respect of the claim of ritual sacrifice.
     He had not provided adequate reasons why he found  the  Appellant  had
    not suffered domestic violence in the past, although he had provided an
    adequacy of reasoning why he found she was not at real risk of such  on
    return.  Alternatively he had provided adequate reasons plainly in line
    with the evidence that indicated it would not be unreasonable or unduly
    harsh  for  the  Appellant  to  internally  relocate  if  that   proved
    necessary.

15. Accordingly therefore there was no material error of law in this case.





Decision

16. I find no material error of law was made by the judge in this case  and
    I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

