
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05579/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2018                          |On 26th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                    U M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain (instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
      permission, in relation to a Decision and  Reasons  of  Judge  Caswell
      following a hearing at Bradford on 27th January 2017.  In  a  Decision
      and Reasons promulgated on 3rd February 2017 the appeal was  dismissed
      on all grounds.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who claimed asylum on the basis
      that he is an ethnic Oromo; that his father was a member  of  OLF  and
      was killed by the  Government  in  2003;  that  he  himself  had  been
      attacked by Government forces and left for dead; that he was a  member
      of OLF in Ethiopia and delivered leaflets and that he  was  wanted  by
      the authorities who had been to his home looking for him.  Also he had
      been involved with the OLF in the UK and would be at risk on return.

   3. The Judge noted that the issue  in  the  appeal  was  credibility;  if
      credible the Appellant was entitled to succeed.

   4. She found however that the Appellant had consistently failed to give a
      clear account of events, pointing to  numerous  inconsistencies.   She
      noted that in oral evidence he gave vague, evasive  and  contradictory
      answers; claimed that he  had  memory  problems  without  any  medical
      evidence; that a letter of support  was  based  only  on  a  telephone
      interview and recited what the Appellant had told the author  and  was
      expressed in vague terms.  Apart from  the  Appellant  there  were  no
      other witnesses.

   5. For those reasons the Judge found the Appellant had not been  involved
      with the OLF in Ethiopia, that his father had not been killed  by  the
      Government and that he himself had not been attacked.

   6. Those findings were not challenged.

   7. The grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  and  argued
      before me related to the Appellant's  sur  place  activities  and  the
      Judge's conclusions in relation to them.

   8.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  attended  a   London
      demonstration.  She found the Appellant's presence at a  fund  raising
      event would not bring him to the attention of  the  authorities.   She
      found when he left Ethiopia he was of no interest and they would  have
      no reason to be interested in him now and would not be  aware  of  his
      very minor involvement in the UK.  She also said  that  if  questioned
      the Appellant could either deny involvement or  be  truthful  and  say
      that he had attended only to bolster a false asylum claim and that  in
      truth he had no affiliation with the OLF.

   9. Mr Hussein argued that the Judge had not applied the Country  Guidance
      case of MB (OLF & MTA - risk) Ethiopia  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00030.   He
      argued that the Ethiopian authorities made no distinction between  low
      level sympathisers and high profile activists and  if  the  Judge  had
      followed the guidance she would have found the Appellant  at  risk  on
      return.

  10. The head note to MB reads as follows:-

         (1)  As at February 2007, the situation in Ethiopia is  such  that,
      in general:-

              (a) Oromo Liberation Front members and sympathisers;

              (b) persons perceived to be OLF members or sympathisers; and

              (c) members of the Maccaa Tulema Association;

         will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within the  scope  of
         paragraph (2) or (3) below.

         (2)  OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically  perceived
         by the authorities to be  such  members  or  sympathisers  will  in
         general be at real risk if they have been  previously  arrested  or
         detained on suspicion of OLF involvement.  So too  will  those  who
         have a significant  history,  known  to  the  authorities,  of  OLF
         membership or sympathy. Whether any such persons are to be excluded
         from recognition as refugees or  from  the  grant  of  humanitarian
         protection by reason of armed activities may need to  be  addressed
         in particular cases.

         (3)   Given the proscription of the MTA and the  current  state  of
         tension on the part of  the  Ethiopian  authorities,  the  Tribunal
         considers that MTA members will also be at real risk on  return  if
         they have previously been arrested or detained on suspicion of  MTA
         membership and/or of OLF membership or are known  or  suspected  of
         membership of the MTA. Despite the banning of the MTA, the Tribunal
         does not consider that the evidence is such as to show a real  risk
         where the extent of the authorities' knowledge or  suspicion  about
         an individual relates to something less than membership of the MTA.



  11. The fact that he Judge found that the Appellant was not an OLF  member
      or sympathiser and that his minimal activity in the  UK,  which  would
      not be known by the Ethiopian authorities, meant  that  the  Appellant
      would not be perceived as such.

  12. Paragraph 2 of the head note indicates such people would be at risk if
      (my emphasis) they have been previously arrested or detained.  On  the
      Judge's findings the Appellant had not and thus would not be at  risk.
      Her conclusions were in line with the Country Guidance case.

  13. The Decision and Reasons contains reasoned findings, properly open  to
      the Judge on the evidence and in line with the Country Guidance  case.
      It contains no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity Direction

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 25th January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
