

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/05746/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11th October 2017                     |  On 19th October 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                              jeger hakim riza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Bracaj, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, who was born on 27th October  1995.
     He seeks to challenge the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Henderson who, on 4th January 2017, at  North  Shields,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse him asylum in a letter dated 26th May 2015.  The  appellant  was
    represented by Ms Bracaj and the respondent represented by Mr Mills,  a
    Home Office Presenting Officer.

2.   The appellant is an ethnic Kurd from a village in the area of  Sulaiman
    Bek in Iraq.  His home village is called Yafa.  Since  June  2014,  his
    village has fallen under the control of ISIS as a result of  which  his
    family  fled  towards  the  mountains.   Unfortunately,   they   became
    separated.  In November 2015 Hashdi Al-Shabi took over and  drove  away
    the Peshmerga and destroyed and burned the village.

3.   The appellant claimed to have been in touch with his uncle  who  warned
    him not to return to Iraq.  His uncle  was  able  to  arrange  for  the
    appellant's identity documents to be sent to the appellant.   Mr  Mills
    told me that the identity documents sent by the appellant's uncle would
    enable the appellant to obtain a CSID.  The judge did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim that he had no contact with  any  family  members  in
    Iraq and did not accept that the  appellant  had  been  straightforward
    about his contact with family members.   He  rejected  the  appellant's
    account of having lost contact with both his brother and uncle, because
    during the screening interview he said that he could obtain his ID from
    Iraq and this he was  able  to  do.    The  judge  believed  that  this
    indicated that the appellant had been able to contact his home.

4.   Ms Bracaj suggested that this was  an  illegal  finding  by  the  judge
    because he had failed to take into account that there continues  to  be
    uncertainty and disruption in the region and even though the  appellant
    may have obtained documents from Iraq, this does not  necessarily  mean
    that any family members who helped him with those documents would still
    be there, or that the appellant would still be in  contact  with  them.
    There was a lack of basic infrastructure in the area and it  could  not
    be said that in those circumstances the appellant could not  have  lost
    contact with his family members.  There is no  basis  for  the  judge's
    finding  and  it  fails  to  consider  the  background  evidence,   she
    submitted.

5.   When considering whether or  not  the  appellant  could  relocate,  the
    judge noted that there was nothing to suggest that he would not be able
    to seek employment.  However, he went on to point out that there was no
    evidence to suggest that he would be able to obtain employment, said Ms
    Barcaj.  The judge failed to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant would have to make  his  way  to  the  IKR  and  that  he  is
    suffering depression.  These matters were not considered by the  judge.
    However, his medical condition must be taken into account  in  relation
    to his ability to relocate and find employment.  It would be  extremely
    difficult for him to find employment given his medical condition  urged
    Ms Barcaj.

6.   Mr Mills suggested that the judge had given perfectly adequate  reasons
    for finding that the appellant had not been wholly truthful in relation
    to contact with family members.  He had noted that since the  appellant
    had been in the United Kingdom, he had made contact with family members
    and obtained identity documents which would enable him to obtain a CSID
    card.  The findings of the judge were findings which, on the  evidence,
    were open to the judge to make.

7.   So far as the second challenge is concerned, the judge noted  that  the
    appellant  was  suffering  from  depression  and  is  in   receipt   of
    medication.  The judge also noted that this medication is available  in
    the Iraqi/Kurdish region.  The appellant would be returned to  Baghdad.
    He would be in possession of a CSID card and would be able  to  transit
    to Erbil the same day if he was concerned  about  staying  in  Baghdad.
    Once in Erbil, there is no reason to believe that he should not be able
    to find some employment despite his depression.  He is a 21  year  old,
    otherwise fit and healthy, male.  He would be in possession of  a  CSID
    card which in IKR would give him access to benefits, rations etc.

8.   I reserved my determination.

9.   The appellant is a Kurd who speaks Sorani.  The judge  noted  that  the
    appellant does not speak fluent Arabic and has  no  family  support  or
    links to Baghdad.  He found that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to be returned to Baghdad.

10.  The current country guidance case  relating  to  Iraq  is  AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC), chaired by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Peter Lane (as he was then).  In relation to internal relocation within
    Iraq, AA points out that a Kurd who does not originate from the IKR can
    obtain entry for ten days as  a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
    permission for a further ten days.  If he were then to find employment,
    he can remain longer, although  he  will  need  to  register  with  the
    authorities and provide details of the employer.  There is no  evidence
    that the IKR authorities proactively remove Kurds from  the  IKR  whose
    permits have come to an end.  The IKR is said to be virtually  violence
    free.  AA also makes it clear  that  having  a  civil  status  identity
    document, there are other ways in which it is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
    national of the United Kingdom  to  obtain  a  passport  or  a  laissez
    passer.  Where an appellant is returned to Iraq on a laissez passer  or
    expired passport, they will be at no serious risk of harm at the  point
    of return by reason of not having a current passport or  other  current
    form of Iraqi identification document.

11.  This appellant does, apparently, have sufficient evidence  of  identity
    to be able to obtain a civil status identity document.

12.  The appellant will return to Baghdad, but since it is not safe for  him
    to remain there, he would have to transit Baghdad en route to IKR.   It
    is clear from AA that the appellant would be able to obtain  entry  for
    ten days, as a visitor, and then  renew  his  entry  permission  for  a
    further ten days.  If he were to find employment then he  could  remain
    for longer.  The judge noted that the appellant  suffers  from  anxiety
    and  depression  and  this  reached  a  critical  point  prior  to  his
    substantive interview when, apparently, he attempted to  hang  himself.
    This substantive interview was conducted in May 2006  and  yet  at  the
    time of the hearing before Judge Henderson  in  North  Shields  on  4th
    January 2017, there was no up-to-date  medical  report.   There  was  a
    letter confirming that he is receiving treatment for depression and  is
    in receipt of medication, but as the judge properly pointed  out,  that
    treatment is available in the IKR.

13.  At  paragraph  43  of  the  determination  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had last visited a doctor three weeks before the  First  Tier
    Tribunal hearing and he received no evidence at all as  to  whether  or
    not the appellant was fit for work or employment should he be  returned
    to Iraq.  He is a young man who, apart from depression, is otherwise in
    good health.

14.  I have concluded that the judge has given adequate reasons for  finding
    that the appellant has not been  entirely  truthful  about  his  family
    members.  He claimed that he had no contact with family members in Iraq
    now and that he had spoken to his uncle before his interview.  However,
    between his substantive  interview  and  the  appeal  hearing  he  very
    clearly had been  in  contact  with  somebody  in  Iraq,  who  provided
    identity documents for him.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the
    appellant's account that he  had  lost  contact  with  family  members,
    because very clearly, he had made contact.  The appellant did not claim
    to have been in touch with relatives, but since receiving his documents
    to have lost contact with them.

15.  I believe that the judge was entitled to find that the appellant  could
    relocate to IKR.  Employment may be difficult to find, but there is  no
    evidence before me that his current  condition  means  that  he  cannot
    work.  Apparently, the appellant helped his father with  the  farm  and
    has, according to his initial contact record, worked in a shop, so that
    he is not entirely without skills.

Notice of Decision

16.  I have concluded that the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Henderson did not involve the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.
    His decision shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  a  direction  regarding  anonymity  in
accordance with Rule 13 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 directing that no report of  the
proceedings should directly or indirectly  identify  the  appellant  or  any
member of his family.  I can see no basis on  which  such  a  direction  was
made.  I direct that the anonymity direction shall no longer apply.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
