
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05913/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 February 2018                |On 06 March 2018                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     F F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Brackaj of Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, because  this  appeal  turns  on  concerns
about the appellant's health.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Herlihy  issued  on  12  July  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3.    The Appellant was born on [ ] 1982 and is a national of  Iraq.   On  7
June 2017 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's  protection  claim.
On 20 June 2017 the appellant tendered a  notice  of  appeal,  but  did  not
lodge any grounds  of  appeal.  Directions  were  issued  on  21  June  2017
requiring the appellant to lodge grounds of appeal not later  than  28  June
2017. No  grounds  of  appeal  were  produced.  The  directions  warned  the
appellant that in the absence  of  grounds  of  appeal  her  appeal  may  be
dismissed without a hearing.


The Judge's Decision

4.    On 12 July 2017 the appellant's notice of appeal and the  respondent's
decision were put before a duty Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  10  October  2017  Judge  Pickup
gave permission to appeal stating

    "1. The appellant seeks permission to  appeal,  (in  time),  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herlihy) who, in a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 12.7.17, dismissed his  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to reject his asylum claim.


    2. The case is unusual. The appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge without a hearing  on  the  failure  of  the  appellant,
    despite directions to do so, to submit grounds of appeal.  However,  it
    transpires that the appellant had  been  detained  for  28  days  under
    section 2 of the Mental Health Act at the time the appeal was lodged on
    her behalf by her husband. The appellant also claims that no directions
    had been received from the tribunal.


    3. It is arguable that the decision to proceed without a hearing and to
    dismiss the appeal in the absence of grounds of appeal  was  unfair  in
    the circumstances of this case and in error of law."

6. (a)      For the appellant Ms Brackaj moved the grounds  of  appeal.  She
explained that the IAFT5 was submitted by the appellant's  husband  and  was
accompanied by a letter, dated, 13 June 2017 from  Northumberland  Tyne  and
Wear NHS foundation Trust Mental Health Act Office at St Nicholas  Hospital.
That letter confirms that the appellant was detained  for  28  days  from  9
June 2017 under section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983.

(b)   Ms Brackaj conceded that no grounds of appeal  were  lodged  with  the
notice of appeal, but explained that it was impossible to frame  grounds  of
appeal because the appellant had been detained under the Mental Health  Act.
She told me that that  is  something  which  the  Judge  should  have  taken
account of. Instead, at [4] of the decision, the Judge finds that there  are
no circumstances to  prevent  her  from  determining  this  case  without  a
hearing. She told me that that is a material error of law, and that  if  the
Judge had considered the letter from St Nicholas Hospital dated 9 June  2017
there would have been a different outcome.

(c)   Ms Brackaj conceded that the decision is a decision of  a  Duty  Judge
but told me that that decision is not an excluded decision because it  bears
to be a final determination of the appellant's appeal, it is not a  decision
on a preliminary matter.

7.    For the respondent, Ms Petterson told me that the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law, material  or  otherwise.  She  reminded  me  that  no
grounds of appeal accompanied the IAFT5  form,  but  acknowledged  that  the
letter from St Nicholas Hospital was a material matter which the  Judge  had
not considered. Taking account of that letter, Ms Petterson offered no  more
than formal resistance to this appeal.

Analysis

8.    An excluded decision is defined in section  11(5)  of  the  Tribunal's
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. The Tribunal's, Courts and Enforcement  Act
2007 (Miscellaneous Provisions) Order 2010 SI 41 excludes

    (a) Asylum support appeals under section 103  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum act 1999


    (b) Decisions  made  in  connection  with  the  bail  applications  and
    schedule 2 Immigration Act 1971.


    (c) Any procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision made in  relation
    to appeals under sections 82 -83A of the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, regulation 26 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 or s.40A British Nationality Act 1981.

9.    The Judge's decision is not a  procedural,  ancillary  or  preliminary
decision. At [4] of the decision the Judge records that she  considered  the
papers as a whole and then  resolved  to  determine  the  appeal  without  a
hearing. The decision that the Judge reaches is

    "Appeal Dismissed."

10.   There is a competent right of appeal against the Judge's  decision  to
the Upper Tribunal. The competency of the appeal  was  recognised  when  the
decision was posted to the parties under cover of a  letter  dated  12  July
2017 which states

    'Either party may apply to the First-tier Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal on a point of law arising from the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.'

11.   The notice of appeal was submitted by the appellant's  husband  on  20
June 2017. The notice of appeal  refers  to  the  letter  from  St  Nicholas
Hospital dated 13 June 2017 which was attached to  the  grounds  of  appeal.
That letter clearly states that the appellant was detained in  hospital  for
28 days from 9 June  2017.  The  direction  to  produce  grounds  of  appeal
contained a  time  limit  which  fell  within  those  28  days.  It  is  not
surprising the grounds of appeal had not been  produced  by  the  time  this
case was referred to a duty Judge.

12.   Had the Judge taken account of the  appellant's  detention  under  the
Mental Health Act, then it is realistically likely  that  there  would  have
been a different outcome. Had the Judge been fully aware of  the  facts  and
circumstances surrounding the submission of the notice of appeal, the  Judge
would not have reached the conclusion at [4] of the decision that  the  were
no circumstances to prevent determination of the appeal without a hearing.

13.   I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a material  error  of
law. I set it aside.

14.   The substance of the appellant's case has  not  yet  been  determined.
The grounds of appeal have not yet been  tendered  but  I  am  told  by  the
appellant solicitors that they are in a position to accept instructions  and
frame grounds of appeal without delay.

Direction

15.   I therefore direct the appellant  to  serve  on  the  respondent,  and
lodge with the tribunal, grounds  of  appeal  within  14  days.  Failure  to
comply with this direction may result in the appeal being dismissed  without
a hearing under the provisions of rule 25(1)(e) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(First-tier Tribunal)(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


17.   This case is remitted because the fact-finding exercise  has  not  yet
been carried out.  A complete re-hearing is necessary.

18.   I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  before  any
First-tier Judge other than Judge Herlihy.



Decision

19.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

20.   The Judge's decision dated 12 July 2017 is set aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 28 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


