
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05725/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th January 2018                         |On 26th February 2018         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    [B D]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, Counsel instructed by Montague
Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
                         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellant is a Turkish national whose date of birth is recorded  as
    [ ] 1984.  On 8th December 2016 he arrived in the United  Kingdom.   He
    claimed international protection as a  refugee  but  the  Secretary  of
    State refused that application.  He appealed.  His appeal was heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Farrelly on 13th July 2017  at  Taylor
    House.  I note that Ms Patyna, referred to as Mr Patyna in the original
    decision, appeared at first instance.

 2. The substance of the Appellant's case  is  that  he  had  come  to  the
    interest of the authorities in Turkey because of their concern that  he
    was associated with the HDP (There was also a history, on his case,  of
    the authorities being concerned that he was associated with the PKK).

 3. It was not in dispute that the judge had made findings which were  open
    to him in respect of  three  detentions  but  there  was  an  issue  in
    relation to a fourth, which on the Appellant's  case  had  occurred  on
    10th October 2016.  This is dealt with at paragraph 7 of  the  decision
    of Judge Farrelly which reads:

         "On 10th October 2016 [the Appellant] left work and  got  into  his
         car which was then boxed in by two other vehicles.   He  was  taken
         from his car, handcuffed and taken away to a building where he  was
         questioned about the PKK.  After twelve hours he  was  released  on
         condition he act as an informer.  He said  he  was  told  his  wife
         would be harmed if he did not provide information".

 4. Subsequently Judge Farrelly looked to the earlier detentions  and  came
    to the view that the Appellant was a person of no  particular  interest
    to the authorities, that any involvement with the PKK was low level and
    that essentially, he was a person who was simply at the wrong place  at
    the wrong time but not a particular target.  The appeal  was  dismissed
    on all grounds.

 5. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 22nd  August  2017  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal which permission was granted on 31st October 2017 by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin.  In granting permission Judge  Shimmin
    stated:

         "On the basis of positive credibility findings made by the judge it
         is arguable that the judge erred  in  finding  that  the  Appellant
         would not be at real risk of serious harm on return to Turkey".

    Judge Shimmin also found it arguable that the judge had failed to apply
    country guidance fully when considering the Respondent's policy;  thus,
    the matter comes before me.

 6. I am grateful to Mr Clarke who quite properly conceded that  there  was
    an error of law in  the  decision.   That  was  because  no  sufficient
    finding had been made by the judge with respect to  that  detention  on
    10th October 2016.  Clearly if, as the Appellant contended, his car was
    boxed in, then it could hardly be said that he was not being  targeted.



 7. The judge quite properly reminded himself of the guidance in A (Turkey)
    which set  out  the  various  considerations  applicable  to  determine
    whether or not against a particular factual nexus a person is  entitled
    to the relief sought.  Those factors include whether a person had  ever
    been arrested or detained and if so in what circumstances; whether  the
    circumstances of the past  arrest  and  detention  indicated  that  the
    authorities did in fact view the person as a suspected separatist.

 8. Ms Patyna took me through the various risk factors that she  said  were
    present on  the  findings  of  the  judge:  that  there  was  financial
    assistance; that he had been detained; and, she submitted,  that  there
    was to be inferred at the very least a continued interest in  him.   He
    would not be expected to lie on return.  This was a decision which  she
    suggested was otherwise well reasoned.

 9. Having read the decision with care it is of note  that  Judge  Farrelly
    did not find any reason to criticise the  Appellant  as  an  unreliable
    witness.  Positive findings were made.  The reason why the judge  found
    against the Appellant was because, in my  judgment,  he  had  for  some
    reason by the time he had got towards the end of the decision failed to
    focus on the last arrest of 10th October 2016. However, it is clear  to
    me reading the decision as a whole that had the judge done so he  would
    have found that those events did in fact occur.

10. Mr Clarke quite properly concedes that if a positive finding  had  been
    made in relation to that then the appeal would have to be allowed.   He
    invited me not to re-make the decision but  to  remit  it,  but  in  my
    judgment, that would  not  be  appropriate  in  this  case.   There  is
    sufficient for me to be satisfied that the judge would have found  that
    as contended for by the Appellant.

11. In those circumstances I find that there is a material error of law and
    that the decision needs to be re-made.

12. In the re-making I find that on 10th October  2016  the  Appellant  did
    leave work, get out of  his  car  which  was  boxed  in  by  two  other
    vehicles.  I find also applying the lower standard that  the  Appellant
    was taken from his car, handcuffed and questioned.  I accept also  that
    he was released after twelve hours on  condition  that  he  act  as  an
    informer. Taken together with other periods of detention  I  find  that
    the Appellant is at risk on return.  I  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that
    there is in any event heightened tension in the region but I make plain
    that that was not the factor that persuaded me that the decision should
    be re-made in the Appellant's favour.  It would have  been  re-made  in
    his favour in any event; I refer to paragraph 27 of Farrelly's Decision
    and Reasons.

13. In the circumstances the decision is as follows.  The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside and re-made.  The appeal is allowed on
    international protection grounds.  The Appellant  is  a  refugee.   The
    appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.  Necessarily the  appeal  is
    dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds  as  the  Appellant  is  a
    refugee.


Signed                              Date: 22 February 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
































