
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05032/2019 (V)
                                                           PA/05720/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On Thursday 27 May 2021              |On Friday 25 June 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

     (1) WC
     (2) BC
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Khan, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellants are granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Chapman promulgated on 8 August 2019 ("the Decision"). By the Decision,
    the Judge dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's
    decisions dated 16 May 2019 refusing their protection and human rights
    claims.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Afghanistan.  They are a father and
    son.  They are both Sikhs as are their family members who are dependent
    on their claims.  They have made an individualised claim for asylum
    based on an attack which they said occurred on 25 January 2019.  They
    say that the Taliban demanded money from the family and when they said
    they could not pay, the First Appellant's daughter, [K], was taken by
    force and later said to have been killed.  The asylum claim is also
    based on the Appellants' position as Afghan Sikhs more generally.

 3. The Judge did not accept as credible the individualised claim.  The
    reasoning is based in large part on documents produced by the
    Respondent showing that, at the date when the attack is said to have
    taken place, the family was in fact in France.  The Appellants now say
    that they were mistaken about the date and the mistake occurred when
    the date was recalculated from the Afghan to the English calendar.  The
    Judge also did not accept that the family was at risk based only on
    their religion and ethnicity.  In reaching that conclusion, the Judge
    had regard to the country guidance case of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs
    persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC) ("TG and others").
    The Judge also concluded that there were no very significant obstacles
    to the family's integration in Afghanistan.

 4. The grounds of appeal can be summarised as follows:

      1) A challenge to the credibility findings (paragraphs [1] to [5] of
         the grounds).

      2) An assertion that the Judge erred by not having regard to the UNHCR
         report concerning internal relocation to Kabul (paragraph [6] of
         the grounds).

      3) A challenge to the findings relating to the family's position as
         Afghan Sikhs (paragraphs [7] and [8] of the grounds).

      4) A challenge for the same reasons to the rejection of the human
         rights claim based on there being very significant obstacles to
         integration in Afghanistan (paragraph [9] of the grounds).

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Shaerf on 28 January 2020 in the following terms so far as
    relevant:

         "... The Judge had before him the recent judgment in AS
         (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 873 which expressly dealt with
         risks to members of the Sikh and Hindu communities and which at
         paragraph 82 made reference to recent guidelines issued by UNHCR.
         The Judge made no reference to any of these.

         The grounds for appeal disclose arguable errors of law and
         permission is granted in respect of all of them."

 6. By a Notice and Directions dated 20 January 2021, Upper Tribunal Judge
    Kebede directed that the error of law issue should be determined at a
    remote hearing absent objections from the parties.  Neither party
    objected.  So it was that the matter came before me to determine
    whether the Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to
    either re-make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal to do so.  The hearing was conducted via Microsoft Teams.
    There were no technical issues affecting the conduct of the
    proceedings.  I had before me a core bundle of documents relating to
    the appeal including the Respondent's bundle (hereafter referred to as
    [RB/x]), the Appellant's bundle as before the First-tier Tribunal
    (referred to hereafter as [AB/xx]), and as loose documents the
    documents to which I refer at [3] above which consist of the biometrics
    of the family as taken by the authorities in France in January and
    February 2019.  I refer to those documents hereafter as the "French
    Documents".

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

 7. I can dispose very shortly of the ground which I have summarised as (2)
    above.  As Ms Khan pointed out, the family come from Kabul and there is
    therefore no issue of internal relocation.  I observe however that this
    ground may have led Judge Shaerf to grant permission.  As Mr Tufan
    pointed out, although there is no reference to risk to the Sikh
    community (or at least none I can find) in the Court of Appeal's
    judgment in AS (Afghanistan) as referenced in the permission grant, the
    UNHCR guidelines might have been relevant to the Appellants' position
    on return if internal relocation (with which AS (Afghanistan) was
    solely concerned) was at issue.  However, as Ms Khan conceded before
    me, it was not. I observe that, in any event, the basis for the grant
    of permission on this point is overtaken by the Tribunal's later
    decision in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 130 where
    those guidelines were considered.  That later decision has since been
    upheld by the Court of Appeal ([2021] EWCA Civ 195).

 8. I turn then to the ground summarised as (1) above concerning the
    credibility findings.  I begin with the findings made by the Judge
    which are challenged which read as follows:

         "48. The Appellants claimed asylum in this country with a clear and
         unambiguous account of what happened to them in Afghanistan and the
         dates on which it happened.  The timelines they consistently gave
         in their screening and asylum interviews were that: [K] was
         kidnapped on 25 January 2019; two days later (27 January 2019), the
         Taliban rejected their offer of $10,000; two days later (29 January
         2019) they received the letter and [K]'s belongings; the next day
         (30 January 2019) they arranged an agent to help them lave; they
         stayed with the agent for ten days in Kabul (until 10 February
         2019); they travelled via an Arab country by plane and then spent
         fifteen days before arriving in the United Kingdom on 25 February
         2019.  In the asylum interview, they were asked several times about
         these dates, and they both confirmed the accuracy of these
         timelines on several occasions in answer to several questions
         during the interviews.

         49.  It was not only the Appellants who gave these timelines.  When
         their wives were also screened and asked about their journeys to
         the United Kingdom, they gave similar timelines.  Indeed, the words
         used by all four in the screening interviews were so remarkably
         similar as to suggest that they had discussed the days between them
         and had colluded in giving their answers.

         50.  Had it not been for the fact that they had been encountered by
         the French immigration authorities, these timelines could not have,
         and most likely would not have been, challenged, and the
         credibility of their accounts would have been assessed on the basis
         of a consistent, plausible timeline.

         51.  Yet, even without reliance on the undermining evidence from
         France, there are aspects of their accounts which create suspicion
         about their credibility.

         52.  Firstly, for example, there is the discrepancy (in both
         screening and asylum interviews) about the number of men who came
         to the property and kidnapped [K].  The First Appellant said three,
         and the Second Appellant said four.  This inconsistency is not
         explained by them, or by the nature of the event in question.  I
         would have thought this to be a detail about which they would both
         be consistent given that both claimed to be present when the event
         occurred, and it is not explained by their illiteracy which both
         referred to on several occasions when giving oral evidence.

         53.  Secondly, the letter from the Taliban has not been produced.
         Again, their illiteracy does not explain this because the
         importance of the letter was known to them when it was read to them
         and was the cause of them leaving the country due to the threats
         contained in it.  I would have thought it reasonable that, having
         decided to claim asylum in another country, this letter would have
         been retained as evidence of what they said happened to them.

         54.  Thirdly, the Appellants claim that they decided to leave the
         country the day after receiving the letter and the bag containing
         [K]'s belongings, and they then went into hiding for ten days
         before doing so.  Yet, they do not refer to any efforts to wait to
         see if [K] resurfaced either alive or dead, or any efforts to try
         to locate her or her body.  In the light of their religion,
         illiteracy, and the objective evidence, I can just accept as
         plausible that they might not have thought it worthwhile to report
         the matter to the Afghan authorities, but I do not find it credible
         that they would not make any effort to try to find their daughter
         or seek to renegotiate her return with the Taliban.  Further, I
         note that the Appellants have not provided any evidence to confirm
         that they even had a daughter/sister, and I am left in some doubt
         as to whether or not she actually existed.

         55.  However, even setting these matters aside, the evidence which
         significantly undermines the credibility of the Appellant's
         accounts is that they were photographed and fingerprinted by the
         French authorities on 24 January 2019, namely before the events
         they describe occurred, and that they denied that this had occurred
         when the asylum interviews took place.

         56.  With regard to their denials, the Appellants' explanations in
         oral evidence were that they did not know, given their levels of
         literacy, that they were in France, and they did not know they had
         been fingerprinted.  I can accept that their literacy levels may be
         such that they did not recognise the French language or that they
         were in France.  It may even be plausible that they did not
         understand what they were being asked to do in placing their hands
         on a glass tablet was giving their fingerprints, although they were
         unable to explain in oral evidence what they did think was
         happening.  I do not, however, find credible that they did not know
         they were being photographed as they were each directly facing the
         camera when the photographs were taken, and so I do not find it
         credible that they did not know they were being encountered by
         officials in a country to which they did not belong on 24 January
         2019.

         57.  This meant that when they were asked about this in interview,
         their denials are not credible.  They denied that anything had
         happened at all, when a credible answer might have been to accept
         that something had occurred even if they were not sure what.  That
         they both denied in the same way an event which so clearly did
         occur, after both had given detailed accounts of their experiences
         in Afghanistan, suggests that they had colluded about what to say
         in the event that they were asked about it, and that their answers
         were designed to 'buy time' before deciding what to do about the
         undermining material.  I find that the Appellants were attempting
         to conceal information from the Home Office.  This damages their
         credibility by statute but also in fact.

         58.  I pause to consider the Appellants' level of literacy, which
         they offered as a reason on several occasions in oral evidence when
         they were challenged about some of their answers.  I can accept
         that they may not have had significant educations, but I note that
         both Appellants have set up and managed businesses in Kabul which
         must have involved the ability to plan and organise their
         businesses as well as manage stocks and finances.  The Second
         Appellant, for example, was able to find the money to leave the
         country, and both Appellants were literate enough to explain the
         Afghan calendar in oral evidence.  They both showed knowledge of
         their country and religion when asked about these in interview.
         Overall, albeit they might not be able to read and write, I do not
         find their illiteracy to be a credible explanation for their
         failure to recall events or dates accurately.  Instead, I
         considered it to be more of an attempted shield deployed by them
         when responding to questions that significantly challenged their
         versions of events.

         59.  With regards to the dates, the Appellants now say that the
         events occurred in Afghanistan earlier than they had previously
         claimed.  They were forced to do this because they have had to
         accept that they were encountered in France after receiving the
         refusal letters.  In their statements, they say that this was
         because the First Appellant wrongly converted the dates on which
         things actually occurred, and they tried to clarify what they meant
         in their oral evidence at the hearing.  Yet, their explanations
         were confusing (as conceded by Mr Dixon in his submissions) and did
         not provide a coherent timeline especially when coupled with their
         oral evidence that they had spent six weeks at the house in France
         rather than the fifteen days claimed by them and their wives in the
         screening interviews.  They were also inconsistent with the several
         questions and answers in interview about the dates and their
         repeated confirmation in interview that the original dates they had
         given were accurate.

         60.  I might have been helped by some expert or objective evidence
         about conversions from the Afghan calendar to the Gregorian
         calendar but this was not available to me.  Instead, fearing that
         an otherwise credible account might be deemed incredible only
         because of the date issue, I spent a considerable amount of time
         during the hearing trying to understand why the confusion might
         have arisen, but I was unable to do so.

         61.  I find that I am left with confusing and incoherent accounts
         about dates, which has only arisen because the Appellants' original
         account has been found wanting by the intervention of the French
         authorities, and that the confusion arises only because of the
         Appellants' attempts to undo the damage to their credibility caused
         by that intervention when compared with the original accounts.

         62.  I find myself satisfied, notwithstanding my attempts to
         comprehend the Appellant's amended accounts, that what they, and
         their wives, all said contemporaneously when they first entered the
         country is more likely to be nearer the truth than their amended
         accounts.  Those accounts included (what appeared then to be) a
         coherent timeline that the events which formed the basis of their
         claim started on 25 January 2019, that they left the country on 10
         February 2019, and that they spent fifteen days at a house in
         France before arriving in the United Kingdom.  I find therefore
         that the events which they claimed to have occurred on 25 January
         2019 could not have occurred on that date because they were in
         France at the time.

         63.  In other words, for all the above reasons (which include my
         doubts about the events themselves as well as about the dates), I
         do not find the Appellant's accounts credible.  I find it more
         likely than not that they have colluded between themselves and
         their wives to fabricate accounts of events in order to establish
         an asylum claim in this country.  I find that they have not
         discharged the burden upon them of showing that they are at risk
         from the Taliban in Kabul."

 9. The grounds as pleaded point to the explanation given for the
    discrepancy as to dates as being a mistaken conversion between
    calendars.  They say also that the findings at [53] and [54] of the
    Decision are in error because it was plausible that the Appellants
    would not realise that they needed to bring the Taliban letter and that
    their account about the kidnap of [K] was consistent.  In relation to
    the findings at [56] of the Decision, the Appellants say that no
    evidence has been produced about the way in which the photographs in
    the French Documents were taken.  It is suggested that they might have
    been taken with a mobile phone without the Appellants' knowledge.  It
    is also said that the Judge, at [57] of the Decision, wrongly found
    that the Appellants had denied the encounter during interview when they
    had not done so.

10. I deal with that last short point first.  Question 143 of the Second
    Appellant's interview reads as follows:

         "Q: And you are telling me that you were not encountered,
         fingerprinted and photographed in France on 24 January 2019 is that
         correct:

         A: No."

11. Taken alone, I accept that the answer may be ambiguous.  It is not
    clear whether the Second Appellant is denying the encounter or
    indicating that what is there said was not what the Second Appellant
    was saying.  That answer however has to be read in the context of the
    questions and answers which precede it as follows:

         "Q140: The Home Office has a record of you, your wife and your
         daughter being fingerprinted in Coquilles in France on 24 January
         2019, the day before you claim your sister had been kidnapped.  Can
         you explain this to me?

         A140:     No, we were not fingerprinted.

         Q141:    We have a record of your fingerprints and your photographs
         being taken on this date the 24/01/2019, and you gave different
         dates of birth for each of you, along with giving your daughter's
         name as [P] and not [J].

         A141: We were not fingerprinted.

         Q142: Were you ever encountered by any authorities other than those
         at airports when you flew? [Rephrased] Apart from having to pass
         through airport security with passports given to you by the agent,
         did you encounter any authorities on your journey to the UK?

         A142: No."

12. Read in the context of those answers, the Judge was entitled to read
    the answer to question 143 as being a flat denial of the encounter.
    The corresponding part of the First Appellant's interview is similarly
    a clear denial.  It reads as follows:

         "Q147: You said that your daughter was taken on 25 January 2019,
         however the Home Office has information which says that your
         fingerprints were taken by UK officials in Coquelles in France on
         24 January 2019 can you please explain?

         A147: No that's wrong.

         Q148: Your photograph was taken and you gave a different name and
         DOB, it is you and it was in France.

         A148: We have not given anything.

         Q149: Are you saying the prints taken in France which match you and
         the photo taken which is yours, along with the other members of
         your family who were also photographed in France on 24 January 2019
         are not your's?

         A149: No."

13. Dealing then with the points made about the photographs and how those
    were taken, Ms Khan had not seen the French Documents. I therefore held
    those up to the camera during the hearing to allow her to see them.
    She did not thereafter press a point that the Appellants could have
    been unaware of how those were being taken.  As the Judge said, they
    are taken facing the camera and the Appellants could not have been
    unaware of the photograph being taken, whether it was taken on a mobile
    phone or a more official device. As the Judge also pointed out, even if
    the Appellants did not realise what the authorities were doing when
    their fingerprints were taken, they must have known that something
    official was occurring.  The Judge was entitled to find as damaging to
    their credibility their initial stance regarding the French Documents
    that the encounter did not happen.

14. I turn then to the point about the conversion of the dates.  I accept
    of course that, in Afghanistan, a calendar which is not that used in
    the UK is generally adopted.  In the screening interview, a specific
    date was not given in either calendar.  That interview took place on 25
    February 2019 and, when asked about the date, the Appellants said that
    it was "[o]ne month ago on a Friday".  The Appellants were not then
    interviewed substantively until nearly three months later, on 8 May
    2019.  They had in the interim instructed their solicitors.  Although I
    accept that their solicitors were not funded to attend the interview
    with them, those solicitors wrote a lengthy letter two days prior to
    the asylum interview setting out the general case on risk to Sikhs
    ([RB/D]).  I accept that this letter does not include any information
    about the individual claim.  However, the Appellants had the benefit of
    legal advice and the opportunity to explain the details of the claim to
    those solicitors. That would include the opportunity to explain the
    dates and work out the correct conversion if they were in any doubt.

15. It is also worthy of note that when challenged during the substantive
    interview about the timelines in light of the French Documents, they
    did not say that they might be mistaken about the dates due to a
    mistaken conversion.  They simply denied what the French Documents
    showed.

16. It was not until the statements for the appeal that they raised a
    mistaken conversion as an explanation.  The First Appellant said this
    ([AB/1-2]):

         "1.  In response to Paragraphs 24-26 I wish to clarify that we are
         Afghans and we normally use the Afghan calendar.  However, I was
         trying to convert this to the UK calendar.  I told them in the
         interview that I arrived in the UK on the first month and 25th day
         of 2019.  However, I got confused in converting the dates in my
         mind.  If you listen to the recording I am sure that you will hear
         some confusion between me and the interpreter when I was trying to
         give him the date.

         2.   It may help if I give the dates in the Afghan calendar.  We
         were attacked on the 4 Jaddi 1397 and my daughter was taken.  On
         the 6 Jaddi 1937 we went to meet the Taliban to pay some of the
         ransom.  We could not raise the whole amount but had 10000 US
         Dollars.  On 8 Jaddi 1397, my son found the bloody cloths and
         jewellery outside in a black back [sic] with a note.  They
         threatened to take his wife if we did not pay up.  He had the note
         read by the shop keeper.  The following day we left house with the
         agent and stayed there for 10 days.  You will note the interpreter
         did not mention the months in the interview.  He was trying to
         explain by saying this month and that month.  He did not mention
         January to me.  We left Afghanistan on 19/20 Jaddi 1397."

17. The Second Appellant's statement ([AB/5-6] says this:

         "1.  In response to Paragraphs 24-26 I wish to clarify that we are
         Afghans and we normally use the Afghan calendar.  However, I was
         trying to convert this to the UK calendar.  I told them in the
         interview that I arrived in the UK on the first month and 25th day
         of 2019.  However, I got confused in converting the dates in my
         mind. My father and I were informed we would be asked about the
         dates. So when we were at home we thought we would go through the
         dates in our mind.  If listen to the recording of my father we are
         sure that you will hear some confusion between him and the
         interpreter when he was trying to give him the dates. I have not
         received a copy of my recording.

         ...

         3. We got to the UK on 06 Hout 1397 which is 25.02.2019.  We
         claimed asylum on the same day ..."

18. The supposed confusion regarding dates during the interview is not
    borne out when one reads the record of those interviews.  When the
    First Appellant was asked the date of the incident at question 57, he
    answered that it occurred on "25 January 2019".  He confirmed that this
    was the correct date at question 60.  The record does not show that he
    had any doubts or tried to give the date according to the Afghan
    calendar as well in case he had made any mistake.  The Second
    Appellant's interview is even starker.  When asked when the incident
    happened at question 9, he replied "[i]t was Friday 25 January 2019. I
    remember it like today".  There is no confusion reflected in the
    answer.  Ms Khan suggested that not everything might have been written
    down and that there might have been some confusion not reflected in
    that answer.  Whilst I accept that the written record might not be
    verbatim, it is difficult to read the answer as indicating any
    confusion given particularly in light of the second sentence.  It is
    difficult to see how difficulties surrounding interpretation of dates
    could have infected two separate interviews.

19. Ms Khan sought to suggest that the Judge erred by suggesting that
    expert evidence might have been obtained.  She submitted that it was
    not clear what an expert could have said.  I disagree that there is any
    error in this regard.  An interpreter for example might have explained
    the difference between the dates in the Afghan calendar as asserted in
    the statements and what the dates would have been if the original dates
    were adopted.  That might have explained some of the confusion.  The
    methodology of conversion might have been explained.  As it was, the
    Appellants tried to give this explanation themselves.  As appears at
    [59] of the Decision, the attempts to explain the mistaken conversion
    made matters worse.

20. The Judge was entitled to rely on the inconsistency in dates.  As I
    have already pointed out, the Appellants had ample time and even the
    benefit of legal advice prior to the substantive interviews.  When
    challenged about the dates at interview, they could have said (but did
    not) that they might have converted the dates wrongly.  They could have
    given the dates in the Afghan calendar as well as the Gregorian
    calendar, but they did not do so.  Their continued insistence that they
    had not been encountered by the authorities in France as they very
    evidently had been merely served to damage their credibility further.

21. The other points raised in the grounds concerning the failure to bring
    the Taliban letter or the implausibility that the Appellants would have
    left Afghanistan without knowing what had befallen [K] are merely
    disagreement with the findings made.  The Judge was entitled to rely on
    these points having considered the evidence.  In any event, once the
    credibility of the incident is undermined by the evidence concerning
    dates, the Judge did not need to give any further reasons.

22. For those reasons, I am satisfied that no error is disclosed by
    paragraphs [1] to [5] of the grounds which I have summarised above as
    ground (1).

23. I turn then to what I have summarised as ground (3) concerning the
    general risk to Sikhs in Afghanistan.  Two points are made in the
    pleaded grounds.  The first concerns the position of the Appellants'
    female family members and their ability to practise their religion
    openly.  The second concerns the Judge's reasoning based on TG and
    Others.  I start with the second part of the ground as that is
    concerned with the situation for Afghan Sikhs more generally.

24. The ground of challenge to the Decision in this regard is, on its face,
    broadly a disagreement with the Judge's finding that there is not a
    general risk to Afghan Sikhs on return.  Paragraph [8] of the grounds
    repeats the point which Ms Khan accepted to be misconceived, that the
    Appellants should not be expected to relocate internally within
    Afghanistan and that internal relocation would be unduly harsh.
    However, Ms Khan sought to develop the point pleaded at [7] regarding
    the Judge's findings based on TG and Others.  She submitted that the
    Judge should have considered whether to depart from TG and Others based
    on the background evidence of the current situation for Afghan Sikhs
    which he had before him.  Mr Tufan did not object to the development of
    the ground in this way.

25. Ms Khan pointed out that the conclusion regarding general risk in TG
    and Others was based on an insufficiency of evidence regarding
    incidents of violence.  That conclusion in turn was based in part on
    the historic nature of the incidents reported in those cases by Dr
    Giustozzi (see record of the incidents relied upon at [40] of the
    decision and what is said at [48] of the decision in that regard).  The
    Tribunal in those cases also had the Respondent's Operational Guidance
    Note ("OGN") dated June 2013 which is cited at [50] of the decision.

26. Based on that material, the Tribunal made the following observations:

         "78.         It is not disputed before us that historically members
         of the Sikh and Hindu community in Afghanistan have been subjected
         to what may be perceived as acts of persecution by both state and
         non-state actors. The material we have been asked to consider
         demonstrates that the number of such incidents has reduced (but
         this might be explained by the reduction in the Sikh and Hindu
         population) and there is currently little material to support a
         claim of official state sponsored persecution. The material does
         support a finding that there is ongoing harassment of and
         discrimination against some members of the Sikh and Hindu community
         in Afghanistan, as set out above, but the evidence includes very
         few examples of recent acts of harm or threats of harm sufficient
         to satisfy the necessary test. We bear in mind Dr Giustozzi's point
         that this is an area that has not been prioritised by the media for
         reporting but when we consider all the material available to us, we
         find it of note that there is little to suggest that there have
         been continuing recent incidents of harm toward Sikhs/Hindus.
         Although Dr Giustozzi has described a picture of 'intensive
         harassment' at page 12 of his report, he has not supported this by
         drawing attention to specific examples of individuals being
         repeatedly harassed. Expropriation has been said to have almost
         stopped because the most valuable properties have already been
         taken away. Under the heading 'post-2005 violence and harassment'
         Dr Giustozzi focuses on examples of violence up to 2010 and
         references to more recent years are vague and generalised . This is
         notwithstanding the fact that Dr Giustozzi's researcher carried out
         three interviews in December 2013-January 2014 with senior members
         of Sikh and Hindu communities. We accept that whilst the subject
         group diminishes in size opportunities to inflict harm may also
         decrease and note that the small number of Sikhs and Hindus who
         remain in Afghanistan have been reported to be even more vulnerable
         to abuse (see UNHCR report 2013), but the lack of evidence of such
         ongoing issues is a relevant consideration. Perhaps the best
         evidence in support of the existence of a current real risk from
         the perspective of the appellants is to be found in the Respondents
         OGN of 2013 which we set out above."

27. Against that background, Judge Chapman in these appeals had before him
    the following evidence:

      a) A report of the murder of a Sikh shopkeeper in Kabul in May 2019
         ([AB/25-26]).  The Afghan police are reported to have arrested the
         alleged murderers.

      b) A letter from Dr Jasjit Singh, FHEA to the Minister of State for
         Immigration dated 6 January 2019 ([AB/27-30]).  It appears that he
         is a researcher at the University of Leeds.  His letter refers to
         his involvement in fourteen immigration cases which involved
         interviewing fourteen families about their lives in Afghanistan,
         journeys to the UK and religious beliefs.  It appears that these
         cases concerned families who were not believed about their Sikh
         faith.  Mr Singh says that all fourteen families reported a fear of
         persecution and threats.  Some of the specific accounts given are
         not dissimilar to the account in this case which was disbelieved in
         these appeals.  Mr Singh does not report any direct knowledge of
         the situation in Afghanistan.  The letter makes reference to an
         attack in July 2018.  It is said that there have since then been 17
         other terror attacks, but it is not said that those targeted Sikhs
         specifically.

      c) A newspaper report about one individual returned to Afghanistan by
         the UK and who was brought back to the UK by the British
         Government.  It is claimed that the individual concerned was forced
         to say that he had converted to Islam.  The Guardian report at
         [AB/32-34] is largely concerned with the operation of the justice
         system in Afghanistan.

      d) A report of the shooting of the Head of the Sikh Community in
         Kunduz in December 2016 ([AB/35-36].

      e) A report of general abuses against Sikhs dated June 2016 ([AB/37-
         40]).

      f) Accounts of a suicide bombing in Jalalabad in July 2018 (being the
         attack referred to by Dr Singh above).  This killed "at least 13
         members of the [Sikh] community" although another of the accounts
         (and the UNHCR guidelines referred to below) report that "17 of the
         dead were Sikhs and Hindus" ([AB/41-47]) (the distinction perhaps
         explained by a difference between Sikhs and Sikhs and Hindus taken
         together).

      g) The Respondent's Country Policy and Information Note ("CPIN") dated
         May 2019 at [AB/50-55] provides details of the position of Afghan
         Sikhs generally including some incidents of harassment and threats
         and including the July 2018 attack.

      h) The UNHCR guidelines from August 2018 at [AB/56-105] report that
         non-Muslim minority groups suffer general discrimination, "societal
         harassment and in some cases violence".

      i) An OHCHR report at [AB/106-] dated 5 September 2018 also refers to
         the July 2018 attack and other discrimination and harassment based
         largely on historic events.

28. I turn then to the way in which Judge Chapman dealt with the general
    risk, beginning at [64] of the Decision.  He summarised the Appellants'
    case in that regard at [64] and [65] of the Decision as follows:

         "64. Mr Dixon presented the appeal on the basis that even if the
         Appellants are found to be not credible with regard to their core
         claim and are not at risk from the Taliban, they are at risk of
         persecution because of their religion in Afghanistan.  I now
         consider this aspect of the appeal.

         65.  In doing so, I disregard my adverse credibility findings
         regarding the events concerning the Taliban because the claim is
         that, even without these events occurring, the Appellants are at
         risk of persecution on the basis of their religion and ethnicity
         alone.  My credibility findings are such that I find that I must
         treat with some caution the Appellants' evidence about their likely
         circumstances on return but I have been able to rely on the
         objective evidence presented in the appeal which has not been
         disputed.  I take into account that, taking away their evidence
         about the Taliban, this leaves open the possibility that the sole
         reason for them leaving the country is that subjectively they feel
         that circumstances there are now so bad that they felt obliged to
         leave, and that they have felt obliged to fabricate a claim in
         order to do so."

29. As the Judge rightly recorded at [66] of the Decision (and as is
    recorded as being agreed), the starting point for his consideration was
    the guidance given in TG and Others.  The Judge set out the factors
    which required assessment in accordance with that guidance.  In order
    to assess the Appellants' evidence regarding the general risk, the
    Judge made the following findings about their profile at [69] to [70]
    of the Decision:

         "69. The Appellants, their wives, and the Second Appellant's
         daughter lived together in a family unit in a district of Kabul
         where there are eighty to ninety Sikh families living as well as
         people from other, mixed, religions.  They have lived there for
         many years and have established themselves there.  Objective
         evidence shows that most Sikh families in Afghanistan live in Kabul
         because intolerance towards them there is not as acute as in other
         parts of the country.  The First Appellant used to own a business
         selling footwear but the family now maintains itself from income
         from the Second Appellant's business selling children's toys.  He
         travels daily to Kabul city to run the business.  He was able to
         put his hands at short notice on the considerable sum of $10,000
         from the business to pay the Taliban and the agent to leave the
         country (he confirmed in evidence that this was one amount of
         $10,000 only because the Taliban did not take it when offered to
         him).  They describe themselves as being above average in terms of
         wealth.  The family attends the local Gurdwara, which is close to
         their home.  The daughter has received an education in Kabul.

         70.  The Appellants confirm that they have been insulted and
         harassed as a result of their religion even though they are not
         from the part of the religion which wears Turbans and that they
         have suffered discrimination.  This is consistent with the
         objective evidence, and not disputed by the Respondent.  I note
         that, although I have left open the possibility that they have left
         the country because of conditions for Sikhs there, this is not what
         the Appellants have claimed.  Their claim was originally based only
         on the events concerning the Taliban which I have not found
         credible."

30. The Judge then assessed the profile as he had found it to be against
    the factors appearing in the guidance in TG and Others and, at [71] of
    the Decision, expressed himself to be satisfied that the claims would,
    following that guidance, be refused as none of the factors applied.
    The factors were broadly the position of women if unprotected by a male
    family member, financial situation, access to religion and access to
    education for any minor children.  The Judge summarised his conclusion
    as follows:

         "... Although I accept they are likely to suffer discrimination,
         they are of above average wealth, have shown that they can manage
         businesses, and there is nothing in their past to show that the
         discrimination they have suffered is over and above that suffered
         by the Sikh community in Kabul generally, which, according to TG
         and others does not pass the required threshold."

31. The Judge nonetheless went on to consider the other background material
    before him.  He did so on the basis of the submission made by the
    Appellants' representative that he should consider whether to depart
    from TG and others.  In other words, he addressed the self-same
    submission as Ms Khan made to me.  At [72] to [74] of the Decision he
    summarised the other background evidence.  I do not repeat what is
    there said as Ms Khan did not suggest that any of that was an
    inaccurate summary of the evidence he had.

32. Having summarised that material, he went on to reach his findings on
    that submission at [75] to [79] of the Decision as follows:

         "75. The CPIN concludes, as did the Upper Tribunal, that, in
         general, Sikhs and Hindus are not at risk of persecution or serious
         harm from the state, and that, in general, there are not very
         currently very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to
         depart from the conclusions reached in TG and others.

         76.  I must follow the country guidance case unless there are very
         strong grounds, supported by cogent evidence, to justify departing
         from it, applying (SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 (paragraph
         47).

         77.  I have weighed all of the above evidence very carefully.  It
         demonstrates that Sikhs continue to face significant problems in
         Afghanistan but that this was the case in 2015 when TG and others
         was decided.  There have been some specific incidents of violence
         involving Sikhs since then but, in my judgement, they provide the
         same limited evidence that was described in TG and others (in the
         part of the judgement referred to me by Mr Dixon and which I have
         cited in noting his submissions above).

         78.  I find the most compelling feature of the updated evidence to
         be that the numbers of Sikhs continue to dwindle, but this was also
         a feature of the evidence before the Upper Tribunal in 2015.
         Although the evidence suggests that numbers have continued to
         reduce, the assessment of risk is not simply a matter of numbers,
         and, balanced against this, there is evidence of efforts being made
         by the authorities to provide protection and new facilities to
         those that remain.  The declining numbers of Sikhs living [in]
         Afghanistan may be a reflection of more and more choosing to leave
         merely because they are fewer in number than because of greater
         persecution, and I am not sufficiently satisfied, on the evidence
         before me that the latter is the case.

         79.  For these reasons, I find that there is insufficient evidence
         to satisfy me that I should depart from the country guidance in TG
         and others.  Having considered the Appellants profiles and that of
         their family members, I am not satisfied that they are at risk of
         persecution, harm or ill-treatment which crosses the threshold to
         entitle them to protection in the United Kingdom."

33. I asked Ms Khan what the Judge had got wrong in addressing what was in
    effect the submission she had made to me.  She said only that due to
    the levels of violence, there was cogent evidence of durable change.
    That, as the pleaded ground in this regard, is merely a disagreement
    with the conclusions of the Judge reached on the evidence before him.
    It does not disclose any error of law.

34. I turn then to the first part of the ground which I summarised above as
    (3) dealing with the position of the Second Appellant's wife and what
    is said about the risk to her and modification of her behaviour.

35. The Second Appellant's wife in her statement at [AB/9-10] says that she
    is unable to live "a safe life where [she] can practice [her] religion
    safely".  She says that as a woman in Afghanistan she is "confined to
    [her] home" and "a prisoner in [her] own home".  She does not say why
    that is so or that she has individually suffered any attacks or threats
    on account of either her sex or religious beliefs.

36. Ms Khan directed my attention to [40] of the Decision which summarises
    the submission made by the Appellants' Counsel on this point as
    follows:

         "A further aspect of these considerations is the risk to women.  Mr
         Dixon referred me to the Home Office Country Policy and Information
         Note ('CPIN'), dated May 2019, which refers to 'Sikh women don't
         have a good life here.  They can't go outside they can't dress as
         their culture, and can't go outside for sightseeing with their
         families'.  Mr Dixon submitted that these were all factors to also
         take into account when considering the claim on human rights
         grounds because they amount to very significant obstacles to
         integration under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules
         such that Article 8 is also engaged..."

37. The pleaded ground is to the effect that the Judge has failed to take
    into account why the Second Appellant's wife would modify her behaviour
    and whether that would be to avoid persecution.  That is not the way in
    which the case was put to Judge Chapman (as set out above) and the
    Judge cannot be faulted for not considering it in that way.
    Nonetheless, I go on to consider it.  The pleaded ground is based on
    the Supreme Court's judgment in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 ("HJ (Iran)") and in particular the
    stages for consideration by a Tribunal or Court at [35] of the judgment
    as follows (so far as relevant with my emphasis added):

         "(a) The first  stage,  of  course,  is  to  consider  whether  the
         applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that
         orientation he will not be entitled to be treated as  a  member  of
         the particular social group. But I would regard this  part  of  the
         test as having been satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is
         at risk of persecution because he is suspected of being gay, if his
         past history shows that this is in fact the case.

         (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which  are
         directed to what his situation will be on return. This part of  the
         inquiry is directed to what will  happen  in  the  future.....  The
         question is  how  each  applicant,  looked  at  individually,  will
         conduct himself if returned and how others will react  to  what  he
         does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will come  in
         contact, in private as well as  in  public.  The  way  he  conducts
         himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
         degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to  conceal
         aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
         even from those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.  If  he  fears
         persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
         entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
         concealment may be. The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has
         no part in this inquiry.

         (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be able
         to do in the country of his nationality everything that he  can  do
         openly in the country whose protection he seeks is not the test. As
         I said earlier (see para 15), the Convention was  not  directed  to
         reforming the level of rights in the country of origin. So it would
         be wrong to approach the issue on the basis that the purpose of the
         Convention is to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that  he  can
         live as freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to
         do if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to  everyone  the
         human rights standards that are applied by  the  receiving  country
         within its own territory. The focus throughout must be on what will
         happen in the country of origin.

         (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in  fact
         conceal aspects of  his  sexual  orientation  if  returned,  is  to
         consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in  response  to
         social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons  of  his  own
         choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
         asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he  will  resort  to
         concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
         persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
         well founded.

         (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have a well-
         founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he has,  the  causative
         condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426, para  5  will  have
         been established. The applicant will be entitled to asylum."

38. Those stages are set out in HJ (Iran) in the context of an asylum claim
    based on sexual orientation, but the same stages may be applied by
    analogy to a situation where a person is required to modify the
    practice of his or her religion in order to avoid persecution or, for
    example, to adopt conduct which he or she would otherwise not follow in
    order to avoid persecution on grounds of sex.

39. Ms Khan drew my attention to [91] to [93] of TG and Others which dealt
    with the position of Sikh women in Afghanistan (again with my emphasis
    added):

         "Women

         91.  In relation to the role of women it is noted in the Rawan News
         article dated 11th July 2013 and headed  'Tough  Times  for  Afghan
         Hindus and Sikhs' that it is alleged that Sikh women cannot go  out
         of their houses. Dr Giustozzi in his evidence refers to the fact he
         has never seen a single Sikh woman, identifiable as  such,  on  the
         streets in Afghanistan and would not expect to do so. The  role  of
         women within Hindu and Sikh families within Afghanistan appears  to
         be based around the home and family life.

         92.  Dr Giustozzi also referred to Sikh and Hindu women not leaving
         the house unless properly covered, as with most if not all women in
         Afghanistan, in order to avoid an  adverse  reaction  amongst  some
         members of the Muslim community. We accept that  a  Sikh  or  Hindu
         woman  not  'properly  attired'  may  be  subjected  to  abuse  and
         harassment on the streets in Afghanistan but the  evidence  clearly
         indicates that this is the  same  for  all  women,  whatever  their
         religious persuasion, including Muslim women. It was submitted that
         such a requirement may give rise to an HJ (Iran) issue. Whilst our
         attention was not drawn to Y&Z by the parties we can confirm that
         we have considered the application of the HJ (Iran) issue to  the
         religious  context although this  argument  was  not  adequately
         developed before us and fails to  distinguish  between  members  of
         these religious groups who choose not to go out alone or covered as
         that is the way they ordinarily behave and those that may be forced
         to  hide  a  fundamental  element  of  their  belief(s)  to   avoid
         persecution.

         93.  Nevertheless we do consider that a Sikh or Hindu single  woman
         without family protection from a husband, other male member of  the
         family, or within a family unit in which there is no male member of
         the household able to provide effective protection, may be entitled
         to international protection based upon threats and related acts  as
         a result of their perceived vulnerability as a member of a minority
         religious group with no form of available protection against  such.
         In this respect we note the evidence regarding abductions of  women
         and female children  and  forced  conversions  to  Islam.  Credible
         threats of any form of violence or serious harm  (including  forced
         marriage involving  forced  conversion  or  not),  where  there  is
         inadequate protection should entitle that  person  to  a  grant  of
         international protection."

    Ms Khan accepted that the Tribunal in TG and Others had left the "HJ
    (Iran)" point open.  The finding made at [93] of the decision is to be
    found in the guidance provided but is not relevant to these appeals as
    the female members of the family have the protection of the male
    members.  The Tribunal's guidance expressly did not say however that
    women were at risk of persecution on account of a combination of their
    sex and Sikh religious identity.

40. Mr Tufan drew my attention to the current Country Information and
    Policy Note ("CPIN") from March 2021 (Version 6.0) concerning Hindus
    and Sikhs in Afghanistan which sets out an interview with an Afghan
    Sikh female MP.  She indicated, in response to the question whether a
    Sikh female could go out alone and whether they are required to cover
    themselves, that female Sikhs wear traditional scarfs and did not
    consider that there would be an issue in Kabul.  I accept of course
    that this could not have influenced the Judge's thinking as it was not
    published at that time and therefore not before him.

41. There was however an earlier CPIN dated May 2019, excerpts of which
    were before the Judge at [AB/50-55].  That deals with the position of
    women in Afghanistan more generally, many of whom reported harassment
    due to their attire.  It is said that "[a]lmost all women reported
    wearing some form of head covering.  Some women said they did so by
    personal choice, but many said they did so due to societal pressure and
    a desire to avoid harassment and increase their security in public."
    It is there reported that "Sikh women do not have a good life in
    Afghanistan because they were unable to go outside or dress in
    accordance with their culture."

42. I accept that the Judge did not make any express finding stemming from
    this evidence regarding the female dependents in these appeals.
    However, the starting point for the Tribunal on this issue was whether
    there would be treatment amounting to persecution which would or might
    require an individual to modify his or her behaviour. The Judge made
    findings that the Appellants were not at general risk of persecution.
    There was evidence of potential harassment due to the combined factors
    of sex and religion but, importantly, there was no evidence that Afghan
    Sikh women face persecution on that account. The Second Appellant's
    wife's evidence was that she stayed at home, but it is notable as the
    Judge observed that their daughter attended education. The Second
    Appellant's wife did not say that she had been attacked in the past or
    even threatened due to the combined factors of her sex and religion.
    Importantly, the Judge also noted that the Appellants' claim was not
    primarily concerned with the risk to Afghan Sikhs generally.  Having
    reached the conclusion he did regarding the lack of a well-founded fear
    of persecution based on the Appellants' general position as Afghan
    Sikhs, any failure to make a finding in relation to the risk to the
    Second Appellant's wife specifically, particularly given the way in
    which the appeals were presented, could make no difference to the
    outcome.

43. Finally, the grounds raise as summarised at (4) above a point regarding
    obstacles to integration in Afghanistan under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Immigration Rules ("Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)").  The ground as
    pleaded is that the claim in this regard is made out "for the same
    reasons as that for the protection claim but the threshold for proving
    the same is much lower since you do not have to show a real risk of
    persecution or serious harm and the IJ has failed to consider this".
    Ms Khan did not press this ground.  She was right not to do so.

44. The Judge considered the issue at [82] of the Decision as follows:

         "I incorporate into my consideration of this issue my above
         findings.  I acknowledge that the Appellants are part of a small
         minority community in Afghanistan but they have always been part of
         that small community.  I acknowledge that they have given up what
         they had in order to seek a new life in the United Kingdom, and
         that re-establishing themselves will not come without some
         difficulty.  However, they have done this in the past and I do not
         consider that they will be unable to do so if returned.  They will
         be returned as a family unit, and will have support from others in
         their community.  They are not without the means, skills and
         qualities to be able to do so again without there being the sort of
         very significant obstacles envisaged by paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)".

45. The issue for consideration under Paragraph 276ADE(1) is whether the
    Appellants are able to integrate in Afghanistan.  As the Court of
    Appeal said in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813 (to which judgment Judge Chapman had regard), this
    "calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the
    individual will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how
    life in the society in that other country is carried on and a capacity
    to participate in it".  The task for the Judge is not, as the pleaded
    ground appears to suggest, merely a reconsideration of the protection
    claim but with a lower threshold.  In any event, Judge Chapman took
    into account his earlier findings in relation to the protection claim.
    The Judge properly directed himself as to the test which applies.
    Applying that test to the facts and evidence here, he was entitled to
    reach the findings he did for the reasons he gave.  There is no error
    of law in this regard.

46. For the foregoing reasons, there is no error of law in the Decision.  I
    therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the Appellants'
    appeals remain dismissed.



DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chapman promulgated on 8 August
2019 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  I
therefore uphold that decision with the consequence that the Appellants'
appeals remain dismissed.


Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated: 24 June 2021



