
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05586/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2021                  |On 04 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 HALALA [H]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Katani, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  is  a  Kurdish  citizen  of  Iraq.   FtT  Judge  Handley
    dismissed her appeal by a decision promulgated on 14 August 2018.   The
    respondent concedes that the FtT's decision errs in law (in particular,
    on ground 2, failure to take account of the evidence of a witness)  and
    cannot stand.  Parties  agreed  on  the  following  outcome,  based  on
    developments since the case was before the FtT.  The appellant is in  a
    relationship, and Islamic marriage, with  a  partner  who  has  refugee
    status.  They have a child, with similar status.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and  the  appeal,
    as originally brought to the FtT, is allowed on article 8 human  rights
    grounds.  (The appellant does not insist on her protection claim.)

 3. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    Hugh Macleman
    24 February 2021


    UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.







