

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/05088/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22nd February 2018                      | On 29th March 2018              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     Sk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson of Counsel, instructed by the Coram
                    Children's Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Rodger promulgated on 13 October 2017, in which the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse her protection and  human  rights  claim
    dated 16 May 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1994, who
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 May 2010, and claimed
    asylum that day.  The asylum claim was refused on  10  September  2010,
    but the Appellant was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  as  an
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking child until 1 July  2011.   The  applicant
    applied for further leave to remain on 3 June 2011 which was refused on
    4 May 2012 and the appeal against that refusal was dismissed on 26 June
    2012.  An application for permission to appeal was unsuccessful and the
    Appellant was appeal rights exhausted on 11 April 2013.

 3. The Appellant submitted further submissions on  4  March  2015  on  the
    basis that the his removal to Afghanistan would be  in  breach  of  the
    Refugee Convention as he is at risk on return from the Taliban  in  his
    home area and also in Kabul had the hands of the Taliban,  at  risk  of
    forced labour and/or trafficking and at risk because of westernisation;
    further that return to Afghanistan placed him at risk of indiscriminate
    violence contrary to Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive  and
    that his removal would breach of Articles  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  The  further  representations  included  a
    report from Dr Foxley in support of his claims.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on 16 May 2017 on the basis that
    the Appellant would not be at risk on return to  Afghanistan  from  the
    Taliban, nor would he be at risk of exploitation or  trafficking  given
    that he was a healthy adult male and that there was no  risk  based  on
    westernisation.  In the  circumstances,  there  was  no  need  for  the
    Appellant to internally relocate to Kabul but in any event  that  would
    not be unreasonable in all of the circumstances.   The  Respondent  did
    not consider that Article 15(c) was engaged so  it  was  not  necessary
    therefore to grant the Appellant  humanitarian  protection,  nor  would
    there be any breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights if removed to Afghanistan.  In  relation  to  private  and
    family life, the Appellant's family remained in Afghanistan  and  there
    was no evidence of his claimed partner in the United  Kingdom  or  that
    such  a  partner  was  settled  here.   There   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances for a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration
    Rules.  The Respondent separately  considered  the  Appellant's  mental
    health that he claimed  to  be  suffering  from  depression  and  post-
    traumatic stress disorder but noted  that  he  was  not  receiving  any
    treatment in the United Kingdom and that  treatment  was  available  in
    Afghanistan together with family support, such that there would  be  no
    breach of Article 3 on medical grounds.

 5. Judge Rodger dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  13
    October 2017 on all grounds.  In the  course  of  the  decision,  Judge
    Rodger considered  whether  the  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness
    pursuant to the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  to  of  2010  and
    Practice Direction, First Tier and Upper Tribunal,  "Child,  Vulnerable
    Adult and Sensitive Witnesses" (the "Guidance") but did  not  make  any
    adjustments during the course of the hearing.  I return below  in  more
    detail to the findings  made  in  relation  to  the  Guidance  and  its
    application.

 6. In dismissing the appeal, the Appellant was not found to be credible in
    relation to contact with his family,  risk  on  return  or  as  to  his
    ability to speak Pashto.  The witnesses who attended the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal were the Appellant's friends and were also  not
    found to  have  given  credible  evidence.   There  were  a  number  of
    inconsistencies identified in the  evidence.   Judge  Rodger  concluded
    that there was no risk on return  to  the  Appellant  for  any  of  the
    reasons claimed and, in any event, he  would  be  able  to  safely  and
    reasonably relocate internally to Kabul.  The  Appellant's  claims  for
    humanitarian protection and  under  Articles  2  and  3  on  protection
    grounds stood or fell with the main asylum claim.  Further,  there  was
    no disproportionate interference with his right to respect for  private
    and family life under  Article  8  and  there  was  no  serious  health
    condition to separately engage Article 3.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in its assessment of the  Appellant's  mental
    health in a number of ways, including a failure to make clear  findings
    as to whether the Appellant was or was  not  a  vulnerable  witness,  a
    failure to make adjustments during the course  of  the  hearing  and  a
    failure to take into  account  the  Appellant's  mental  health  making
    credibility findings.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    its assessment of risk on return in relation to (i) the objective  risk
    in the Appellant's home area; (ii) the Appellant's position  on  return
    in terms of family support; and (iii) the risk that he would face as  a
    westernised young person.  Thirdly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    materially erred in its assessment under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  under  paragraph  276ADE   of   the
    Immigration Rules and outside of those rules.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth on  15  December
    2017 on all grounds, albeit the reasons for the grant of permission  to
    appeal focus only on ground one.

 9. At the hearing, Counsel for the Appellant relied on the written grounds
    of appeal and reasons for the grant of permission to appeal.  This  was
    not a case where it was claimed that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    regard to the Guidance on vulnerable witnesses  but  a  case  in  which
    credibility findings were made first and then the  Guidance  considered
    at the end in a confused manner.  The evidence on which the application
    to apply the guidance on vulnerable witnesses  was  a  letter  dated  8
    August 2017 from the Croydon IAPT  Psychological  Therapies  and  Well-
    being Service referring to a telephone assessment of the same day which
    recorded the Appellant as presenting with severe symptoms of depression
    and anxiety such that a course of cognitive behavioural  therapy  would
    be suitable and referral for further support made.

10. Counsel for the Appellant went through in detail the key parts  of  the
    decision dealing with the assessment of whether  the  Appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness or not.   The  first  reference  to  this  being  in
    paragraph 44 of the decision in relation to the request at  the  outset
    of the hearing to treat the Appellant has a vulnerable witness  due  to
    his mental health problems, which was rejected on the basis that  there
    was insufficient evidence to show that the  Appellant  would  have  any
    particular difficulties during the hearing but additional  breaks  were
    offered if needed.  The second reference is  in  paragraphs  51  to  53
    which first make negative credibility findings  against  the  Appellant
    about his contact with his family.  The next reference is in  paragraph
    61  where  the  Judge  undertakes  his  assessment  of  credibility  by
    reference to the Guidance, albeit this comes after the conclusion  that
    the Appellant was not credible.   The  conclusions  are  reaffirmed  in
    paragraphs 70 and 76 of the decision.

11. Overall in  relation  to  the  Guidance,  Counsel  submitted  that  the
    assessment of the Guidance was in the wrong place in the  decision  and
    the assessment was inconsistent.  Contrary to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]
    EWCA  Civ  367,  a  factfinder  must  not  reach  a  conclusion  before
    considering all of the evidence  before  it  and  should  not  reach  a
    conclusion on one part of the evidence and then if in the negative, ask
    whether the conclusion  should  be  shifted  by  any  expert  evidence.
    Further, it would in particular be unusual in the context  of  refusing
    to accept to treat  someone  as  a  vulnerable  witness  to  make  some
    allowances or adjustments during the course of the  appeal  hearing  in
    any event.  It is also inconsistent for the Judge to  have  found  that
    the Appellant's mental health was not proven but  then  to  purport  to
    apply the Guidance in any event, with confusion as to  whether  or  not
    the Appellant was or was not a vulnerable witness.   It  was  submitted
    that this materially impacted on the hearing and the assessment of  the
    evidence in the appeal.

12. On the second ground of appeal, it  was  submitted  that  even  with  a
    finding of family support  in  Afghanistan,  it's  existence  does  not
    amount to protection for an individual  and  there  was  a  failure  to
    consider  evidence  on  experiences  of  young  people   returning   to
    Afghanistan and that they often struggle to reconnect with their family
    and support may not necessarily be available from them  either  because
    they are not welcome on return or the family  do  not  have  sufficient
    resources to help.  This evidence contained in the After Return  report
    from the Refugee Support Network is referred to in the decision but  it
    was submitted not lawfully engaged with.  In any  event  there  was  no
    proper consideration of whether in fact there was  family  support  for
    the Appellant on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  Further,
    there was a failure of the Judge to refer to specific  evidence  before
    him including a letter from  the  Refugee  Support  Networks  dated  21
    September 2017, the oral evidence of Ms Norman and the detailed written
    evidence submitted by her.

13. On the third ground of  appeal,  Counsel  makes  essentially  the  same
    points in the context of the assessment of whether there would be  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's  reintegration  on  return  to
    Afghanistan and noted the lower threshold in paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules compared to requirements of  internal  relocation  in
    the context of a protection claim.  The Appellant's  westernisation  is
    relevant to reintegration even if not accepted  in  the  context  of  a
    protection claim.

14. The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted in relation to ground  one
    that it was a matter for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine  the
    extent of vulnerability of a  person  which  in  turn  depends  on  the
    quality of evidence before the Tribunal in relation to  the  Appellant.
    It was submitted that the consideration of whether to make  adjustments
    at the  hearing  was  reasonable  with  adequate  reasons  set  out  in
    paragraph 44 for declining to do so.  There was no evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal from a mental health expert professional and in any
    event, there was detailed consideration of what evidence there  was  in
    paragraph 61 to 64 of the decision.  In those paragraphs the Judge gave
    adequate reasons for the weight he attached to that evidence.

15. In terms of the  order  with  which  matters  were  considered  in  the
    decision under challenge, it was submitted that it was not  correct  to
    suggest that there were findings on  credibility  and  subsequently  an
    assessment of vulnerability under the Guidance, there  was  in  fact  a
    long section dealing with aspects of credibility and  then  conclusions
    on risk on return.  When reading the decision as a whole, there  is  no
    clear  misdirection  or  failure  to  make  assessment,  there  was   a
    conclusion based on all of the evidence before the Tribunal.

16. In relation to the second ground of appeal, the Home Office  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Judge had given  detailed  consideration  to
    the evidence before it, including Dr Foxley's report and  gave  reasons
    why it was not accepted at face  value.   There  was  clearly  detailed
    analysis of the potential risk to the Appellant from the  Taliban,  the
    authorities, on the basis of westernisation and in relation  to  mental
    health.  It is not an error of law for a Judge not to mention each  and
    every specific piece of evidence before her and in this appeal,  detail
    and adequate consideration was given to the evidence.  On  this  ground
    of appeal in particular it was submitted that the grounds of  challenge
    sought to reargue the appeal rather than identify an error of  law  and
    no material misdirection has been identified by the Appellant.

17. Finally, the Home Officer presenting Officer submitted that  there  was
    no error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's private or family life for the reasons given  in  paragraph
    96 of the decision which were adequate and lawful.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first ground of appeal relates to the  Appellant's  claimed  mental
    health problems  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  application  of  the
    Guidance as to its conduct of the  hearing  and  determination  of  the
    appeal.  The Guidance applies  to  appellants  and  witnesses  who  are
    'vulnerable', as defined in section 59 of the  Safeguarding  Vulnerable
    Groups Act or because of their personal characteristics or impairments,
    including mental health.  The Guidance to the First-tier Tribunal makes
    it clear in paragraph 3 that:

         "The consequences of such vulnerability  differ  according  to  the
         degree to which an individual is affected.  It is a matter for  you
         to determine the extent of an identified vulnerability, the  effect
         on the quality of the evidence and the weight to be placed on  such
         vulnerability in assessing the evidence  before  you,  taking  into
         account the evidence as a whole."

 2. There are three specific stages of an  appeal  to  which  the  Guidance
    applies, first, before the substantive hearing (which is  not  relevant
    to this appeal as matters relied upon at the hearing were not raised at
    that stage); secondly,  at  the  substantive  hearing  and  finally  in
    assessing the evidence and determining the appeal.

 3. The Appellant appeals on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to make adjustments during the substantive hearing for the Appellant as
    a vulnerable witness and failed to record  whether  or  not  he  was  a
    vulnerable witness.  These matters were dealt with at the beginning  of
    the substantive hearing and the grounds of  appeal  record  that  Judge
    Rodger stated orally that he did not consider the  Appellant  to  be  a
    vulnerable witness.  That is reinforced by the conclusions in paragraph
    44 of his decision setting out the request, the information before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and conclusions on what, if any,  adjustments  were
    required, which stated as follows:

         "I was asked at the outset to treat the appellant as  a  vulnerable
         witness on account of his mental health problems. I was  told  that
         he needed to have somebody from the refugee centre to sit  next  to
         him due to his age and his concentration problems.  Given that  the
         appellant is now aged 23 years and given that there was no  medical
         report from a medical expert to confirm problems with concentration
         arising from any mental health problems or any reference within the
         IAPT letters to problems with concentration or memory,  I  was  not
         satisfied that it was appropriate to treat him as being in need  of
         someone sitting next to him.  Further, I  was  not  persuaded  that
         there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  he   would   have
         difficulties with answering questions or concentration or that  any
         difficulties with concentrating or  answering  questions  would  be
         attributable to any mental health conditions or symptoms  suffered.
         However, I did make clear that I was happy to break  after  periods
         of 30 minutes if a break was  needed  given  that  there  was  some
         evidence that he has recently been  referred  for  counselling  for
         reported mental health symptoms."

 4. The rejection of the application to be treated as a vulnerable  witness
    on the basis of a telephone assessment with the Appellant which did not
    identify any difficulties with concentration or memory, was  one  which
    was open to Judge Rodger on  the  very  limited  evidence  before  him.
    Adequate reasons were given for the refusal and  his  consideration  of
    the request was in line with the Guidance.  It is not inconsistent  for
    the Judge to have erred on the side of caution and  offered  additional
    breaks for the Appellant during the hearing  if  needed.   That  was  a
    sensible, practical course based on the  evidence  before  him  and  in
    accordance with the general guide in paragraph 3 of  the  Guidance  set
    out above.  The additional breaks were also likely to  have  alleviated
    the claimed difficulties with concentration if they existed.

 5. Secondly, the Appellant appeals on the basis that there was  a  failure
    to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's  mental  health  when  making
    credibility findings and in  doing  so,  reached  findings  before  his
    mental health was considered and/or taken into account.

 6. The Guidance, at paragraphs 14 and 15, specifically directs Judges to:

         "14. Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different degrees
         of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to  those  who
         are  not  vulnerable,  in  the  context  of  evidence  from  others
         associated with the appellant and the  background  evidence  before
         you.  Where there were clear discrepancies in  the  oral  evidence,
         consider the extent to which age, vulnerability or  sensitivity  of
         the witness was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

         15.  The decision should record whether the Tribunal has  concluded
         the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable  or  sensitive,
         the effect the Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability had
         in assessing the evidence before it and thus whether  the  Tribunal
         was satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her case
         to the relevant standard  of  proof.   In  asylum  appeals,  weight
         should be given  to  objective  indications  or  risk  rather  than
         necessarily to a state of mind."

 7. It is necessary to set out  Judge  Rodger's  findings  in  relation  to
    mental health and credibility in full to determine whether he erred  in
    law in his application of the Guidance on this point.   However,  these
    should also be put into context within the decision as  a  whole.   The
    Judge's starting point at paragraph 45 was the  previous  determination
    of Judge Davey and the findings of fact therein which were set  out  in
    the subsequent paragraphs and considered in accordance with  Devaseelan
    (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702.  There was no further challenge to  the  determination  of
    Judge Davey and no suggestion by the Appellant  that  the  findings  of
    fact contained in that earlier decision were in any way affected by the
    Appellant's mental health at the time of  that  decision.   There  were
    therefore existing adverse credibility findings  prior  to  the  appeal
    before Judge Rodger  which  he  was  bound  to  take  into  account  in
    accordance with Devaseelan.

 8. Paragraph 50 of Judge  Rodger's  decision  records  the  parts  of  the
    Appellant's evidence that were not previously accepted as  credible  by
    the previous  judge  and  paragraph  52  specifically  deals  with  the
    previous finding that the Appellant was in contact with his  family  in
    Afghanistan.  Judge Rodger then  considered  the  evidence  before  him
    about the Appellant's family and sets out detailed reasons  as  to  why
    the claim that he has not been in touch with them since arriving in the
    United Kingdom was not found to be credible and that the finding in the
    previous determination stood.  The matters relied upon in reaching  the
    same finding were in relation to the Appellant's attempts to trace  his
    family through the Red Cross (and  lack  of  supporting  evidence  from
    them); the Appellant's poor explanation for deletion  of  his  facebook
    account; and the lack of credibility of the witnesses who  appeared  on
    the Appellant's behalf.  The majority of the reasons given  as  to  the
    Appellant's lack of credibility on the point  in  relation  to  contact
    with his family were  matters  which  were  wholly  unaffected  by  any
    claimed mental health problems or vulnerability, focusing primarily  on
    assessment of the other witnesses and lack of supporting documentation.
     Those findings  were  entirely  open  to  Judge  Rodger  and  were  in
    accordance with paragraph 3  of  the  Guidance  as  well  as  the  more
    detailed provision in paragraphs 14 and 15 of the same.

 9. Following this, when dealing with further aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility and risk on return to Afghanistan, Judge Rodger set out his
    findings in relation to mental health and applicability of the Guidance
    in paragraphs 61 to 65 as follows:

         "61. In determining the appellant's credibility, I have  of  course
         taken into account that he was recently assessed  by  telephone  by
         local IAPT services  in  August  2017  and  that  he  had  reported
         symptoms  that  scored  severe  relating  to  both  depression  and
         anxiety.  I have fully considered whether  any  inconsistencies  in
         his account or his ability to provide evidence and the nature of it
         has been affected by any mental health problems, asset out  in  the
         Joint Presidential Guidance Note 2 of 2010 relating  to  vulnerable
         adults.  Whilst I accept that he was assessed and that he has  been
         referred for CBT treatment following the  assessment  there  is  no
         medico-legal report carried out by a medical expert to confirm  the
         existence of any alleged mental health symptoms and the  effect  of
         those on the appellant.  Whilst there is a record of the  appellant
         reporting certain mental health symptoms by the  IAPT  practitioner
         in both March 2015 and again in August 2015 [sic 2017], there is no
         indication of whether the treatment provider had considered whether
         the appellant was genuine  in  the  presentation  or  reporting  of
         symptoms and the assessment was done by telephone  rather  than  by
         meeting the appellant.  I also note  that  the  appellant's  mental
         health symptoms appear to have  improved  as  he  had  no  suicidal
         thoughts and he was no longer self-harming by punching walls.  This
         is consistent with  the  appellant's  initial  response  in  cross-
         examination  wherein  he  confirmed  that  his  mental  health  was
         generally improving.  Whilst in response to Ms Robinson's  question
         in re-examination he sought to clarify this by saying that  he  had
         misunderstood the question and that his mental health  was  getting
         worse, I was not persuaded  by  this  explanation.   There  was  no
         suggestion or indication at the time that the question was put  and
         answered that he had not been able to understand the  very  clearly
         put and succinct question put to him in  cross-examination  and  he
         was very clear in his response.  I was not persuaded  that  he  had
         not understood the very clearly put question  about  his  improving
         mental health.  He has a very good understanding of English and the
         question was not complicated or obscure and there  was  no  request
         for the question to be repeated on account of a perception  at  the
         time of it being asked of it being unclear or not understood and  I
         did not feel the need to clarify it with the appellant as there was
         no hesitation in his  response  and  it  was  consistent  with  his
         earlier evidence that he was no longer punching walls and  did  not
         have suicidal thoughts..

         62.  Further, the letter from the IAPT practitioner  following  the
         assessment on 08/08/17  stated  that  the  appellant  had  reported
         having nightmares and flashbacks.  These were not reported in March
         2015, which was closer in time to when  he  had  left  Afghanistan.
         This does not seem to set well with this being a  credible  account
         of suffering from mental health problems and there  is  no  medical
         evidence to comment  on  the  consistency  of  his  account  or  to
         diagnose a mental health condition.  I also note that the appellant
         has not been prescribed medication for any mental  health  symptoms
         and there is no indication that he has had to  utilise  any  crisis
         teams or go to his GP on account of his mental  health  in  between
         the two assessments  other  than  Ms  Norman  organising  the  IAPT
         assessment on his behalf through his GP.

         63.  With regards to the mental health condition being relied  upon
         by the appellant, I take note of the contents of the letter  by  Ms
         Norman.  Whilst she refers to her assessment of the appellant being
         of low mood  and  fragile  mental  health,  she  is  not  medically
         qualified and there is no evidence that she  has  carried  out  any
         tests or assessments in order to check whether the reporting of the
         symptoms is consistent or otherwise credible.  Further, whilst  she
         states that she carried out an emotional wellbeing assessment  with
         the appellant, she is not a medically  trained  practitioner  or  a
         medical expert and I am not satisfied that I am able to rely on her
         evidence that the appellant is of fragile mental  health.   I  also
         take into account that Ms Norman has been supporting the  appellant
         through the Refugee Support Network programme and since closure  of
         the programme.   She  is  not  independent  and  is  not  medically
         trained.  Further, the appellant  had  told  her,  and  it  was  Ms
         Norman's understanding, that the appellant is not in  contact  with
         any family in  Afghanistan  and  her  letter  and  support  of  the
         appellant has been based on a non-credible account  being  provided
         to her by the appellant.  Therefore, whilst she may  have  observed
         the appellant's low mood, given  that  she  was  persuaded  by  the
         appellant that he was not in contact with his family, which I  find
         to be untrue, I am not satisfied that I am able to place  any  real
         weight on her assessment of his mental health situation  or  extent
         of any such alleged condition, as this is likely to be yet  another
         incidence of where the appellant has misled her and her support and
         opinion of his likely situation and situation on return is based on
         a wrong premise.

         64.  Whilst I accept that the appellant had an assessment in  March
         2015 and again in August 2017, the conclusions of the  reports  are
         based on the account provided to them by  the  appellant  over  the
         telephone and there is no indication of whether  the  assessor  had
         considered whether the symptoms were consistent or indeed credible,
         (which would seem to be normal as a patient's account  is  normally
         taken at face value).  The appellant has been represented  and  yet
         there is no medical assessment report relating to his mental health
         and on his own evidence he has not been to his GP himself with  any
         mental health problems.  He had the recent IAPT referral which  was
         organised by Ms Norman with his GP and whilst he said that  he  had
         been referred for primary healthcare two years ago, he said that he
         had lost the appointment letter and didn't go  to  the  assessment.
         If he had been suffering from an on-going mental  health  condition
         with significant symptoms and was in need of treatment, I  find  it
         difficult to accept that he would not  have  chased  up  a  further
         appointment or that there would be no diagnosis of a mental  health
         condition.

         65.  Overall having had the  benefit  of  oral  evidence  from  the
         appellant and on considering all of the evidence available to me, I
         am not satisfied that the appellant's account of his mental  health
         is credible or that any symptoms he may suffer from are  as  severe
         as alleged or would impact  on  his  ability  to  reintegrate  into
         Kabul."

10. Although there is not a specific sentence  in  the  decision  that  the
    Judge does not conclude that the Appellant is vulnerable; when read  as
    a whole and in conjunction with paragraph 44 set out above, it is clear
    that Judge Rodger did not  conclude  that  he  was.   He  appropriately
    directed himself as to the Guidance and what needed  to  be  considered
    when assessing credibility (beyond matters relating to contact with the
    Appellant's family which turned primarily on other evidence),  but  did
    not accept that the Appellant had the mental health  problems  claimed,
    nor that any symptoms were as severe as alleged and therefore  that  he
    was not a vulnerable witness in  accordance  with  the  Guidance.   The
    findings made and reasons for them on this point are cogently  set  out
    in detail and were open to the  Judge  on  the  very  limited  evidence
    before him as to the Appellant's claimed mental health.  I do not  find
    that there is any error of law in the Judge's  self-direction  on  this
    point, his application of the guidance nor of his reasoning as  to  why
    the Appellant was not considered to be vulnerable.

11. Further, I do not find that Judge Rodger has inappropriately considered
    the Guidance in a confused way or after  making  credibility  findings,
    contrary to Mibanga or otherwise.  In paragraph 51 of the decision,  it
    is clear that the Judge is summarising what he has taken  into  account
    (the oral evidence and written documentation) and  his  conclusions  on
    that, the reasons for which follow in significant  detail.   As  above,
    the issue about contact with family was considered  first,  before  the
    claimed mental health problems and assessment of applicability  of  the
    Guidance or otherwise; but that is logical given the  applicability  of
    the previous decision of Judge Pavey in accordance with Devaseelan  and
    in any event, as above, whether or not the Appellant was vulnerable  in
    accordance with the Guidance could not have  materially  affected  that
    finding or the reasons for it.

12. From paragraph 66 onwards, there is then  the  assessment  of  risk  on
    return and whether internal relocation  to  Kabul  would  be  safe  and
    reasonable.  Within  those  paragraphs,  there  is  a  further  summary
    conclusion in paragraph 70 as to risk on return, which in  part  relies
    on credibility.

13. In paragraph 76, Judge Rodger also considers as  a  substantive  matter
    whether  the  Appellant's  claimed  mental  health  would  affect   the
    prospects of him reintegrating on return to Kabul.  This is a  relevant
    factor to consider given the Appellant's claim but is separate  to  the
    first ground of appeal as to applicability of the Guidance.

14. In summary, I do not find  that  Judge  Rodger  erred  in  law  in  his
    consideration of or application of the Guidance in circumstances  where
    there was a distinct lack of supporting evidence as to the  Appellant's
    mental health and any effect on him as a result of that and where  very
    detailed and cogent reasons are given for the  conclusions  reached  on
    this.

15. As to the second ground of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    its assessment of risk on return in relation to (i) the objective  risk
    in the Appellant's home area; (ii) the Appellant's position  on  return
    in terms of family support; and (iii) the risk that he would face as  a
    westernised young person; I also find no error of law for  the  reasons
    set out below.

16. Whilst Judge Rodger did not make any express finding that the Appellant
    was objectively at risk on return to his home area from the Taliban (he
    did expressly find that the Appellant was not at risk on return to  his
    home area, or anywhere else, from the  Afghan  authorities  or  due  to
    westernisation, and accepted that the Appellant may have  a  subjective
    fear on return to his home area), that could not  in  any  event  be  a
    material error of law as he went on to find, in the same way that Judge
    Davey did previously, that the Appellant could  safely  and  reasonably
    relocate to Kabul.  The latter would inevitably lead  to  dismissal  of
    the asylum appeal whether or not the Appellant was objectively at  risk
    on return in his home area.  There is therefore no  material  error  of
    law in failing to make express findings about risk on return  from  the
    Taliban in the Appellant's home area.

17. As to whether family support would  be  available,  Judge  Rodger  made
    clear findings which  were  open  to  him  on  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was in contact with his family.  In paragraphs 74 and  75  he
    expressly refers to the report from Dr  Foxley  and  the  After  Return
    report on this issue and accepts from those documents that  the  simple
    existence of family in Afghanistan does not equate  to  protection  for
    the returnees.  However, he  finds  in  relation  to  this  Appellant's
    circumstances,  that  there  would  be  such  support,  assistance  and
    protection, relying on the  past  financial  means  of  the  family  to
    procure the Appellant's passage to the United Kingdom, the  Appellant's
    own resourcefulness, intelligence  and  ability  to  integrate  into  a
    foreign country and that he has good support networks and  connections,
    including with friends and their families who  live  in  or  relatively
    near to Kabul.  These are adequate reasons for the  finding  made  that
    the Appellant would likely be supported on return.

18. It is not necessary for the First-tier Tribunal to refer  to  each  and
    every piece of evidence before them in the written decision  and  there
    was no error of  law  in  the  present  appeal  for  failing  to  refer
    expressly in paragraphs 74 and 75 to the UNCHR  Eligibility  Guidelines
    in 2016 which do not in substance take the matter any further than what
    Judge Rodger expressly accepted which is that the existence  of  family
    life does not per se equate to protection for returnees.  In any event,
    Judge Rodger was bound by the country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 000163 (IAC)  (the  headnote  of  which  was
    quoted in full in paragraph 32 of the decision) to the effect  that  it
    is not in general unsafe or unreasonable for  a  person  to  internally
    relocate to Kabul, even if they do not have family or a support network
    in Kabul.  There is therefore no error of law  in  relation  to  family
    support and in any event, no material error of law as family support is
    not essential for it to be safe and reasonable to  internally  relocate
    to Kabul.

19. Judge Rodger considered whether the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Afghanistan due to westernisation in paragraphs 78 and 79  of
    the decision, giving cogent reasons as to why he would not be based  on
    the background evidence before him.  This included the After Return and
    the Asylos report but was not  expressly  limited  only  to  these  two
    documents.  As above, the First-tier Tribunal need not  refer  to  each
    and every piece of evidence before them in  the  written  decision  and
    there is nothing to suggest that  Judge  Rodger  failed  to  take  into
    account the letter from Bryony Norman and Emily Bowerman of the Refugee
    Support Network (particularly as he expressly referred to this evidence
    earlier in the decision as part of the written evidence,  supported  by
    oral evidence from Bryony  Norman).   The  Appellant,  in  his  written
    grounds of appeal, specifically relies  upon  the  conclusion  in  that
    letter that he has adapted well and integrated into life in the UK, but
    that is, with respect, addressing a different point to risk  on  return
    because of westernisation.   Cogent reasons are given for  the  finding
    that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk   on   return   due   to
    westernisation, including the limited anecdotal evidence of  targeting,
    that he Appellant still speaks Pashto, that his  friends  who  are  now
    British Citizens have not had any difficulties on return to  Kabul  and
    that there were no previous adverse experiences for the  Appellant  due
    to his religious practices.  There is no error of law  in  relation  to
    the findings on westernisation.

20. Finally, the last ground of appeal  is  that  Judge  Rodger  materially
    erred in his assessment under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights and under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  This
    ground of appeal was put very  briefly  both  in  writing  and  orally,
    relying essentially on the same factual points as in the second  ground
    of appeal.  I have found no error of law in relation  to  consideration
    of family support or westernisation in the context  of  the  protection
    claim and similarly there is no error of law  in  failure  to  consider
    these in the context of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  or
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

21. Judge Rodger appropriately directed himself  as  to  considerations  of
    reintegration under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    outside of them under Article 8 in the final section  of  his  decision
    from paragraph 91 onwards.   He  found  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    supported by  on  return;  that  he  is  resourceful;  has  educational
    qualifications; speaks Pashto; and had spent  his  childhood  years  in
    Afghanistan.  These are adequate reasons for finding that he would  not
    face very significant obstacles to reintegration on return and that his
    removal would not be a disproportionate interference with his right  to
    respect for private and family life.  There is no error of law  in  the
    assessment or findings in this regard.

22. For all of these reasons, there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and as such, the decision of  Judge
    Rodger to dismiss the appeal is confirmed.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     23rd March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

