
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05007/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Rolls Building              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 February 2018                      |On 26 February 2018               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     H K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, instructed by Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on 2 November 2017 in which  she
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  respondent
    made on 11 May 2017 to refuse to  granted  asylum  and/or  humanitarian
    protection

 2. The appellant is a Turkish citizen. His case is that  he  is  an  Alevi
    Muslim Kurd, and a supporter of HDP, as is  his  father.  He  has  been
    arrested on three separate occasions between  March  2014  and  October
    2016. He was tortured and ill-treated in detention and was  accused  of
    supported the PKK; he was also asked to  be  an  informer.   After  his
    third detention, his family made arrangements for him to be brought via
    Italy to the United Kingdom where he  claimed  asylum  on  arrival.  He
    fears further persecution on return for the same reasons and also  that
    he would be compelled to undergo military service.

 3.  The  respondent  accepted  the  appellant's  religion,  ethnicity  and
    nationality, but rejected the rest of his claim,  noting  that  it  was
    open to him to buy himself out of military service.

 4. The judge  considered  that  the  central  issue  was  the  appellant's
    credibility and in her decision at [21] addressed that,  concluding  at
    [23] that appellant had omitted to give details of what now formed  the
    core of his claim. She noted also [24]  that  the  appellant  had  been
    inconsistent about his ability to buy himself out of  military  service
    and as to his liability to undertake service.  She also drew inferences
    adverse to credibility from his failure to claim asylum in Italy [25].

 5. I am satisfied that, as is set out in the grounds of appeal, the  judge
    erred in her approach to credibility in two ways. First,  there  is  no
    finding as to whether the appellant was  a  vulnerable  witness,  given
    that he claimed to have been the victim of torture, and to be suffering
    mental health problems as a result. It  was  incumbent  on  the  judge,
    following  the  Presidential  Practice  Direction  as  set  out  in  AM
    (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA 1123, for her to  have  done  so.  I  do  not
    accept the submission that this would not have made a difference.

 6. Further, the judge appears not to have applied the principles  set  out
    in YL (China) [2004] UKIAT 00145  in  her  approach  to  the  screening
    interview, failing to note that it was carried out at 1 am, and  it  is
    notable that the respondent does not in the refusal letter take  points
    on failure to disclose details of the claim earlier. The judge did  not
    take proper account of the reasons for those failures set  out  in  the
    substantive interview.

 7. While Mr Avery submitted that there were other reasons  justifying  the
    adverse credibility finding, I consider that these are also  undermined
    by the failure to address the issue of vulnerability, and it is unclear
    why the judge drew inferences from a failure to provide evidence  [25],
    nor is it clear why she thought it reasonable to have obtained  medical
    evidence from Turkey [26] or why she rejected the explanation  for  not
    claiming asylum in Italy.

 8. While it could be said that the findings with respect to  liability  to
    military service are made out, those are insufficient  to  explain  why
    the rest of the claim which is  not  credible,  given  that  these  are
    discreet issues.

 9. I find also that the judge failed, in fact, to  make  any  findings  of
    fact but simply rejected the claim [28]. That is not a sufficient basis
    on which to make an assessment of future risk, and there is no evidence
    that the judge, as Ms Kiai  submitted,  took  the  background  evidence
    about how the Turkish authorities customarily behave towards  suspected
    PKK supporters.

10. The judge also failed to consider IK (returnees, records,  IFA)  [2004]
    UKIAT 312 or to apply it to facts as found. While  I  note  Mr  Avery's
    submission that on the facts as found, there was no material error, for
    the reasons set out above, the  fact-finding  was  defective.  Further,
    there were no findings on many of the issues such as family connections
    with the PKK, there being a tacit acceptance that  family  members  had
    been recognised as refugees.

11. For all of these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of  law,  and  I  set  it
    aside.  As the judge failed to  make  any  proper  findings,  the  only
    course of action properly open to me is to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
    on all issues.

13. The appeal must not be before First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
    granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date  20 February 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
