


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
PA/05666/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 19 September 2018                  |On 24 April 2019                       |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                     M.A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                      Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, of Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                ERROR OF LAW

Introduction


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego ("the judge"), promulgated on 21 June  2018,  in
    which he dismissed the appeal on all grounds. That  appeal  arose  from
    the Respondent's decision of 16 April 2018, refusing a  protection  and
    human rights claim made by the Appellant on the basis that he is wanted
    by the authorities for his support of relatives who are of  the  Ba'hai
    faith.

The Judge's Decision


 2. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant. He set out in  detail  the
    evidence and submissions at [22] to [28] and findings at [29] to  [53].
    While the judge noted that the Appellant's written testimony was clear,
    coherent and plausible and identified other positive factors that  fell
    in his favour, he set  out  several  "negative  factors"  that  counted
    against him at [37]. Consideration was given to the reliability of  the
    documentary evidence, inconsistencies in the account, the provenance of
    evidence from an Iranian lawyer, omissions  in  the  evidence  and  the
    absence  of  documentary  evidence  that  should  have   been   readily
    available. At [43]  the  judge  identified  "major  difficulties"  with
    credibility and set these out as follows:

    "43.1. The evidence about the  shop  being  sealed,  and  the  lack  of
    evidence of a notice from the authorities sealing the shop.

    43.2 The lack of any correspondence between the Iranian lawyer and  the
    UK solicitor.

    43.3 The tendering as probative evidence of blank documents from the UK
    solicitor's office as if they are from the Iranian  lawyer,  when  they
    are blank printouts from the UK solicitor's email  account,  of  things
    forwarded to it, which are notoriously unreliable.

    43.4 The absence of any WhatsApp or Telegram call or  document  history
    about critical conversations and messages.

    43.5 The evidence of the appellant in the hearing about a raid  on  his
    home (which was very damaging to the credibility of the appellant given
    the detail in  the  witness  statement,  and  the  assertion  that  the
    interview had been inadequate so that effort had to be made to put  the
    case fully subsequently)."

The grounds of application and grant of permission

 3. The grounds of application take issue with the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility  and  the  challenge  secured  the  Appellant  a  grant  of
    permission by the First-tier Tribunal on 1 August 2018.

 4. The Respondent did not file a Rule  24  response,  but  Miss  Isherwood
    resisted the appeal.

Decision on Error of Law


 5. I have considered the helpful submissions made by both representatives.
    While Miss Isherwood made a  valiant  attempt  to  defend  the  judge's
    decision, I have reached the conclusion that in  an  otherwise  focused
    decision the judge did err for essentially two reasons.

 6. The evidence in any appeal must be  assessed  in  the  round.  I  fully
    appreciate that the judge has stated that this is what he did, however,
    errors were made in the approach he adopted  in  the  consideration  of
    evidence in relation  to  an  email  from  an  Iranian  lawyer  to  the
    Appellant's solicitors and the Appellant's written and oral  testimony.



7.    First, it was the Appellant's case that he had been summoned  to  face
    charges in the  Revolutionary  Court  of  Iran.  It  was  claimed  that
    information relating to those charges was provided to the Appellant  by
    his lawyer in Iran. The evidence comprised of a letter from the  lawyer
    to the Appellant and a further  letter  confirming  the  basis  of  the
    charges. This letter it was said was attached to an email sent  by  the
    lawyer to the Appellant's solicitors.

8.    The judge noted  the  email  printed  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    contained  no  attachment  and  he  was  critical  of  the  Appellant's
    solicitors  by  their  failure  to   provide   correspondence   between
    themselves and the Iranian lawyer. The judge concluded that this was  a
    negative  factor  and  identified  it  as  a  major   difficulty   with
    credibility at [37.4] and [43.2].

9.    In particular the judge noted at [37.4] that "if there was  lawyer  to
    lawyer correspondence it should have been printed off as it was.  There
    are no emails from the UK solicitors to the Iranian lawyer, as would be
    expected in order to get the documentation."

10.   And at [43.3] noted that  "The  tendering  as  probative  evidence  of
    blank documents from the UK solicitor's office as if they are from  the
    Iranian lawyer, when they are blank printouts from the  UK  solicitor's
    email account,  of  things  forwarded  to  it,  which  are  notoriously
    unreliable".

11.   The judge further elaborated on the  difficulties  presented  by  this
    evidence at [46] to [49] and stated thus:

    "If the account were reasonably likely to be true the  first  thing  to
    establish is  that  there  is  an  Iranian  lawyer  instructed  by  the
    appellant. The next thing to do is to have correspondence from  and  to
    that lawyer to  establish  that  the  evidence  tendered  is  reliable.
    Neither of these have been done, and they would not have been difficult
    given that the Iranian lawyer is said to be cooperative.

    Further, the evidence tendered purported to be how documents were  sent
    to the UK lawyer is totally unreliable when inspected.  The  letter  of
    the 23rd May 2018 from the lawyer was said to have  been  delivered  by
    hand to the solicitors: and it would have been simple to take a copy of
    the passport of that named relative to show an exit  and  entry  stamp.
    The emails said to have attached documents  lack  credibility  for  the
    reasons given above.

    None of these things are required where a  claim  is  proved  on  other
    evidence, but when such evidence is available and any competent  lawyer
    (and the appellant is represented by solicitors experienced  in  asylum
    work) would obtain  it,  the  absence  of  it  is  a  very  significant
    credibility deficit by reason of TK (Burundi)".

12.   It is apparent from the above that the judge was very  concerned  with
    the lacuna in the evidence and had significant doubts  that  the  email
    and the evidence from the lawyer was as purported. In my judgement, the
    above paragraphs illustrate that an excessive degree of negativity  was
    attached to  the  failure  to  adduce  evidence  of  lawyer  to  lawyer
    correspondence and thereby to the Appellant's credibility as opposed to
    the reputation of his solicitors. On the judge's analysis the fault was
    that of the Appellant's solicitors, but this failing was transferred to
    the Appellant by a misapplication of the guidance given in TK (Burundi)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 40. While the judge assessed the  availability  of  the
    evidence, its significance to the case, he did not consider the reasons
    for its absence and it does not appear that the appellant or indeed his
    solicitors were given an opportunity to explain the omission(s). I thus
    conclude that it was not open to the judge to rely on  the  absence  of
    evidence in rejecting the Appellant's account.

13.   In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the judge's approach to  the
    evidence from the Appellant's lawyer in Iran is flawed.

14.   Second, the judge's record of proceedings  indicates  that  in  cross-
    examination the Appellant agreed to the Presenting Officer's suggestion
    that "in your witness statement for the first time you  say  that  your
    family home raided - is that correct" (sic). What followed was a series
    of questions about that incident which concluded with  the  Appellant's
    evidence that his shop was raided, his home was  inspected,  and  that,
    the latter was not hitherto  mentioned  as  it  was  not  important  as
    nothing was  taken.  What  then  followed  was  a  further  suggestion,
    contrary  to  the  first  suggestion,  put  to  the  Appellant  by  the
    Presenting Officer that, " in your witness statement  you  do  not  say
    your home was raided, only your shop,  why  not  say  in  your  witness
    statement that home was also raided".

15.   The judge concluded that the inconsistency  was  a  "negative  factor"
    and concluded that this presented a "major" difficulty  and  was  "very
    damaging" to the Appellant's credibility. It is clear that this  was  a
    material issue in the judge's assessment that impacted upon his overall
    assessment of credibility.

16.   There was considerable debate about this issue at the  hearing.  I  do
    not accept the submission that there was a deliberate  attempt  by  the
    Presenting Officer to entrap the Appellant, in initially putting to him
    that he referred to a home  raid  in  his  witness  statement  when  he
    clearly had not. That is a serious allegation and there is no  evidence
    to support it.

17.   However, I do accept that the question was misleading and  should  not
    have been put and corrected either by the Appellant's representative or
    by the judge before a response was elicited from the Appellant. While I
    appreciate that the Appellant initially confirmed the  suggestion  that
    he had referred to the raid in his  witness  statement  and  thereafter
    gave an account of it, I agree with Mr Gayle that there may  have  been
    many reasons other than untruthfulness as to why the appellant did  not
    resile from the suggestion. Whilst it is unfortunate that the  question
    was put or indeed allowed to be put, the judge was aware that the error
    was inadvertent, but an appropriate assessment  was  not  made  of  the
    weight that should properly be attributed to that  evidence  given  the
    manner in which it was procured.

18.   I am satisfied that the approach was improper  and  as  a  consequence
    there has been procedural unfairness. It is clear that the judge placed
    significant weight on this evidence and given the fundamental nature of
    an asylum decision and the consequences for the Appellant, it would  be
    inappropriate in those circumstances  to  compound  the  unfairness  by
    refusing to set aside the Decision.

19.   In light of all of the above, I set aside the judge's decision.

Disposal


20.   Both representatives were agreed that if I were  to  find  a  material
      error of law this appeal would have to be remitted to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a complete re-hearing.  Having regard to  the  nature  of
      the error I deem it appropriate to take this course of action.

Decision

I am satisfied that the Decision involved the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Housego  is  set
aside.  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing
before a different judge.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date: 19 April 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

