
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05846/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th February 2018                     |On 22nd February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                    A N A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer) For the Respondent:    Ms C Warren (instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State, with
    permission, in relation  to  a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge  Duff
    following a hearing at North Shields  on  20th  November  2017.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 24th November 2017 the  appeal  was
    allowed on asylum and Human Rights grounds (Article 3).

 2. Permission to appeal having  been  granted  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, the matter came before  me  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had made an error of law in its Decision and Reasons and if so
    whether and to what extent the  Decision  and  Reasons  should  be  set
    aside.

 3. For the sake of continuity and clarity I shall  refer  to  ANA  as  the
    Appellant and to the Secretary of  State  as  the  Respondent  in  this
    judgment.

 4. The Appellant, a Tanzanian national had claimed asylum on the basis  of
    political opinion.

 5. The Secretary of State asserts that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  by
    denying the Home Office Presenting Officer the  opportunity  to  cross-
    examine the  Appellant.   That,  she  asserts,  amounts  to  procedural
    unfairness.  It is argued that,  although  a  vulnerable  witness,  the
    medical evidence before the Judge did not say that  the  Appellant  was
    unfit to give evidence.

 6. That is the sole challenge.

 7. I find that the grounds are not made out.  A reading  of  the  Decision
    and Reasons explains that the Judge had  medical  evidence  dated  27th
    October  2017  confirming  that  the  Appellant  suffered  from  severe
    depression.  The Judge observed that the Appellant before him  appeared
    extremely flat and on the verge of tears when the Judge  spoke  to  him
    through an interpreter.  The Judge asked  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer what questions she intended to  ask.   The  Judge  found  that,
    although the proposed questions were entirely proper, they were  likely
    to cause the Appellant severe distress and,  given  the  state  of  his
    mental health, the answers were unlikely to be  reliable  or  accurate.
    He  thus  decided  against  taking  oral   evidence   and   gave   both
    representatives time to prepare their submissions.

 8. The Judge's actions were entirely appropriate  and  in  line  with  the
    Presidents' Guidance on dealing with vulnerable witnesses.  It is for a
    Judge to assess vulnerability and proceed accordingly  assisted,  where
    possible, by medical evidence.  Mental disorders can fluctuate and  the
    fact that in the medical report the doctor did not mention an inability
    to give evidence that could have changed and the stress  of  a  hearing
    would not have helped.  I note also from the Record of Proceedings that
    there was no objection raised by the Home Office Presenting Officer  on
    the day who no doubt observed  the  same  difficulties  as  the  Judge.
    There was also no statement from the Home Office Presenting Officer  on
    the day.

 9. I note that the Judge dealt with  each  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenges in the Letter of Refusal with the aid of an  expert  report.
    The Judge assessed that report and gave reasons for accepting the parts
    he accepted.  He also took note of the medical report  from  the  Helen
    Bamber Foundation, in particular concerning scarring.

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not act unfairly towards the  Secretary  of
    State's representative and thus the Decision and  Reasons  contains  no
    error of law material or otherwise and shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


Signed                              Date 14th February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


















