
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05304/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd July 2019                     |On 18th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 miss R M M
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Graham,  promulgated  on  29th  June  2018,  following  a  hearing   at
    Birmingham Priory Court on 23rd May 2018.  In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq, was born on 23rd August  1985,  and
    is a female.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    10th April 2018 refusing her claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is threefold.  First, that she  is
    a  whistle-blower  who  has  exposed  the  production  of   counterfeit
    medication, such that she would now be at risk from criminal  gangs  or
    the Iraqi authorities and have no sufficiency of  protection.   Second,
    that she is an atheist and this means that  the  Convention  reason  of
    "religion" is engaged and she will be at risk of ill-treatment for this
    reason.  Third, that she is going to be exposed to  "serious  harm"  by
    virtue of Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification  Directive  because  she
    stands to suffer  degrading  treatment  or  punishment  or  torture  or
    inhuman treatment upon return to Iraq for the reasons given above.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the Appellant's claim on the basis of the  medical
    report of Dr George (at paragraph 26) who made it  clear  that  in  his
    opinion, if it became known that the  Appellant  was  an  atheist  "she
    could be at real risk from religious extremists.   The  risk  would  be
    serious in central and southern Iraq...".  First, the judge went on  to
    say that, "I am  satisfied  that  even  if  it  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is an atheist she has not detailed  any  incident  which  has
    brought her to the attention of the authorities regarding  her  failure
    to practise Islam" (paragraph 26).

 5. Second, the judge then went on to consider the application of Section 8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004
    and observed that the Appellant had delayed claiming asylum for a month
    and that  "I  am  satisfied  this  delay  in  claiming  asylum  is  not
    consistent  with  the  behaviour  of  a  general  refugee  in  need  of
    international protection.  I am satisfied that  this  has  damaged  the
    credibility of her account".

 6. Third, the judge considered the Appellant's  claim  that  she  believed
    that there was in existence an arrest warrant  in  her  name,  but  the
    judge observed that,

         "The Appellant's account regarding the arrest warrant is  extremely
         vague and lacking in detail.  The Appellant is unable to  say  what
         offence she is accused of, or who complained  to  the  authorities.
         She is unable to produce the arrest warrant  and  appears  to  have
         made no attempt to obtain a copy, despite her  father  and  brother
         being resident in Baghdad" (paragraph 29).

 7. Finally, the judge had regard to the  views  of  the  expert,  Dr  Alan
    George, dated 16th May 2018, who had taken the view that,  although  he
    could not rule out as implausible the Appellant's testimony that  there
    was an arrest warrant issued  against  her,  this  was  nevertheless  a
    surprising action on the part of her tormentors because,

         "It is not obvious to me what the illicit  traders  might  gain  by
         having [the Appellant] arrested.  Indeed,  that  course  of  action
         would carry a risk of her appearing in court and providing detailed
         evidence concerning the illicit medicine.  If the objective was  to
         silence her,  a  more  crude  course  of  action  might  have  been
         expected,  such  as  direct  threats  to  her  and  her  relatives"
         (paragraph 31).

 8. All in all, therefore, the judge disbelieved the  Appellant's  account,
    and disbelieved any potential risk to her on the alleged grounds.   The
    appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  have  regard
    to the fact that the Appellant's claim was fundamentally, in  its  core
    basis, accepted by the Respondent Secretary of  State  in  the  refusal
    letter of 24th November 2017.  Second, the judge failed to have  proper
    regard to the fact that the Appellant was an atheist.  Indeed, no clear
    finding had been made on this  issue.   The  government's  own  country
    information and guidance report on "religious  minorities",  of  August
    2016, made it clear that a non-Muslim would be at grave risk  in  Iraq.
    Third, the judge appears to have applied Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants)  Act  2004  in  a  determinative
    fashion, avoiding thereafter having to consider  any  other  issue,  by
    applying a template to the finding of credibility in her case.

10. On 12th November 2018, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 3rd July 2019, Mr Draycott, relied  on  the
    grounds of application.  He placed particular reliance on the fact that
    the well-known decision in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  made  it  quite  clear
    that the principle that "nobody should be forced  to  have  or  express
    political opinion in which he does  not  believe"  applied  equally  to
    religious questions, and that if the  Appellant  was  an  atheist,  she
    should not be required to disclose this in a way that puts her at risk,
    which is manifestly the case given what is said about the situation  in
    Iraq from the government's own sources.  The Appellant had a  passport.
    She did not have a CSID card.  In the process of acquiring a CSID card,
    she would have to make known her religious affiliation, and this  would
    put her at risk.  Even if she did not  have  to  say  anything,  and  a
    duplicate CSID card would be made, she would still be  at  risk  as  an
    atheist returning back to Pakistan.  The judge had not made  a  finding
    on her atheism.  This was a novel point as far as returns to  Iraq  was
    concerned.  It required a proper and clear decision.  The judge had not
    made such a decision.

12. Second, the judge had applied  Section  8  in  a  manner  that  was  in
    violation of the decision in JT (Cameroon) [2009] 1 WLR 1411 where  the
    Court of Appeal had made  it  clear  that  the  proposition  that  "the
    Section did  not  dictate  that  relevant  damage  to  the  credibility
    inevitably resulted; that accordingly, Section 8(1) was to be  read  as
    if the qualifying word 'potentially'  were  inserted  before  the  word
    'damaging'".  In that case Lord Justice Pill had gone  on  to  say  (at
    paragraph 16) that, "I agree with the parties that there is a real risk
    that Section 8 matters were given a status and a compartment  of  their
    own rather than taken into account, as there should have been, as  part
    of a global assessment of credibility".

13. Finally, the judge wrongly criticised the Appellant on the  basis  that
    she had  been  unable  to  produce  an  arrest  warrant.   It  was  the
    Appellant's case that she had heard that there was an  arrest  warrant.
    Nobody had seen this arrest warrant.  It was  certainly  not  the  case
    that  her  family  members  had  seen  it  or  had  possession  of  it.
    Accordingly, it was not correct for the judge to say that  the  failure
    of  the  Appellant  to  produce  the  arrest  warrant  undermined   her
    credibility.

14. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the judge below had not erred  in
    law for the following reasons.  First, the  Appellant  had  never  been
    asked whether she had a CSID card.  In the circumstances, it was  quite
    likely that she did have a CSID card because she  had  a  passport  and
    this was the basic documentation required for her  to  then  procure  a
    CSID card.  This meant that even if she did not have  a  CSID  card  it
    would be possible to duplicate one with ease.

15. Second, the issue of her being an atheist was irrelevant because if she
    had a CSID card, or could procure one, she would be able to return back
    to Iraq and on that basis perform all the  normal  activities  that  an
    ordinary  citizen  does  without  having  to  disclose  her   religious
    affiliation or otherwise.

16. Third, she was being returned to Baghdad and there  is  no  reason  why
    from there she could not use the CSID card to travel around.

17. Finally, as far as the application of Section 8 was concerned, one  had
    to look at the judge's approach to this.  What the judge makes clear is
    that, "I have considered the Appellant's credibility by looking at  the
    matter in the round" (paragraph 28).  This means  that  the  judge  had
    looked at all the evidence, and not  simply  applied  Section  8  as  a
    template.  He could not be criticised for coming to the conclusion that
    the Appellant's evidence lacked credibility.

Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the  decision  below
    falls to be set aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are
    as follows.

19. First, there is the question of the Appellant's activity as a  whistle-
    blower.  The refusal letter has to a significant  extent  accepted  the
    Appellant's core account.  It makes it clear that the Appellant's claim
    that she was responsible for the sales  of  oncology  products  in  the
    northern regions of Iraq and also the  marketing  projects  across  the
    whole of Iraq meant that it was her responsibility to check  the  stock
    levels of medication at all the oncology centres.  The  refusal  letter
    makes it clear (see paragraphs 38 to 39), that,

         "You have provided a consistent  account  of  medication  that  you
         encountered whilst in your job role, including Arimidex  which  you
         stated was hormonal treatments for breast cancer patients,  further
         stating the side effects of such treatment ...".

20. The refusal letter goes on to say that "your claims in regards to  your
    job role and the medication you encountered are deemed to be consistent
    with the evidence you have submitted for  this  aspect  of  your  claim
    ...".




21. The refusal letter then goes on to say (at paragraphs 41 to 44) that,

         "You claim you were at the government hospital  Nanakali  in  Erbil
         ... which is consistent with background information ...  where  you
         discovered counterfeit medication which was expired ... you noticed
         that the medication Arimidex, again a medication which is  accepted
         that you had dealings with as part of your job role in the material
         fact above, had expired in January 2016, however a sticker had been
         placed on top of this to state that the  expiry  date  was  January
         2017 ... further you noticed that there was Turkish writing on  the
         medication ... you reported what you had found to the  company  you
         worked for and to your manager who was shocked but  did  not  think
         anything could be done about it ...".

22. The refusal letter then goes on to conclude that,

         "Given that it has been accepted that you worked  for  the  (Astra)
         Zeneca pharmaceutical company in the material fact above  that  you
         had access to various types of medication, and given the  objective
         evidence  surrounding  widespread  corruption  of   pharmaceuticals
         throughout Iraq, it is deemed believable that you  would  encounter
         counterfeit medication as part of your job role ...".

23. This basic consistency in the Appellant's account should have been  the
    starting point of the judge's evaluation of the  Appellant's  evidence.
    The Appellant did not, indeed, claim to have seen  an  arrest  warrant.
    She claimed to have been very concerned about the  use  of  counterfeit
    medicines, to the extent that she constantly raised this issue, and  it
    is not beyond the bounds of probabilities, that she would have come  to
    the unwelcome attention of the illicit traders, as referred  to  by  Dr
    George in his expert report.

24. Second, there is the question of the Appellant's  atheism.   The  judge
    does not actually make a clear finding as to whether the  Appellant  is
    an atheist or not.  If anything, the  broad  reading  of  paragraph  26
    appears to suggest that the judge proceeds on  the  basis  that  it  is
    accepted that the Appellant was an atheist.  If this is so, it  is  not
    necessary for the Appellant to fall under risk, bearing  in  mind  what
    the country guidance information from  the  British  government  itself
    accepts, that she had become the victim of a targeted  attack  for  not
    practising Islam.  The government's own reports  make  it  quite  clear
    that such people are at risk.  The judge  needed  to  proceed  on  this
    basis.

25. Third, there is the issue of the application of Section 8.   The  delay
    in this matter of the Appellant claiming asylum in the UK  is  only  of
    one month.  It is hardly contumelious delay.  Yet, the  judge  proceeds
    on the basis that, "I am satisfied this delay in claiming asylum is not
    consistent with  the  behaviour  of  a  general  refugee  ...",  before
    concluding that, "I am satisfied that this has damaged the  credibility
    of her account" (paragraph 28).  This does not by any means follow.

26. Finally, there is the issue of Dr Alan George's expert report which  is
    dealt with at paragraph 31.  The judge takes the view here that Dr Alan
    George does not actually support  the  Appellant's  claim,  insofar  as
    there is a reference to there being an arrest warrant.   However,  this
    overlooks the fact that in essence, Dr George supports the  Appellant's
    case of her being at risk of persecution.

27. He makes it quite clear in his report of 16th May 2018 that,

         "Atheists run a great risk  of  being  targeted  by  fundamentalist
         Sunni and/or Shia Muslim factions, who consider it  their  duty  to
         punish unbelievers ..., in my opinion, if it became known that [the
         Appellant] was an atheist, she could be at real risk from religious
         extremists.  The risk would be  serious  in  central  and  southern
         Iraq."

28. The government's  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  on  Iraq  of
    September 2017 was not considered by the judge in this regard.  All  in
    all, therefore, there is sufficient error of materiality in the overall
    analysis of the Appellant's claim, which is fundamentally  credible  in
    its origin, to indicate that the  decision  should  be  set  aside  and
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge Graham
    pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2b of the Practice Directions.

30. An anonymity direction is made.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

31. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019
