
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05721/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2019                  |On 27 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     kh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr V Madanhi, solicitor, CB Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bunting, promulgated on  12  August  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith on 11 October 2019.




Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction was made previously and is reiterated  below  as
    this is a protection matter.

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 12 January
    2019 with his wife and two children, aged 3 and 4. His asylum claim can
    be summarised as follows. He is an Iraqi national of Kurdish  ethnicity
    who was born in Sulaymaniyah. In 2016, he began  work  for  the  Komala
    Political Party as a security guard. In 2018, the appellant was  asked,
    along with others, to assassinate a major in the PUK, which he  refused
    to do. The appellant was held captive for two days and agreed to  carry
    out the assassination. He was released owing to the intervention of his
    relative R, who was subsequently detained.  Instead the appellant  fled
    Iraq. He fears that he will be at risk from  the  Komala  party  if  he
    returns to Iraq as well as from R's relatives.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the appellant's protection  claim  in  a
    letter dated 6 June 2019. The  appellant's  nationality  and  ethnicity
    were accepted however,  the  remainder  of  his  claims  were  rejected
    because of his lack of knowledge of the Komala  party,  inconsistencies
    in his account as to whether he was a member  of  the  said  party  and
    several other aspects of his account. The respondent considered it  not
    unreasonable for the appellant to return to  Sulaymaniyah  via  Baghdad
    airport  or  to  make  his  own  arrangements  to  travel  directly  to
    Sulaymaniyah from the United Kingdom. It  was  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant's passport was with an agent, however it was considered  that
    the appellant could obtain another one and retrieve his CSID card  from
    his father, in whose possession it was.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  rejected  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's claim to have been asked to carry out an assassination  and
    his  reasons  for  leaving  Iraq.  The  judge  rejected  many  of   the
    respondent's other reasons for refusal and accepted that the  appellant
    worked for Komala and that he was a reluctant or  opportunistic  member
    of the party.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider the content of the appellant's witness statement when  finding
    against him regarding the assassination plot and as such there had been
    an absence  of  anxious  scrutiny.  It  was  further  argued  that  his
    explanation ought to have been accepted by the judge and that the judge
    failed to consider the risk on return for the appellant from the Komala
    party.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent filed no Rule 24 response.

The hearing

 9. Mr Madanhi relied on the grounds as pleaded, stating that he shared the
    sentiments of the judge granting permission. He had no wish  to  expand
    on the grounds.

10. Ms Everett expressed sympathy with the grant of permission, she  stated
    that she could understand the point that the judge was speculating  and
    that he was not entitled to do so. She added that the judge did not set
    out  the  appellant's  case  in   sufficient   detail   including   any
    explanations.

11. In response, Mr Madanhi argued  that  the  judge  should  have  clearly
    highlighted to what extent the witness statements were  considered  and
    rejected.

12. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made a material error of law and that the decision was set aside.

Decision on error of law

13. The appellant relied upon two statements in his appeal,  the  first  of
    which was contained in the respondent's bundle and preceded the refusal
    of his claim and the second of which, dated 2 July  2019,  was  in  the
    appellant's bundle in which he responded to the reasons for refusal.

14. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the core of the appellant's account of
    being selected to carry out an assassination. At [58], the judge  finds
    that the appellant was "unable" to explain why Komala would have chosen
    him and at [59]  and  [63]  the  judge  expressed  agreement  with  the
    Secretary of State's view that the explanation previously  provided  by
    the appellant  was  unsatisfactory.  This  is  the  only  part  of  the
    appellant's claim which was roundly rejected, with  the  judge  finding
    that part of his account to be implausible. The judge, in reaching that
    conclusion, made no reference to  either  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statements which addressed this issue in  some  detail.  In  the  first
    statement, the appellant explained how he was recommended  by  a  named
    relative who was a high ranking official in Komala  to  carry  out  the
    assassination with two other Komala members. In addition, the appellant
    replied to the respondent's criticisms in paragraph 12  of  his  appeal
    statement.  It is also relevant that  the  appellant  spoke  of  having
    received weapons training in connection with his role as a guard, which
    is not taken into consideration at [65] when the judge states that  the
    appellant had not had any relevant specialist skills or training. While
    the judge is entitled to prefer the view of the respondent, it is first
    necessary for  there  to  be  some  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.

15. The judge further erred in finding at [64] that the appellant  was  not
    someone  who  was  ideologically  committed  to  the  cause   or   [66]
    politically interested. These findings take  no  consideration  of  the
    appellant's recent witness statement where he explains  that  while  he
    was not initially interested in Komala when he began working  for  them
    at his relative's suggestion; he had become  interested  in  the  party
    thereafter and consequently became a member.

16. The judge found in the appellant's favour regarding most of  the  other
    matters  in  issue,  as  seen  by  paragraphs  [50-56],[60]  and  [69].
    Accordingly, it cannot be said that the  judge  would  have  inevitably
    arrived at the same conclusion had  he  taken  into  consideration  the
    appellant's written statements which provided an explanation as to  why
    he was chosen to be part of an assassination mission.   Therefore,  the
    error identified shows an absence of anxious scrutiny and amounts to  a
    material error of law.

17. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of the core issue in  his  asylum
    appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive him
    of such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Bunting.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  26 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

