
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05613/2017
                                                               PA/05616/2017
                                                               PA/05618/2017
                                                               pa/05621/2017


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 15th February 2018                         |On 2nd March 2018            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between
                                     GG
                                     GJ
                                     GJ
                                     SZ
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy Counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent :   Mr Walker  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Sri Lanka. These  proceedings  impact
    upon the status and rights of the appellant's  children.  In  order  to
    protect those children and having considered all the  circumstances,  I
    consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jerromes.  By decision promulgated on 22  November  2017
    Judge Jerromes dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of
    the respondent to refuse him asylum, humanitarian protection or  relief
    otherwise on human rights grounds either under  Articles  2  and  3  or
    under Article 8.

 3. By decision dated 10 January  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  Thus  the  matter
    appeared before me to determine in the first instance  whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law in the decision.

 4. There are 3 files connected to the present file. The  files  relate  to
    the appellant's wife  and  2  children.  They  are  to  be  treated  as
    dependants upon the appellant's case. They do not have appeals in their
    own rights.

    Factual background

 5. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.  He  lived  and  worked  in
    Colombo. The appellant claims that he was living  in  the  house  of  a
    teacher Mrs [K] and the teacher's partner, Mr [V K], in Colombo.

 6. On the evening of 10 March 2009 at around 5:30  PM  the  appellant  was
    going home when he saw a white van parked in  front  of  the  teacher's
    house blocking the driveway. The appellant noticed that  there  were  2
    police hats on the dashboard of the van. The  appellant  then  saw  the
    teacher being bundled into the van  by  2  men.  Whilst  the  appellant
    sought to intervene to stop the teacher being taken, he was  threatened
    with a gun. As a result the appellant rode off on his bike. He then saw
    the van being driven away.

 7. In  an  affidavit  the  appellant  asserts  that  the  government,  the
    Secretary of the Ministry of Defence, the defence authorities including
    army commanders, Sri Lanka police including the Inspector  General  and
    the local police station at Dehiwala are responsible for the  abduction
    of Mrs [K]. The appellant never sought to explain how he knew that  all
    the parties referred to were complicit in the abduction.

 8. The appellant then claimed that he had reported the  abduction  to  the
    police,  the  Human   Rights   Commission   and   the   Lesson   Learnt
    Reconciliation  Committee.  Shortly  after  reporting  the  matter  the
    appellant claims that he began to fear for his own safety. In interview
    at question 50 he says he began to fear for his safety in July 2009 but
    then at question 99 says it was at the end of March 2009.

 9. The appellant makes allegations that he was  the  victim  of  a  staged
    motor accident on 4 April 2009, although as set out  in  paragraph  6.4
    (ii) the evidence to support that it was a staged accident was  limited
    to the appellant's assertion and  was  therefore  challenged.  He  also
    claimed that his room was set on fire at the end of February 2010, that
    also was challenged.

10. In February 2010 the appellant claims that he went into hiding. He  did
    however  manage  to  continue  going  to  work  without  problems.  The
    appellant's evidence was that he rarely went out other than to work but
    that he was able to continue working through out.

11. On the 12th April 2010 the appellant was granted a visa  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Dependant. The visa was valid from 27  April
    2010 to 29 August  2011.  The  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    travelling on his own passport. He was granted  further  leave  in  the
    same capacity until 10 April 2014. Further applications  for  leave  to
    remain based on family and private life dated 6 June 2013 were refused,
    as were applications dated 5 June 2014 to remain as a dependent partner
    of a PBS migrant.

12. On 2nd December  2016  the  appellant  made  a  claim  to  asylum.  The
    appellant's application was refused  on  2  June  2017.  The  appellant
    appealed and the appeal was heard by Judge Jerromes on the 8th November
    2017.

13. As part of the evidence before Judge Jerromes the appellant produced an
    arrest warrant and evidence from a lawyer in  Sri  Lanka  that  he  had
    obtained  the  warrant  after  contacting  the  Criminal  investigation
    Department and receiving information, then  going  to  the  Magistrates
    Court at Colombo and checking case No B2487/11. A copy of  the  warrant
    was produced. A certified copy of the document had been obtained.

    Grounds of Appeal

14. Within the grounds of appeal it is submitted that there were  a  number
    of matters that were not put to the appellant. It is suggested that the
    judge  has  taken   issues   with   regard   to   inconsistencies   and
    contradictions in the appellant's evidence but the  appellant  was  not
    given  the  opportunity  of  dealing  with  those  inconsistencies   or
    contradictions.  It  is  alleged  that  neither  the  judge   nor   the
    respondent's representative put the issues to the appellant  nor  asked
    the appellant to explain or expand on the  evidence.  It  is  submitted
    that as a matter of fairness the presenting officer or the judge should
    have put the matters to the appellant.

15. In that respect reliance is placed upon the case of R v SSHD  ex  parte
    Mashwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 specifically paragraph  4  thereof  which
    provides:-

         "4       Undoubtedly a failure to put to a party  to  litigation  a
         point which is decided against him can be grossly unfair  and  lead
         to injustice. He must have a proper opportunity to  deal  with  the
         point. Adjudicators must bear  this  in  mind.  Where  a  point  is
         expressly conceded by one party it will usually be unfair to decide
         the case against the other party on the basis that  the  concession
         was wrongly made, unless the tribunal indicates that it  is  minded
         to take that course. Cases can occur when fairness will require the
         reopening of an appeal because of  some  point  of  significance  -
         perhaps arising out of a post hearing decision of the higher courts
         - requires it. However such cases will be rare."

16. In the first instance the problem with regard  to  paragraph  cited  is
    that it is dealing in the main with matters that have been conceded  by
    one party. It is not asserted that the respondent in any way  made  any
    concession in respect of the issue raised. The judge has  in  paragraph
    48 recorded the matters that were accepted by  the  respondent.  It  is
    clear that the other aspects of the  appellant's  case  have  not  been
    conceded or accepted.

17. The first issue taken is with regard to when the appellant reported the
    abduction of Mrs [K] to the police. The  judge  has  specifically  made
    reference to the fact that the appellant in his statement claimed  that
    he had reported the  abduction  within  an  hour  and  a  half  of  the
    incident, where as in interview the appellant  had  said  that  he  had
    reported the matter at the end of March [see answer  to  question  99].
    The appellant's representative was submitting that one had to read  the
    answer in the context of what was said before in answers 97 and 98. The
    questions and answers :

         97       Q: How soon after you first reported the incident did  you
         start receiving the threats?

             A: Around 3 weeks, at the end of March 2009

         98       Q: When did you first going to hiding?

             A: 02/02/2010

         99       Q: When did you first report the incident?

             A: I first reported the incident to the police at the  end  of
             March 2009.

18. The appellant's representative was seeking to suggest that one needs to
    consider the whole of the answers made. However it is clear that  there
    is a potential degree of inconsistency between what  was  said  in  the
    appellant's statement and what was said in interview. It  is  clear  in
    the refusal letter that the appellant's account of his reports  of  the
    matter to the police were limited  and  vague  and  not  accepted  (see
    paragraph 38  of  the  refusal  letter).  Clearly  at  that  stage  the
    respondent would not have had the statement.

19. Whilst the appellant's representative has relied upon  paragraph  4  of
    SSHD V Maheshwaran, paragraph1-3 and 5 are also relevant:

         "1 This is the Judgment of the court. This  is  an  appeal  from  a
         Judgment of Turner J. who quashed determinations of an  adjudicator
         and of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal. The case is concerned  with
         fairness in proceedings before an  adjudicator  in  an  immigration
         appeal. We understand that there has been an increasing reliance by
         those acting for claimants in immigration  appeals  on  some  words
         uttered by that judge in the course of granting an application  for
         permission to apply for judicial review in R v  Immigration  Appeal
         Tribunal ex parte Gunn (unreported 22.1.1998) :


             "It is an elementary aspect of fairness that  if  a  Court  or
             Tribunal is to reject  on  the  basis  of  lack  of  truth  an
             allegation, then there should be a specific challenge  in  the
             first place and secondly, on a reasons basis, adequate reasons
             should be given in the face of that forensic challenge why  it
             has or has not succeeded."


         2  Relying in part on those words,  it  was  and  is  submitted  on
         behalf of the claimant  in  the  present  case  that  if  the  Home
         Secretary does not  challenge  an  assertion  of  fact  made  by  a
         claimant before an adjudicator and the adjudicator does  not  raise
         with the claimant doubts about the veracity of his  assertion,  the
         adjudicator is bound to accept that assertion as proved if  not  to
         do so may be material to his determination. In  our  Judgment  that
         submission is far too broadly  framed.  Miss  Julie  Anderson,  who
         appears on behalf of the Home Secretary asks this court  to  reject
         it as one to be rigidly applied to all situations. She is right  to
         do so.


         3  Those who make a claim  for  asylum  must  show  that  they  are
         refugees. The burden of proof is on them. Whether or not a claimant
         is to be believed is frequently very important. He will assert very
         many facts in relation to events far away  most  of  which  no  one
         before the adjudicator is in a position to corroborate  or  refute.
         Material is often adduced at the last minute without warning.  From
         time to time the claimant or the Home Secretary are  neither  there
         nor represented and yet the adjudicator carries on with  his  task.
         He frequently has several cases listed in front of him on the  same
         day. For one reason or another not every hearing will be effective.
         Adjudicators can not be expected to  be  alive  to  every  possible
         nuance of a case before the oral hearing, if there is one,  starts.
         Adjudicators in general will reserve their determinations for later
         delivery. They will ponder what has been said and what has not been
         said, both before the hearing and at the hearing.  They  will  look
         carefully at the documents which have been  produced.  Points  will
         sometimes assume a greater importance than they  appeared  to  have
         before the hearing began or in  its  earlier  stages.  Adjudicators
         will in general rightly be cautious about intervening  lest  it  be
         said that they have leaped into the  forensic  arena  and  lest  an
         appearance of bias is given.


         ... [for paragraph 4 see above]


         5  Where much depends on the credibility of a party and  when  that
         party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before  the
         decision maker, that party manifestly has a forensic problem.  Some
         will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight  on  and  make
         evidential or forensic submissions on them. Others will  hope  that
         'least  said,  soonest   mended'   and   consider   that   forensic
         concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
         would be better to try and switch the tribunal's attention to  some
         other aspect of the case. Undoubtedly it is open  to  the  tribunal
         expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
         considers that the witness may not  be  alerted  to  the  point  or
         because  it  fears  that  it  may  have  perceived   something   as
         inconsistent  with  an  earlier  answer  which  in  truth  is   not
         inconsistent. Fairness may in some circumstances require this to be
         done but this will not be the usual  case.  Usually  the  tribunal,
         particularly if the party is represented, will  remain  silent  and
         see how the case unfolds."


20. As set out there may be reasons why a representative chose not to  deal
    with an inconsistency. It does not result in the judge having to ignore
    the evidence. As stated  in  paragraph  5,  fairness  may  require  the
    Tribunal put matters to an appellant in certain circumstances  such  as
    where there is a concession and the judge  intends  to  go  behind  the
    concession but this will not be the usual case.

21. Here there was a potential inconsistency on the face of the  record  of
    interview and statement. The judge was entitled to expect an  appellant
    who has experienced legal representation to deal with  the  matter.  In
    the absence of the appellant's representative dealing with  the  matter
    the judge was entitled to act on the evidence before him and  make  the
    findings that he did. The appellant's representative  sought  to  argue
    that there was no inconsistency. The judge was entitled to look at  the
    evidence and to treat the evidence in the manner that he did. The judge
    was not obliged to put the matter to the appellant.

22. The next point taken is that the judge  has  raised  the  issue  within
    paragraph 53.1 (ii) that the appellant's wife did not give evidence. It
    is asserted that at no point did the judge indicate that he  was  going
    to take this point against the appellant. Again  the  appellant's  wife
    was noted as  being  at  the  hearing  and  in  the  hearing  room.  In
    submissions before me the representative indicated that  he  taken  the
    view that the appellant's evidence was such that he  did  not  need  to
    call the wife. That was his decision. However consistent with the cases
    of Gedow, Abdulkadir and Mohammed  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  1342  and  TK
    (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 whilst the judge is correct to  say
    that there is no requirement for corroboration where  corroboration  is
    easily available the lack of such is a factor that can  be  taken  into
    account. As set out in paragraph 21 of TK:-

         "21      The circumstances of this case in my view demonstrate that
         independent supporting evidence which  is  available  from  persons
         subject to this jurisdiction be provided wherever possible and  the
         need for an Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious approach  to  the
         evidence of an appellant where independent supporting evidence,  as
         it was in this case, is readily available within this jurisdiction,
         but not provided. It  follows  that  where  a  Judge  in  assessing
         credibility relies  on  the  fact  that  there  is  no  independent
         supporting evidence where there should be supporting  evidence  and
         there is no credible account for its absence commits  no  error  of
         law when he relies on that fact for rejecting  the  account  of  an
         appellant."

23. Whilst in TK it emerged subsequently that the evidence would  not  have
    supported  the  appellant's  case,  the  principle   is   clear   where
    corroboration is readily available a judge is  entitled  to  take  into
    account the fact that the corroborative evidence readily available  has
    not been called.

24.  The next point taken is that the  judge  has  made  comment  that  the
    appellant's account is vague. The judge because of the reasons set  out
    has made findings that there was insufficient detail and that  she  did
    not find the account credible. It is suggested that  the  judge  should
    have invited counsel to ask further questions to clarify matters.

25. Throughout it appears that counsel is suggesting that the judge  should
    direct the legal representative as to what  questions  they  should  be
    asking and what evidence they should be producing. It is  not  for  the
    judge  to  conduct  the  trial  on  behalf  of  counsel  or  the  legal
    representative. The appellant had competent  legal  representatives  to
    present the case. The judge was entitled to expect them  to  deal  with
    any issues that they wished to deal with. If the evidence was vague and
    failed to deal  with  matters  in  sufficient  details  the  judge  was
    entitled to make conclusions on the evidence presented.

26. It suggested that the judge's approach to the document at  page  33  of
    the appellant's bundle is flawed and that again the  judge  looking  at
    the document has taken a point that was never taken by the Home  Office
    and a point not put to the appellant. The judge merely notes  that  the
    document is dated 20 September 2010 and that if that  date  is  correct
    the account by the appellant cannot be correct. Whilst the  appellant's
    representative was seeking to refer to the left-hand side  of  page  33
    seeking to rely upon the details set out at the top there, which appear
    to be "My NoUM/026/2011", the document is dated on the right-hand  side
    20 September 2010. That date as noted by the judge is inconsistent with
    the account given by the appellant that [VK] had reported the matter to
    the LLRC in 2011. Whilst the representative sought to  argue  that  the
    details on the left-hand side added some  support  to  his  appellant's
    account, no explanation for  that  numbering  or  detail  is  contained
    anywhere. It may be a reference to a date but that is not clear nor  in
    what context the reference is to be taken. The  document  otherwise  is
    clearly dated. The judge has merely drawn conclusions from  what  is  a
    clear date and concluded that  that  date  was  inconsistent  with  the
    evidence. The judge was entitled to examine the  documentation  and  to
    make conclusions that she did on the basis of the evidence presented.

27. In the circumstances the majority of the issues taken  in  the  grounds
    are disagreements with the findings of fact  made  by  the  judge.  The
    judge has carefully examined the evidence and has given  valid  reasons
    why on specific pieces of evidence she has made the findings  she  has.
    The judge has given ample reasons for her conclusions on the facts.

28. The final issue taken by the appellant's representative relies upon the
    case of P (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.  The  appellant  had
    produced an arrest warrant.  The  warrant  allegedly  emanated  from  a
    lawyer. The lawyer had allegedly retrieved the warrant after contacting
    the Criminal Investigation Department. He claims that it is a certified
    copy of the case bearing number B2487/11. The  lawyers  position  as  a
    member of the bar had been supported by documentary evidence.

29. It is suggested that the judge has within paragraph 55 of the  decision
    got the facts wrong because it was not  the  appellant  that  made  the
    report to the LLRC but [VK]. It is apparent from paragraph 55.1 that is
    exactly what the judge was considering. The judge took account  of  the
    fact that the letter from  the  LLRC  referred  to  above  was  clearly
    inconsistent with the appellant's account.

30. Further to that whilst the judge does not examine the bona fide  is  of
    the lawyer involved in the present proceedings the judge does  consider
    the document and the fact that the appellant does  not  appear  on  any
    stop list. If as  asserted  the  warrant  was  a  document  upon  which
    reliance could be placed, the judge was entitled to conclude  that  the
    appellant would be on a stop list.

31.  The  judge   otherwise   considers   the   inconsistencies   and   the
    implausibility of the circumstances in which that  arrest  warrant  was
    issued. The judge has given  valid  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    evidence otherwise  indicates  that  the  warrant  is  not  a  reliable
    document.

32. Further to that the judge considered otherwise whether given the change
    in circumstances within Sri Lanka the appellant would be of  continuing
    interest to the authorities in any event. The judge noted at  paragraph
    58 (i) that the appellant was not an individual who could be  perceived
    to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka, he is not  a  journalist,
    and was not on the facts as found by the judge an individual  that  had
    given evidence to the LLRC. The appellant's name has not and  does  not
    appear upon any stop list. The judge was entitled to conclude that  the
    appellant was of no interest to the authorities. The  judge  considered
    in all the circumstances that the appellant was not an  individual  who
    would be at risk in any event on return to Sri  Lanka.  That  certainly
    was an issue that was raised in the refusal letter as is  evident  from
    paragraph 48 onwards of such. The judge assessing the evidence that has
    been presented concluded that in any event the appellant on  return  to
    Sri Lanka would be of no interest to the authorities and therefore  not
    at risk. The appellant was not in  the  circumstances  in  any  of  the
    categories identified as at risk in the country guidance case law.

33. In that event the judge was entitled to determine  the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the evidence before her. The judge has made findings  of  fact
    based on the evidence was entitled to come to the conclusion  that  she
    did. There is no material error of law in the decision of the judge.

    Notice of Decision

34. The appeal of the appellant is dismissed.



Signed



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Dated 25th February 2018

