
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05843/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 July 2017                        |On 9 August 2017                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             latifa faghirazadeh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Thomas, Compass Immigration Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Latifa Faghirazadeh, was born on 1 January 1986 and is a
    female citizen of Afghanistan.  She arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
    October 2015 and claimed asylum.  By a decision dated 25 May 2016,  the
    respondent refused to grant her asylum and made a  decision  to  remove
    her to Afghanistan.  The appellant appealed against  that  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Chambers)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 13 October 2016, dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  These concern the alleged failure  of
    the  judge  to  make  sustainable  findings  of  fact  upon  a   proper
    consideration of material evidence  and  a  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasoning.  The issue in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is summarised
    in the grant of appeal by Judge Canavan as follows:

         "It is at least arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the
         plausibility of [the appellant's] account in  the  context  of  the
         background  evidence  relating  to  the  treatment  of   women   in
         Afghanistan.  It is also arguable  that,  in  rejecting  the  claim
         solely on the grounds of credibility,  the  judge  failed  to  give
         anxious scrutiny to other material evidence that  was  relevant  to
         potential risk on return.  The appellant's  evidence  in  interview
         suggested that  she  did  not  have  any  male  family  members  in
         Afghanistan her brother having travelled with  her  to  the  United
         Kingdom.  The judge's factual statements in paragraphs 2 and 38  of
         the decision were arguably erroneous and went to a  material  issue
         relating to risk on return for a lone woman without male relatives.
          In the alternative it was arguably not open to the judge  to  find
         it was possible for a return because  "it  also  seems  likely  her
         brother will in the fullness of time be returned" when he still has
         an outstanding asylum application in the UK [38]."

 3. The appellant's husband had been granted refugee status in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2001 and became a British citizen in  2007.   The  appellant
    had married her husband in 2004.  The appellant had  claimed  that  her
    husband's parents had not approved of the marriage.   The  relationship
    between the appellant  and  her  husband  had  not  been  a  good  one,
    according to the appellant and had  deteriorated  into  violence.   The
    appellant claimed that her husband was a violent murderer of  "hundreds
    of people."

 4. Judge Chambers did not believe any part of the appellant's account.  He
    gave thorough and detailed reasons for rejecting her credibility  as  a
    witness of truth.  Ground 2 of the grounds of appeal  submit  that  the
    judge  gave  inadequate   reasons   for   rejecting   the   appellant's
    credibility.  That is plainly not the case.  The grounds advance  vague
    assertions that the judge had failed to  understand  the  evidence  and
    that his failure of  understanding  made  the  findings  unsafe.   Miss
    Thomas, who appeared for the appellant before the Upper  Tribunal,  did
    not seek to pursue that challenge to the judge's findings but, instead,
    concentrated on the remaining ground which concerns the alleged failure
    of the judge to understand the appellant's  evidence  as  to  the  male
    members of her  family  who  remain  living  in  Afghanistan.   In  his
    assessment  of  the  humanitarian  protection  claim  [38],  the  judge
    recorded that, "The appellant said in her interview  that  her  sisters
    and brothers and mother continue to live in Char Qala Kabul.   She  has
    three aunts in the area.  She has other, more distant, relatives.   Her
    children are living with her in-laws."  That  statement  is  incorrect.
    The appellant had claimed throughout that her  two  brothers  had  been
    living in the United Kingdom.  Her mother and sister remain  living  in
    the family home in Afghanistan.  As Judge Canavan observed, the judge's
    mistake might arguably go to the question of risk on return.   However,
    for the reasons which I set out below, I do not find  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed.

 5. It is important  to  consider  the  factual  matrix  upon  which  Judge
    Chambers,  having  made  findings  in  respect   of   the   appellant's
    credibility, assessed risk on return.  The judge wholly disbelieved the
    appellant's account of having experienced difficulties with her husband
    and her husband's family. In the light of the judge's findings of fact,
    therefore, she is, therefore, no more than a female Afghan citizen with
    no criminal or security profile and  no  apparent  family  difficulties
    which might threaten her  welfare  returning  to  the  country  of  her
    nationality.  She has no  reason  to  believe  that  the  Afghan  state
    authorities or any member of her family would seek to harm  her  either
    at the point of her return to Afghanistan or whilst living in her  home
    area of the country.  I agree with Mr McVeety that  the  appellant  has
    adduced no evidence whatever to show that the Afghan authorities  would
    take any interest in her as a lone  woman  returning  to  the  country.
    Moreover, the appellant has family members living  in  Afghanistan  who
    would be in a position to collect her from the  airport  and  take  her
    away to live with them.  As Mr McVeety submitted, the  appellant  would
    be returning to the same personal and economic situation in Afghanistan
    which she had left when she came to the United Kingdom; she is no  more
    at risk now than she was when she left the Afghanistan.   Even  if  the
    appellant is right and she does face a risk, then, on the basis of  the
    factual matrix which Judge Chambers identified, then  it  would  follow
    that all lone women returning to join  family  members  in  Afghanistan
    would be at risk; that is not a conclusion which is consistent with the
    background material or current country guidance.  Indeed, the appellant
    failed before the First-tier Tribunal to establish that was  the  case.
    Miss Thomas did not pursue such an argument before the Upper Tribunal.

 6. It does appear that the judge believed that the appellant's brother was
    living in Afghanistan when that was not the case.   However,  I  cannot
    see that such a finding was material to his assessment  of  risk.   The
    judge was entitled to find that the appellant,  a  woman  returning  to
    Afghanistan unaccompanied by a male family  member,  would  not  be  at
    risk.  Different considerations might apply if she were returning as  a
    lone female to the country where she had  no  family  members  whatever
    residing but that is not the case on the facts as found by the judge.

 7. Judge Canavan also identified a difficulty  in  the  judge's  reasoning
    regarding the asylum claim of the appellant's brother.  I agree that it
    was inappropriate for the judge to pre-judge the appellant's  brother's
    asylum claim ("her brother will in the fullness of time  be  returned")
    but I do not find that this error  formed  the  basis  of  the  judge's
    assessment of risk.  The judge  was  aware  that  the  appellant  would
    return or would be likely to return to Afghanistan before her brother's
    claim and any possible subsequent appeal had been determined.  To  that
    extent, the possibility that the brother would eventually join  her  in
    Afghanistan was simply  an  additional  reason  for  finding  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk.  Given that the judge was  entitled  to
    find that the appellant would not be at risk  if  she  were  to  return
    alone for the reasons which I have identified above, then the  possible
    return of the brother at some unspecified later date added little.

 8. For the reasons I have given, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 9. This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 6 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 6 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

