
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA050152016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                     |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2017                            |On 3 July 2017             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                 KAWAN RAHIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Boyle of  Halliday Reeves law firm
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated on  3  February  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds .

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 22/06/1978  and  is  a  national  of  Iraq.  On
11/05/2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection  claim.



The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Fox ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 23 February 2017 Judge  Froom
gave permission to appeal stating

      1. Permission to appeal is granted because it  is  arguable  that  the
      decision is insufficiently  reasoned  with  regard  to  the  issue  of
      documentation.


      2. In finding the appellant could  exercise  internal  flight  and  be
      safely returned to Erbil, the IKR or Baghdad, it is arguable that  the
      Judge failed to apply the country guidance given in AA (Iraq).


      3. The grounds are all arguable.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Boyle moved the grounds of appeal. He  told  me
that the Judge found that the appellant is Kurdish and  a  member  of  their
Kaka'i faith. The Judge found that the  appellant  comes  from  a  contested
area. He reminded me that the Judge found that  the  appellant  is  not  the
potential victim of an honour crime. He told me that those findings  of  the
Judge are not challenged and that no argument  is  now  advanced  under  the
refugee convention, but that the appellant still relies on article 15(c)  of
the  qualification  directive  and  argued  that  internal   relocation   is
impossible.

(b) Mr Boyle took me to [19] of the decision, where  the  Judge  finds  that
the appellant can safely returned to Erbil, Baghdad or the  Kurdish  region.
He told me that in reaching that conclusion the Judge has not  followed  the
country guidance case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).

(c) Mr Boyle reminded me of paragraph 171 of AA (Iraq). He told me that  the
Judge's consideration of internal relocation is inadequate. He told me  that
the Judge did not take account of the fact that  the  appellant  is  a  Kurd
from a minority religion and did not consider what is likely to  befall  the
appellant in Baghdad, nor did the Judge  consider  how  the  appellant  will
make his way from Baghdad to IKR. He told me that the Judge's  finding  that
the appellant has family and friends "... In that  part  of  the  world"  is
unsafe. He told me that the evidence indicated that  the  appellant  has  no
one in Baghdad, and neither family nor friends in IKR. He told me  that  the
Judge's finding at 19 appears to  be  that  the  appellant  has  family  and
friends within Iraq, but not in either Baghdad or IKR.

(d) Mr Boyle urged me to set the decision aside, and to remit this  case  to
the First-tier to determine of new.

6. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz adopted the terms of  the  rule  24  note,
but told me that he could see force in the argument presented by  Mr  Boyle.
He did not try to defend the decision.

Analysis

7.  In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)  it  was  held  that
(i) Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be  to
the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The Iraqi authorities  will
allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to enter Iraq  only  if  P
is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or  a
laissez passer; (ii) No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if  not
in possession of one of these documents; (iii)  In the light  of  the  Court
of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1276,  an  international  protection  claim
made by P cannot succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm  arising
from an absence of  Iraqi  identification  documentation,  if  the  Tribunal
finds that P's return is not currently feasible, given what is  known  about
the state of P's documentation.

8. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  it  was  also  held
that (i) It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied that the return  of
an Iraqi national (P) to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged risk  of
harm arising from an absence  of  Iraqi  identification  documentation  will
require  judicial  determination;  (ii)  Having  a  Civil  Status   Identity
Document (CSID) is one of the ways in which it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
national in the United Kingdom to obtain a passport  or  a  laissez  passer.
Where the Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a passport  or
laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to  the  Tribunal  what,
if any, identification documentation led the Iraqi authorities  to  issue  P
with the passport or laissez passer (or to  signal  their  intention  to  do
so); (iii) Where P is returned to  Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the  point  of  return  by
reason of not having a current passport  or  other  current  form  of  Iraqi
identification document; (iv) Where P's return  to  Iraq  is  found  by  the
Tribunal to be feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether  P
has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival  in
Iraq. A CSID  is  generally  required  in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
financial assistance from the authorities; employment;  education;  housing;
and medical treatment.  If P shows there are  no  family  or  other  members
likely to be able to provide means of support, P is  in  general  likely  to
face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the  time
any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her  agents  to  assist
P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that  P  will  still
have no CSID; (v) Where return is feasible but P does not  have  a  CSID,  P
should as a general matter be able to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil  Status
Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an  Iraqi  passport  (whether
current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a  passport,  P's
ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page  and  volume
number of the book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
ability to persuade the  officials  that  P  is  the  person  named  on  the
relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has family members  or  other
individuals who are prepared to vouch for P; (v) P's  ability  to  obtain  a
CSID is likely to be severely hampered if P is unable to  go  to  the  Civil
Status Affairs Office of P's Governorate because it  is  in  an  area  where
Article 15(c) serious harm is  occurring.  As  a  result  of  the  violence,
alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin   have   been
established in Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does not demonstrate  that
the "Central Archive", which exists in  Baghdad,  is  in  practice  able  to
provide CSIDs to those in need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a  National
Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for  formal  recognition  of
identity. The precise operation of this court is, however, unclear.


9. In BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) it was held that
(i) The level of general violence in Baghdad city remains significant,  but
the current evidence does not justify departing from the conclusion of  the
Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC).  (ii)  The
evidence shows that those who worked for non-security  related  Western  or
international companies, or any other categories of  people  who  would  be
perceived as having collaborated with foreign coalition forces,  are  still
likely to be at risk in areas which are under ISIL  control  or  have  high
levels of insurgent activity. At the current time the  risk  is  likely  to
emanate from Sunni insurgent groups  who  continue  to  target  Western  or
international companies as well as those who are perceived  to  collaborate
with the Government of Iraq. (iii) The current evidence indicates that  the
risk in Baghdad to those who worked for  non-security  related  Western  or
international companies is low although there  is  evidence  to  show  that
insurgent groups such as ISIL  are  active  and  capable  of  carrying  out
attacks in the city. In so far as there may be a low  level  of  risk  from
such groups in Baghdad it is not sufficient to show a real risk solely as a
perceived  collaborator.  (iv)  Kidnapping  has  been,   and   remains,   a
significant and persistent problem contributing to the breakdown of law and
order in Iraq. Incidents of kidnapping  are  likely  to  be  underreported.
Kidnappings might be linked to  a  political  or  sectarian  motive;  other
kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity for a purely financial  motive.
Whether a returnee from the West is likely to be perceived as  a  potential
target for kidnapping in Baghdad may depend on how long he or she has  been
away from Iraq. Each case will be fact sensitive,  but  in  principle,  the
longer a person has  spent  abroad  the  greater  the  risk.  However,  the
evidence does not show a real risk to a returnee in Baghdad on this  ground
alone. (v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal of  US-led
coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels  seen  in  2006-2007.  A
Shia dominated government is supported by Shia  militias  in  Baghdad.  The
evidence indicates that Sunni  men  are  more  likely  to  be  targeted  as
suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni
identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to a  real  risk  of  serious
harm. (vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves create  a
real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a real risk
for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  Article  15(c)   of   the
Qualification Directive  or  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  if  assessed  on  a
cumulative basis. The assessment will depend on the  facts  of  each  case.
(vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case of
Sunni complainants, are  likely  to  be  unwilling  to  provide  sufficient
protection.

10.  What is not in dispute in this case is that the appellant  is  a  Kurd.
The Judge finds at [36] of the decision that the appellant  adheres  to  the
Kaka'i faith. At [18] the Judge finds that the appellant cannot be  returned
to a contested area. At [19] and [37] the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant
can safely return to Erbil, IKR or Baghdad.

11. The decision contains a number  of  conclusions.  It  does  not  contain
adequate findings of fact to support those  conclusions.  Although  at  [16]
the Judge refers to both AA and BA, and is clearly mindful of  the  need  to
consider whether or not relocation is unduly harsh, the Judge does not  then
carry out adequate consideration of what faces the appellant in  Baghdad  or
how he will travel from Baghdad to IKR.

12. BA tells me that the authorities are likely to be disinterested  in  the
plight of a Kurdish Kaka'i in Baghdad.  The  background  materials  tell  me
that the appellant will be allowed to visit IKR for  10  days.  The  Judge's
decision contains no realistic consideration of what is likely to happen  to
the appellant at the end of that 10-day period. The  Judge  has  found  that
the appellant is returning as a single man with (at best)  limited  support.
Those findings have not been factored into consideration of  whether  it  is
safe and reasonable for the appellant to return to an  area  of  Iraq  other
than his home area.

13.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

14.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law because the Judge, having found that the appellant will not be  safe  in
his home area,  does  not  go  on  to  properly  consider  whether  internal
relocation is safe and reasonable for this appellant.  The conclusions  that
the Judge reaches are not supported by adequate reasoning - so  that  it  is
impossible for the objective  reader  to  see  how  the  Judge  reached  his
conclusions. A  fuller  fact-finding  exercise  might  have  resulted  in  a
different outcome to this  appeal.  I  must,  therefore,  set  the  decision
promulgated on 03 February 2017 aside.

15. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the decision  promulgated  on  03  February
2017. I therefore find that I cannot substitute my own decision  because  of
the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach  a  just  decision
in this appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

18. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  North  Shields
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Fox.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

20. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 03  February  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 30 June2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

