
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/05799/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 6th September 2017                |            On: 11th September 2017  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     AF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms Sachdev, Solicitor, Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq  born  in  1996.  He  appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Herwald) to dismiss his protection appeal.


    Background and Findings of the First-tier Tribunal


 2. The Appellant is Kurdish. He claims to be a  shepherd  from  a  village
    close to Mount Sinjar in Nineveh province.   He  claims  that  he  fled
    Daesh and that he would not be able to safely relocate within Iraq.


 3. The Respondent rejected the entire claim for want  of  credibility  and
    the Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. At paragraph 14(a) of the Tribunal's  decision  it  made  an  important
    finding in the Appellant's favour.  The  Respondent  had  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim to be from Nineveh, but the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    satisfied that he was. Nineveh is a "contested area" where there is  an
    Article 15(c) risk to the civilian population: AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq
    CG [2015] UKUT 00544  (IAC).   The  Respondent  now  accepts  that  the
    Appellant cannot be returned there.

 5.  The question  remained  whether  the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to move to another part of Iraq in order to avoid  Daesh,  and
    the fighting that comes with them.  It was the Respondent's  case  that
    Iraq is a  big  country  and  that  the  Appellant  could  safely  live
    elsewhere;  the  refusal  letter  specifically  posits  Irbil,  in  the
    Independent Kurdish Region (IKR), as somewhere that he could reasonably
    be expected to live. The Appellant's response was that this region  was
    not safe either, and that he had a specific reason why he did not  want
    to go there. His father had left his mother and run away with  a  woman
    from the IKR.   The woman's family had strongly objected to  this.  The
    Appellant would be at risk of retributive "honour" killing if  he  came
    into contact with this family.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal accepted the Appellant's claim that his  father
    had married a Kurdish woman from the IKR.  It did  not  however  accept
    that the Appellant had  any  fears  in  relation  to  her  family.  The
    Appellant had never met these people and there  was  no  evidence  that
    they would be able to locate the Appellant or know who he was.  Further
    it was noted that the Appellant had made no mention of this issue  when
    questioned at his 'screening interview' about the basis  of  his  claim
    for international protection. As to whether relocation to Irbil/the IKR
    was otherwise practicable or reasonable, the Tribunal accepted that the
    Appellant did not have any identity documentation (CSID)  and  that  he
    would not be able to obtain one  from  his  contested  home  area.   It
    accepted  the  Respondent's  case  that  this  would  not  present  the
    Appellant with any difficulty. As a Kurd he would be  admitted  to  the
    IKR for an initial period of ten days, leave which  could  be  renewed,
    and he could stay longer if able to find employment. He had worked as a
    shepherd previously and the Tribunal was not satisfied that he would be
    unable  to  work.   He  could  turn  to  his  stepmother's  family  for
    assistance; the Tribunal was not persuaded that they would seek to harm
    him. It was not therefore unduly harsh to expect him to go to the  IKR.
    The appeal was therefore dismissed on the  grounds  that  there  was  a
    reasonable internal flight alternative in Iraq.




    The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


 8. First, the Appellant challenged the First-tier  Tribunal's  credibility
    findings on the  grounds  that  they  are  inadequately  reasoned.  His
    claimed fear of honour violence is apparently rejected on  the  grounds
    that his evidence was vague and he did not mention the  matter  in  his
    screening interview. The Appellant  submits  that  neither  is  a  good
    reason and places reliance on YL (China) [2004] UKIAT 00145.

 9. Second, the Appellant submits that in its assessment  of  the  internal
    flight alternative the Tribunal did not consider all  of  the  relevant
    factors, made contradictory findings and failed to make findings on key
    matters.

10. Permission was granted on the 16th January 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Canavan who said this:

         "It is at least arguable that the First-tier Tribunal may not  have
         given sufficiently anxious scrutiny  to  the  question  of  whether
         internal relocation was a reasonable option and/or would be  unduly
         harsh. In particular, the Appellant's evidence appears to have been
         that his father left the country with  him  and  the  rest  of  the
         family. There was arguably  no  evidential  basis  to  support  the
         finding that he was likely to have friends and family in  the  IKR,
         which was accepted not to be home area. Nor was there any  analysis
         of the practicalities of him arranging travel from to the IKR  from
         Baghdad in circumstances where it was accepted that he is currently
         unable to obtain a CID and does not have a passport"



11. The matter came before me on the  14th  June  2017  for  a  preliminary
    hearing into whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.


12. In respect of ground (1) my findings are as follows. I  note  that  the
    screening interview took place on the  20th  November  2016.  Asked  to
    BRIEFLY explain why he could not return to his home  country  (emphasis
    in original) the Appellant said:


         "I cannot return because of the war and because of ISIS. ISIS  were
         in the area in which I lived. I do not wish to relocate to  another
         part of IRQ as there is fighting everywhere and it is not safe.  If
         I return I fear ISIS will kill me"


     No mention is made of his father eloping and starting an honour feud.


13. The substantive asylum interview took place on the 17th  May  2016.  He
    reiterated his fear of ISIS and the basis of his claim. There  is  then
    the following exchange [from Q20]:


    "When did your problems start?           When ISIS came on 3/8/14.


    Did you have any before3/8/14?           Yes my real mother died when a


                                       woman from Kurdistan ran away
                                       with my father.


    There follows over one hundred questions and answers  about  where  the
    Appellant was from, and why he fears ISIS. At Q126 it  is  put  to  him
    that he could go to Kurdistan in order to avoid any  difficulties  with
    ISIS.   It is here that the Appellant explains that he fears  going  to
    Kurdistan because that is where the woman's family are from, that  they
    are angry and that his father (with whom he left Iraq) could  not  take
    him there for fear of retribution. His father was also afraid  that  he
    would be arrested because he had eloped.  Asked to explain why  he  had
    not  volunteered  this  information  at  the  screening  interview  the
    Appellant said that he had not been asked.  He also explained that  the
    screening interview had been conducted with  an  interpreter  over  the
    phone.


14. It seems to me that this is a paradigm YL case. In  that  decision  the
    Upper Tribunal considered the factors to be considered when  evaluating
    discrepancies arising in from screening interviews. The  Tribunal  says
    this at paragraph 19:



         "When a person seeks asylum in the United  Kingdom  he  is  usually
         made the subject of a 'screening interview' (called, perhaps rather
         confusingly a "Statement of Evidence Form - SEF  Screening-).   The
         purpose  of  that  is  to  establish  the  general  nature  of  the
         claimant's case so that the Home Office  official  can  decide  how
         best to process it.  It is concerned with the  country  of  origin,
         means of travel, circumstances of arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,
         preferred language and other matters that might help the  Secretary
         of State understand the case.  Asylum seekers are still expected to
         tell the truth and answers given in  screening  interviews  can  be
         compared fairly with answers given later.  However, it  has  to  be
         remembered that a screening interview is not done to  establish  in
         detail the reasons a person gives to support her claim for  asylum.
         It would not normally be appropriate for the Secretary of State  to
         ask supplementary questions or to entertain elaborate  answers  and
         an inaccurate summary by an  interviewing  officer  at  that  stage
         would be excusable.  Further the screening interview  may  well  be
         conducted when the asylum seeker is tired  after  a  long  journey.
         These things have to be considered when any inconsistencies between
         the screening interview and the later case are evaluated".


15. In this case the Appellant was asked to explain why he cannot return to
    Iraq. He quite understandably mentioned ISIS and the war.   Those  were
    the reasons that he feels unable to return to Iraq.   He was not  asked
    whether there were any other issues, or whether he was able  to  go  to
    Kurdistan.  When he was asked those questions, he answered them. It has
    been accepted that this Appellant is an uneducated shepherd;  he  could
    hardly  be  expected  to  have  an  awareness  of  Article  8  of   the
    Qualification Directive, ie he could not have been aware that he needed
    to explain why he was afraid  of  returning  everywhere  in  Iraq.    I
    accept Ms Sachdev's submission that it was  an  error  to  have  placed
    weight on the omission in the SEF.


16. I am not however satisfied that this  was  a  material  error.  By  the
    Appellant's  own  admission  he  has  never  met  the  family  of   his
    stepmother. He has no idea where they are from  or  who  they  are.  It
    would follow that they are in equal ignorance about  him.  I  note  the
    terms in which he has expressed his  fear  in  the  substantive  asylum
    interview. He stated that he and  his  father  were  unable  to  go  to
    Kurdistan at the time that  they  fled  ISIS  because  his  father  was
    afraid.   There is no evidence at all that the Appellant himself  would
    be identified, or be at risk, from these unknown people.   Even if this
    part of the account is true, it can add nothing to the claim.

17. The issue remained as to whether the Tribunal dealt appropriately  with
    the question of internal flight to the IKR.    For  the  reasons  which
    follow I was satisfied that this ground was made out.

18. In AA the Tribunal found that the IKR was "virtually violence  free"[at
    112]. The issue of relocation to Kurdistan is dealt with at 171:


           We have found at paragraphs 112 and 113 above that  there  is  no
         Article 15(c) risk to an  ordinary  civilian  in  the  IKR.  What,
         though, of internal relocation? So far as a Kurd is concerned, the
         evidence  of  Dr  Fatah  was  not  seriously  challenged  by   the
         respondent and we, in any event, accept it (see esp. paragraph  24
         above). The position of Iraqi Kurds not from the IKR is that  they
         can gain temporary entry to the IKR;  that  formal  permission  to
         remain can be obtained if employment  is  secured;  and  that  the
         authorities in the IKR do  not  pro-actively  remove  Kurds  whose
         permits have come to an end. Whether this state of affairs is such
         as to make it reasonable for an Iraqi Kurd to relocate to the  IKR
         is a question that may fall to  be  addressed  by  judicial  fact-
         finders, if it is  established  that,  on  the  particular  facts,
         permanent relocation to Baghdad would be  unduly  harsh.  In  such
         circumstances, the person concerned might be  reasonably  expected
         to relocate to the IKR. In this  scenario,  whether  such  further
         relocation would be reasonable  will  itself  be  fact  sensitive,
         being likely to  involve  (a)  the  practicality  of  travel  from
         Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b)  the  likelihood
         of securing employment; and (c)  the  availability  of  assistance
         from friends and family in the IKR.


19. Ms Sachdev submitted that those three factors  (a)-(c),  identified  as
    being particularly relevant to any fact-finding  exercise  on  internal
    flight,  have  not  been  dealt  with  adequately  in  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's determination. The Tribunal had already  accepted  that  the
    Appellant did not have a CSID. It conducted no analysis of  whether  or
    not that meant that the Appellant would be able to board a flight  from
    Baghdad to Irbil, or indeed gain entry to the IKR. The finding that  as
    a shepherd he was not unemployable did not amount to a proper  analysis
    of whether or not  he  would  in  fact  be  able  to  support  himself,
    particularly given the country background evidence indicating a  severe
    economic crisis in the region.  The  finding  that  the  Appellant  had
    relatives to whom he could turn - his stepmother's family - appeared to
    be at odds with the Tribunal's acceptance, at paragraph 14(b), that  he
    did not know these people, know where they were  from,  nor  even  know
    their name.


20. I accept  that  there  would  appear  to  be  a  contradiction  in  the
    Tribunal's finding on the stepmother's family: it is difficult  to  see
    how he could turn to them for support if he does not know who they are.
    If the Appellant did not have relatives,  did  not  have  a  CSID,  was
    readily identifiable as a non-local (he speaks Bahdini,  a  dialect  of
    Kurdish spoken in Nineveh, as opposed to the Sorani more widely  spoken
    in the IKR) and had no discernible skills other than being a  shepherd,
    it is arguable that upon closer analysis he could  have  made  out  his
    claim that he would face destitution if forced to relocate there.

21. In a written decision promulgated on the 22nd June 2017 I therefore set
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside to a limited extent.



    Internal Flight to the IKR

22. The hearing proceeded for remaking on the issue of internal  flight  on
    the basis of the agreed facts:

        . The Appellant is Kurdish
        . He speaks Bahdini
        . He is a Sunni Muslim
        . He is from Ninevah, near Mount Sinjar
        . He worked as a shephard (and has no other work experience)
        . He has had no formal schooling
        . He has no CSID
        . His stepmother was originally from the IKR but he does  not  know
          who her relatives are and has never had any contact with them
        . He has no relatives of his own in the region. His natal  family's
          last known whereabouts were Mount Sinjar; he does not know  where
          they are today.

23. Ms Sachdev placed reliance  on  a  new  bundle  of  country  background
    information. This was admitted into the evidence without  objection  by
    the  Respondent.   The  bundle  contained   two  items  of   particular
    significance.  The  first  is  a  report  dated  22nd  August  2017  by
    recognised country expert Dr Rebwar Fatah. Although  he  did  point  to
    certain deficiencies in the report (matters which I address below),  Mr
    Harrison took no issue with Dr Fatah's expertise  or  objectivity.  The
    second document was the Respondent's most  recent  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note (CPIN), published in June  2017  and  entitled  'Iraq:
    Return/Internal Relocation'.   The  parties  made  submissions  on  the
    effect of this new country information and I reserved my  decision.  My
    conclusions are as follows.


24. The agreed facts are that the Appellant does not have a  CSID  and  nor
    can he reasonably be expected to get a replacement,  since  that  would
    involve him returning to Ninevah, a region in  the  grip  of  an  armed
    conflict where he would face a personal risk to life and  limb  as  the
    result of indiscriminate  violence.   Nor  does  he  have  a  passport.
    Applying the findings in AA, it is accepted that he would  be  returned
    to Baghdad on a laissez-passer, or an emergency travel document.

25. In AA the Tribunal recommended that the practicality of travel  between
    Baghdad and Irbil be considered as part of the assessment  of  internal
    flight.   It made no findings on the matter itself, and I was shown  no
    direct evidence on the point. I suggested at the  hearing  that  common
    sense would tend to indicate that the Appellant would be able to  board
    a domestic flight to Irbil using his laissez-passer as  identification.
    If such a document can be used on international departures  I  find  it
    difficult to see why it would not be considered acceptable on a  short-
    haul domestic route.  I note UNHCR's evidence [cited  in  the  CPIN  at
    5.3.2] that "generally,  it  is  not  possible  to  travel  without  ID
    documents" but I am satisfied, for the purpose of  this  determination,
    that a laissez-passer would in these circumstances serve as a  document
    establishing identity.

26. The evidence on what might happen on arrival in Irbil has significantly
    changed since the Tribunal gave its guidance in AA.  At  that  time  Dr
    Fatah stated that Kurds from Iraq would be given an initial  period  of
    entry for 10 days, and that after that they would be able  to  register
    to extend their leave in the IKR. The decision does not  indicate  that
    either a CSID or sponsor would be required, or that there would by  any
    particular difficulties in Kurds deciding to stay in the  region.  That
    was the state of the evidence in  May  2015.   The  evidence  presented
    today departs from that in three important respects.

27. First, many of the sources cited, by both Dr Fatah and  the  Respondent
    in the CPIN, state that Kurds from  outside  of  the  IKR  may  now  be
    required to have a sponsor in the region before they are  permitted  to
    enter or remain there:


         "The Erbil governate only allows the entry of IDPs from the  Ninewa
         governate, such as [the Appellant] if they have the sponsorship  of
         a Kurd who is local to the Erbil governate. These instructions were
         put in place after the Mosul offensive began in October  2016,  and
         they apply to people from the Ninewa governate regardless of ethnic
         or religious background, though in practice  the  restrictions  may
         apply more stringently for Turkmen from Tel  Afar  and  Arabs  than
         other ethnic and religious groups. As a Kurdish IDP from the Ninewa
         governate,  [the  Appellant]  may  still  be   subject   to   these
         restrictions. It is not clear how many people are  able  to  obtain
         sponsorship to enter Erbil governate".


    [Dr Fatah, paragraph 67].  See further the evidence cited at section  7
    of the CPIN, where sources are varied  as  local  journalists,  Kurdish
    human rights organisations and the  IOM  concur  that  the  sponsorship
    requirement, withdrawn in 2012 due to concerns  about  corruption,  has
    been reintroduced.

28. Second, there has now emerged clear evidence that the absence of a CSID
    is as significant in the IKR as it  was  considered  in  AA  to  be  in
    respect of Baghdad.   Dr Fatah considers it to be a legal and practical
    requirement [at 68] and the Respondent  herself  says  this  [at  3.3.1
    CPIN]:


         "A Civil Status ID (CSID) and  the  Iraqi  Nationality  Certificate
         (INC) are key documents which establish a  person's  identity.  The
         CSID  enables  a  person  to  access  services  such  as  financial
         assistance, employment, education, housing  and  health.  A  person
         whose return is feasible but who does not have  a  CSID  or  cannot
         obtain one, and who does not have support of family or friends,  is
         likely upon return to face destitution amounting  to  a  breach  of
         Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)"


29. Third, as the foregoing indicates, there is evidence to  indicate  that
    the  socio-economic  conditions  in  the  region   have   significantly
    deteriorated, with the massive influx  of  IDPs  placing  an  increased
    pressure on the local economy.  Dr Fatah states [at 96-99] that it will
    be very difficult for the Appellant to find employment, partly  because
    he is uneducated with only sheep-herding experience, and partly because
    he has  no  connections  locally:  "kinship  and  social  networks  are
    important  for  obtaining  employment,  housing  and  accessing  social
    services in Iraq" [Fatah, para 99].  Even if the Appellant were able to
    secure accommodation without a CSID (for instance through  bribery)  it
    is difficult to see how he would be able to pay the rent week  to  week
    if he is unable to obtain formal permission to work.  As  an  unskilled
    labourer entering a market  where  there  are  already  high  rates  of
    unemployment, I accept that the  Appellant  is  likely  to  be  further
    hampered by his lack of connections to Irbil.

30. I cannot be satisfied, in light of this new evidence, that there  is  a
    reasonable or practicable internal flight alternative in the  IKR.  The
    Appellant has neither sponsor nor CSID with which to  secure  entry  or
    permission to remain. Even if those requirements were overlooked and he
    managed to  get  into  Irbil,   he  has  no  skills  to  speak  of,  no
    connections there and no CSID. Unemployment, and therefore homelessness
    and destitution,  appear to be reasonably likely.   I  agree  with  the
    Respondent's assessment that this would breach Article 3  and  that  in
    those  circumstances  internal  flight  would  not  be   a   reasonable
    alternative.






    Decisions and Orders

31. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside to the  limited  extent  identified
    above.

33. The decision is remade as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on protection grounds".










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          7th September 2017


