
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/05960/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 September 2017                   |       On 18 September 2017          |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                    k m h
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  He appealed to  a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 27 May
    2016 refusing to grant asylum.

2.   The basis of the  appellant's  claim  to  asylum  was  that  he  feared
    persecution due  to  his  political  opinion,  i.e.  that  the  Iranian
    authorities had issued an arrest warrant against him and were targeting
    him because they suspected his brother of being involved with the KDPI.

3.   The appellant claimed that his elder brother S had fled  Iran  in  2004
    and that S had been an activist on behalf of the KDPI.  The appellant's
    family were harassed by the authorities  subsequent  to  his  departure
    including their  father  being  take  away  for  question  on  numerous
    occasions and the appellant being detained on  four  occasions  between
    January and October 2015.  The appellant said that his  brother  S  who
    lived in the United Kingdom had obtained a copy of  an  arrest  warrant
    from Iran via email which he had printed and then  sent  the  appellant
    two copies two or three days before the hearing.  S had told  him  that
    the original arrest warrant was in Iran when the appellant believed his
    father found someone who  located  the  warrant  and  sent  it  to  his
    brother.  The appellant did not know the name of the person who located
    it.  The appellant could not explain why S had not produced  a  witness
    statement to explain how he obtained a copy of the warrant.  S did  not
    attend the hearing as he was busy working.

4.   S had an asylum appeal dismissed in September 2006.  The basis  of  his
    claim for asylum was that he had been accused of burglary and smuggling
    alcohol between Iran and Iraq.  The appellant had now become  aware  of
    this decision and that his brother had not claimed or asserted in  that
    hearing that he  had  been  involved  in  the  KDPI  as  the  appellant
    believed.  It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that his  brother
    had not assisted him in his appeal and had in fact lied  to  him  about
    his involvement.

5.   The judge took into account the appellant's age (he  being  17  at  the
    date of the hearing) and the Practice Direction  on  Child,  Vulnerable
    Adults and Sensitive Witnesses from  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No. 2 of 2010.  He also took into account  paragraph  351  of  the
    Immigration Rules which  dealt  with  unaccompanied  children  and  the
    respondent's guidance on processing asylum applications  from  children
    and considered section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 and the UNHCR Guidelines on Policies and Procedures in Dealing
    with Unaccompanied Children Seeking Asylum 1997.

6.   The judge considered that the appellant might have  genuinely  believed
    his brother was involved with the KDPI but that had turned  out  to  be
    untrue now.  He concluded that as the  appellant's  brother  had  never
    been involved with the KDPI and the circumstances  of  the  appellant's
    fear of returning to Iran on account of that was unfounded.   In  light
    of that the judge did not accept that the appellant had  been  arrested
    or detained on four occasions as claimed, tied in as those events  were
    to the claim that they happened because of  his  brother's  involvement
    with the KDPI.

7.   With regard to the arrest warrant, the judge found a number of  matters
    concerning it to be unreliable.  He recorded the date of  issue  as  16
    February 2016 asking the appellant to attend the court on 7 March 2016.
     The warrant was supposedly certified on 18 February 2016 but served on
    11 January or February 2016.  The date of service predated the issue or
    certification date.  The appellant's occupation was stated as a  trader
    but the appellant had said he did not work and was always at home  with
    his mother.  His surname was misspelt and his home address was  not  on
    the arrest warrant.  In addition the appellant was not able to say  how
    his brother obtained the  warrant  or  where  the  original  was.   The
    appellant could not remember when the warrant was sent to his  brother.
    In his asylum interview the appellant said that his father had informed
    him there was an arrest warrant against him and  in  oral  evidence  he
    said that his father told his brother  there  was  a  warrant  and  his
    brother obtained a copy by email.  The appellant did  not  provide  the
    email to show when and who sent the warrant and to whom.   His  brother
    had not produced a statement to explain how he  obtained  the  warrant.
    The judge went on to say that taking all these matters in the round  he
    did not believe there was a warrant of arrest  against  the  appellant.
    He found that the document provided was unreliable and  relied  on  the
    principles of Tanveer Ahmed as it was for the appellant  to  show  that
    the document was reliable.

8.   The judge then went  on  to  consider  relevant  country  guidance  and
    concluded that the appellant did not fit into the risk  categories  set
    out in SB [2009] UKAIT 00053 and dismissed his appeal.

9.   The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    had misinterpreted the arrest warrant and as a consequence this  had  a
    prejudicial effect upon the overall findings concerning the appellant's
    credibility and risk on return.  Permission was granted on all grounds,
    with the emphasis on the issue of the construction of the date on which
    the arrest warrant  was  served,  but  all  grounds  were  said  to  be
    arguable.

10.  In his submissions Mr Hodson relied on and developed  the  points  made
    in the grounds.  He argued that if the mistakes about the warrant  were
    errors then they were material as the judge  relied  quite  heavily  on
    that.  The judge seized upon what seemed to be a point dispositive of a
    document.  It was not a question of where this  was  dealt  within  the
    judge's decision but the question  of  the  influence  on  the  judge's
    preparedness to give the benefit of the  doubt  on  other  matters  and
    hence was of significance.  The appellant had been able to give  little
    explanation as to how the warrant was secured as it had  been  provided
    by a third party to his brother  who  had  not  attended  the  hearing.
    There were not inconsistencies but matters for the judge  to  give  the
    benefit of the doubt in respect of.  The point appeared to be a  narrow
    one, but it had the potential to be prejudicial.

11.  It was explained in the grounds why it was  said  that  the  judge  had
    erred about the date.  It had not been properly dealt with  on  Tanveer
    Ahmed grounds but the matter was meant to be looked at  in  the  round.
    The misspelling of the surname was not a proper point as there could be
    different ways of translating  Farsi  to  English.   The  question  was
    whether credibility was affected.  Errors about the arrest warrant were
    material as they were relied on primarily as a reason for rejecting  it
    and the matter needed to be considered again.

12.  In his submissions Mr Clarke argued that in fact there was  no  mistake
    by the judge in addressing the dates  in  the  warrant.   The  date  of
    service was the Saturday and if the judge  who  granted  permission  to
    appeal was correct about the eleventh month date then it was clear that
    the date of certification 18 February 2016 was a Thursday so  the  next
    Saturday after certification took it into the next month.  So therefore
    if it had been a Saturday then it must either have been  the  following
    month or before the date of certification.   The  judge  was  therefore
    right for the wrong reason.

13.  It was also open to the judge to conclude that  the  reference  to  the
    person being a trader was a reference to the appellant as  the  warrant
    set out what seemed to be attributes of the person summonsed.

14.  He argued that in any event there was no impact on the outcome  of  the
    appeal.  The judge had set out how the warrant appeared,  at  paragraph
    44 of the determination.  Evidence on this could be seen from paragraph
    17.  There was a  concession  noted  at  paragraph  33  concerning  the
    untruthfulness of the brother.  The case was  based  on  the  brother's
    involvement with the KDPI.  It was clear from the case  that  that  was
    the basis of the claim for example at A29.  It is clear  that  he  fled
    because of his brother and his involvement with the KDPI.  This was the
    whole premise of the appellant's case.  It was hard to see what  weight
    could be given to the warrant emanating from the brother.  Whether  the
    judge was right or wrong concerning the dates on the warrant  as  there
    was no credibility to the audit trail and there were  the  unchallenged
    adverse findings the determination was clearly sound and  the  findings
    were not undermined.

15.  Mr Hodson had no points to make by way of reply.

16.  I reserved my determination.

17.  The grounds argue that the mistake made by the judge in respect of  the
    arrest warrant was that he misread it in that  under  date  of  service
    where it says month: 11 (Jan/Feb) year 1394 (2016) the judge read  this
    as having been served on 11 January or February  2016  whereas  it  was
    supposedly certified on 18 February 2016.  The grounds make  the  point
    that the reference to month 11 is to the eleventh month in the  Iranian
    calendar which is Bahman which runs from 21 January 2016 to 19 February
    2016 and the reference to Jan/Feb is simply a truncated  representation
    of this fact.

18.  I see the force of this, but equally I see the force of the point  made
    by Mr Clarke given that 18  February  2016  was  a  Thursday  the  next
    Saturday after certification would take it to the next month.  So if it
    were on a Saturday it would either have been  the  following  month  or
    before the date of certification.

19.  These matters have  come  very  close  indeed  to  the  representatives
    giving evidence.  It is not necessary in my view to come to  a  decided
    view on the point, because I am entirely satisfied that the  judge  did
    not materially err in this case.  Taking it at its highest, even if  he
    was wrong about the proper interpretation of the dates on  the  warrant
    and also as to the occupation "trader" which the  judge  attributed  to
    the  appellant  but  which  Mr  Hodson  had  argued  should  have  been
    attributed to  his  father  who  is  named  above  the  description  of
    occupation, it is clear that the claim was based on risk on account  of
    the appellant's brother's affiliation to the KDPI, which claim  clearly
    fell apart in light of the determination in the brother's case and  the
    fact that that was not the basis upon which he said he feared  risk  on
    return.  Clearly in light  of  that,  detentions  on  account  of  that
    specific involvement clearly fell away.  In addition,  with  regard  to
    the arrest warrant, the judge went on at paragraph 44 to note that  the
    appellant was unable to say how his brother  obtained  the  warrant  or
    where the original was.  He could not remember  when  the  warrant  was
    sent to his brother.  He did not provide the email  to  show  when  the
    warrant was sent and who sent it and to whom.  There was no evidence by
    way of clarification from his brother.  It is  not  without  importance
    also that the judge went on to say at paragraph 45 and taking all these
    matters in the round he did not believe there was a warrant  of  arrest
    against the appellant.   Even  if  that  was  limited  to  the  matters
    considered under the heading "is there an arrest warrant issued against
    the appellant?" that would be sufficient.  Equally it could be read  as
    applying to taking the claim as a whole and bearing in  mind  the  fact
    that the claim had essentially fallen apart because of  the  fact  that
    the brother did not claim to be at risk on account  of  involvement  in
    the KDPI and had not been involved with the KDPI.  There  is  no  basis
    for the appellant being at risk in relation to collaboration  with  the
    Democrat Party of Iran as described in the arrest warrant if the  claim
    that he was at risk on account of his brother's involvement in the KDPI
    was not borne out.  That was the only basis upon  which  the  appellant
    claimed risk on return.  Accordingly I see no materiality to any  error
    by the judge with regard to the warrant either with regard to the dates
    or the occupation description, as a consequence.  I conclude it has not
    been shown that the judge materially erred in law in  any  respect  and
    his decision dismissing this appeal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


