
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/05400/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      Q
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals  against  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kempton, promulgated on 27  November  2018,  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal "on asylum grounds and human rights grounds".

 3. The SSHD's grounds are set out in the application dated and filed on 10
    December 2018.

 4. It is very difficult, or even impossible, to distinguish in  the  FtT's
    decision between the asylum or protection aspects of the case  and  the
    human rights aspects.

 5. The protection element of the claim was that the  appellant's  brothers
    wanted the appellant to divorce his wife, due to  her  mental  illness,
    and one brother threatened to kill her.

 6. The judge does not say whether  this  allegation  is  established.   At
    paragraph 23, she suspects it is a fabrication.  At paragraph  33,  for
    example, she mentions the allegation without resolving it.

 7. The decision does not consider whether, if  there  is  any  such  risk,
    legal sufficiency of protection is available in Pakistan.

 8. There was nothing in the evidence by which it might realistically  have
    been held that the risk, if there was one, extended more than  locally;
    and Pakistan is a large and populous country.

 9. The grounds at  paragraph  9  say  that  internal  relocation  was  not
    considered.   I note  a  possible  allusion  at  paragraph  34  of  the
    decision, but if the case had reached that stage, what  is  said  there
    would not construe into a finding of undue harshness.

10. Mr Forrest accepted that the decision did not make  it  clear  why  the
    appeal had succeeded on asylum grounds, and had nothing further to  say
    on that aspect.

11. I indicated that the FtT decision on asylum was unsustainable, for  the
    reasons above.

12. Mr Forrest submitted that the human rights case could be extricated and
    that part of the outcome should be preserved.  The main points which  I
    noted from him were these:

      i) The judge correctly directed herself, at paragraph 9, on Razgar.

     ii) There is family life among the appellant, his wife, and  their  two
         children, and their return  involves  interference  not  only  with
         private life, but with that family life.

    iii) Alternatively, this is a case where distinction between family  and
         private life is immaterial.

     iv)  The  judge  correctly  gave  considerable  significance  to  three
         factors: the mental health problems of the appellant's  wife,  even
         although short of the criteria for  a  case  on  article  3  health
         grounds; the best interests of the two children, in particular  the
         older child, who has a diagnosis of autism;  and  the  contribution
         the appellant and his wife might  make  to  the  UK  through  their
         qualifications and professional status.

      v) Given those factors, the decision was justified by reference to  GS
         (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at paragraph 86, cited by the FtT
         judge at paragraph 35.

13. On the human rights grounds, I reserved my decision.

14. The judge did cite Razgar early in her decision,  but  as  Mr  Whitwell
    pointed out in his reply, she did not adopt its structure  when  coming
    to formulate her conclusions.

15. The judge engaged in  a  free  ranging  discussion,  not  organised  by
    reference to the immigration rules.  It is now  thoroughly  established
    that those are the correct starting point, even in  a  case  which  can
    succeed only outside the  rules.   There  was,  unfortunately,  a  more
    logical legal structure in the decision of the SSHD (from paragraph  70
    onwards) than in the decision of the FtT.  If  the  judge  had  adopted
    that structure, and answered the questions so raised in similar  order,
    she might have arrived at a comprehensible answer to the case.   As  it
    is, she has allowed her understandable but generalised sympathy arising
    from the appellants' situation and the comparative  disadvantages  they
    might encounter in Pakistan (paragraph 32 is a prime example)  to  sway
    her into an outcome  for  which  she  has  given  no  legally  adequate
    explanation.

16. Mr Whitwell was also correct in submitting that GS does not support the
    decision.  The principle there is that absence of medical treatment  in
    the receiving country, short of article 3, may be relevant to article 8
    as a factor additional to separation of family members.  I do  not  see
    anything in GS which favours medical aspects adding to a  private  life
    case such as this, where the family returns or remains as a  unit,  and
    no separation of family members is involved.  GS quotes from and agrees
    with MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at paragraph 23, which is
    to similar effect.

17. If the case had been on the asylum grounds only, the outcome might have
    been reversed.  However, Mr Whitwell said that on human  rights,  clear
    findings of fact were required, and setting aside should be followed by
    a  fresh  hearing.   That  was  also  the  fall-back  position  of  the
    appellant.

18. It may be that further proceedings will focus on human rights only, but
    at this stage the decision of the FtT is simply set  aside.  It  stands
    only as a record of what was said at the hearing.

19. Under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, the
    case is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing. The member(s)  of  the
    FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Kempton.

20. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT. Anonymity is preserved herein.


            [pic]


            19 July 2019
            UT Judge Macleman

