

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/05109/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 September 2017                      |  On 16 October 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                           mr karzan ahmad watman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  1st  January  1991.   The
    Appellant claimed asylum based on a purported fear that if returned  to
    Iraq he would be killed by either ISIS or by his  girlfriend's  father.
    That application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 6th  May  2016.
    The Appellant lodged Grounds of  Appeal  and  the  appeal  came  before
    Immigration Judge Fox sitting at Manchester on 7th February 2016.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  6th  March  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 2. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.  On 5th July  2017
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pullig granted permission  to  appeal.
    It is important to note that the only ground upon which permission  was
    given  was  that  the  judge  had  dismissed  all   documents   without
    consideration of the verification report by Ms  Laiser.   Judge  Pullig
    noted that having read the decision he found that  the  judge  made  no
    mention of Ms Laiser's report, which he had read, and which at least to
    some extent might have made a material difference for  the  outcome  of
    the appeal.  He found that ground arguable.

 3. On 27th July 2007 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under  Rule  24.   The  Rule  24  response  opposed  the  appeal
    contending that it was unclear from the  grounds  how  the  report  had
    substantiated the remaining  issues  identified  with  the  Appellant's
    claim in particular the inconsistency of the Appellant's  account  with
    the objective background information.  It  contended  that  the  report
    would only be one element in the consideration  and  even  if  it  were
    supportive it would still have to be considered in the round  with  the
    other findings.  Given the significant number of  adverse  findings  it
    was argued that even if an error was found it was not material.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Ms Wilkins.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submission/Discussion

 5. Ms Wilkins starts by trying to persuade me that because  the  Secretary
    of State raises the issue of materiality in the Rule 24  response  that
    it is appropriate that I should look at the other grounds.  I am not in
    favour of that approach permission not having previously been  granted.
    However as will be seen from the outcome of  this  determination  these
    are grounds that can be re-aired and reconsidered at the next  hearing.



 6. I am substantially assisted in this matter by the  intervention  of  Mr
    Harrison.  He admits having given consideration  to  the  determination
    that there is no reference therein to any consideration whatsoever, nor
    any findings made, with regard to  the  report  of  Sheri  Laiser.   He
    acknowledges to use his words that this is "a glaring error".

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. I have read the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  I  have
    given consideration within the documentation that was before the  Judge
    to the report of Ms Laiser.  There is no  reference  whatsoever  to  it
    within the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   I  accept  that
    that is an error and that it must be material and addressed and for the
    judge to make full and proper findings based on all the  evidence  that
    is before him.

10. I further accept that when looked at in the  round  there  are  aspects
    within the report of Ms Laiser that have  not  been  addressed  by  the
    Tribunal and  that  there  are  questions  in  the  Appellant's  asylum
    interview particularly at questions 136 to 138 which do not  appear  to
    have  been  addressed  by  the  judge.    Taking   all   matters   into
    consideration but in particular the basis  upon  which  permission  was
    granted and the concession made by Mr Harrison I find  that  there  are
    material errors of law within the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge which fatally flaw  the  decision.   In  such  circumstances  the
    correct approach is  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and to remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing along with appropriate directions.

Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law and is set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 2) That the matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Manchester to be reheard on the first available date 42 days hence with
    an ELH of 3 hours.  The remitted hearing is to be before any First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than Immigration Judge Fox.

 3) That there be leave to either party to  serve  and  file  such  further
    objective and/or subjective evidence  upon  which  they  seek  to  rely
    within 28 days of receipt of these directions.

 4) That the Appellant do attend the restored hearing.

 5) That a Kurdish/Sorani interpreter do attend the remitted hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 16 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 16 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
