
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05612/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22 October 2020                  |On 29 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     RJ
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Mohammad of Legis Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was Skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan,  born  on  1  February  1996.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 15 September 2008 at the  age
of 12 years. He claimed asylum when he was detected and served with  removal
papers as an illegal entrant.

The appellant's asylum claim was based upon his fear of the Taliban who  had
killed his parents in a  bomb  attack  on  his  home  following  accusations
against his father of working with the government and  had  stabbed  him  in
his hip and threatened to kill his uncle and his family  if  they  continued
having him staying at their house. The appellant's claim was refused  on  24
February 2009 as the respondent did not believe  his  account,  but  he  was
granted discretionary leave to remain until 23 February 2012  owing  to  his
age. He appealed against the decision but his appeal  was  dismissed  on  22
April 2009 as the Tribunal, although accepting that  his  parents  had  been
killed in a bomb blast, did not accept that it was by the  Taliban  or  that
his family was of any interest to the Taliban and did not accept  his  claim
to have no family remaining in Afghanistan.

On 6 February 2012 the appellant submitted an application for further  leave
to remain in the UK and on 28 August 2014 he was  granted  indefinite  leave
to remain exceptionally, outside the  immigration  rules.  That  followed  a
conviction, on 17 March 2014, for possessing a controlled Class A drug  with
intent to supply, for which he received a community  order.  In  March/April
2016 the appellant was attacked and his jaw  was  broken,  and  in  February
2017 he was involved in a drugs-related assault which led to admission  into
hospital  and  a  subsequent  neurological  condition  for  which   he   was
prescribed anti-epileptic medication by Dr Thomas on  29  March  2017  (page
127 of the respondent's appeal bundle).

On 3 February 2017 the appellant was convicted of  offences  which  occurred
on 9 September 2016, namely possession with  intent  to  supply  a  Class  A
controlled drug - cocaine and having  a  blade/  sharp  pointed  article  in
public and on 27 April 2017 he was sentenced to a total of  4  years  and  6
months' imprisonment. In light of his conviction, the appellant  was  served
with a notice of decision to make a deportation order on 4 October 2017  and
his legal representatives made written representations  on  his  behalf,  on
Articles 2, 3 and 8 grounds, on 8 November 2017.

The appellant's representations referred to him having arrived in the UK  at
the age of 11 years, being placed in foster care and becoming close  to  his
foster family; being in a relationship with a British citizen for  the  past
7 years and planning on getting married once released  from  prison;  having
developed medical problems after being attacked and injured  in  March  2014
and awaiting operations in hospital; and  having  no  one  to  turn  to  for
support in Afghanistan if he was returned there. It  was  claimed  that  his
deportation would breach his Article 8 human rights.

On 14 December 2017 the respondent invited the appellant to  seek  to  rebut
the presumption under section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  Act  2002
that he had been convicted of a particularly serious crime  and  constituted
a danger to the community. The appellant's legal  representatives  responded
the same day, relying upon their  previous  representations  of  8  November
2017.

On 16 April 2018 the respondent  signed  a  deportation  order  pursuant  to
section 32(5) of the 2007 Act and made a decision to refuse the  appellant's
protection  and  human  rights  claim.  In  that  decision,  the  respondent
certified that the presumption in section 72(2) of the 2002 Act  applied  to
the appellant in light of his conviction. His asylum claim  was  refused  on
that basis. The respondent considered in any event that  the  appellant  was
at no risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan  and  could  safely  and  reasonably
relocate to Kabul, that he was not entitled to humanitarian  protection  and
that his removal would not breach his Article  3  or  8  human  rights.  The
respondent accepted the appellant's relationship with  his  British  partner
but noted a lack of evidence to show that they had been cohabiting  for  any
period before he was imprisoned and  did  not  consider  that  it  would  be
unduly harsh for his partner to live in Afghanistan or to remain in  the  UK
without him. The respondent did not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, did  not  accept  that  he
was socially and culturally integrated in the UK and  did  not  accept  that
there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his   integration   in
Afghanistan. The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  were  any  very
compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest in the  appellant's
deportation.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  on  3
July 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew. Judge Andrew  noted  that  no
reliance  was  placed  on  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  former
girlfriend. With regard to the section 72 certification, she concluded  that
the appellant constituted a danger to the community  and  that  he  had  not
rebutted the presumption in that regard. As such, the judge  concluded  that
the appellant could not rely on asylum and she went on to  consider  Article
2 and 3.  She  considered  the  circumstances  arising  since  the  previous
decision from Judge Buchanan in April 2009, which she took as  her  starting
point, and noted that there was no new evidence of  relevance.  She  refused
an adjournment request made on behalf of the appellant in order to obtain  a
psychologist's report and concluded that the appellant was not at  any  risk
on  return  to  Afghanistan  'per  se'.  However,  having   considered   the
appellant's physical and mental health,  which  included  a  report  from  a
retired consultant  neurologist  Dr  Durward  dated  19  November  2018  and
references to seizures and epilepsy as well as to PTSD, she concluded  that,
whilst that was not in itself sufficient to meet the high threshold to  make
out an Article 3 or 8 claim, when taken together with other factors such  as
the fact that he was vulnerable and claimed to  have  no  contact  with  any
family in Afghanistan, it would not be reasonable for  him  to  relocate  to
Kabul. She found that internal relocation would  be  unduly  harsh  and  she
allowed the appeal on Article 3 grounds in a decision promulgated on 8  July
2019.

The Secretary of State sought, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
Upper Tribunal. The case came before me on 1 July 2020 for a remote  hearing
by way of Skype for business  and  I  concluded  that  the  judge  had  made
material errors of law in her decision allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  3
grounds, on the following basis:

    "15. Having heard from both parties I have  no  hesitation  in  finding
    that the judge made material errors of law in her decision allowing the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds. I am entirely in agreement with  the  view
    taken in the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  and  written
    submissions, and the submissions made  by  Ms  Cunha,  that  the  judge
    failed to provide any proper reasons as to why, having  found  at  [49]
    that the appellant would not meet the high threshold  to  establish  an
    Article 3 and 8  claim  on  account  of  his  health  difficulties,  he
    nevertheless  succeeded  on  Article  3  grounds  on  account  of   his
    "vulnerabilities".  The  "vulnerabilities"  considered  by  the   judge
    appeared, at [55], to be little more than the medical issues which  she
    had already found not to be sufficient to meet the Article 3  test.  It
    seems that the judge took the view that  the  relevant  issue  was  the
    reasonableness of return to Kabul which involved a lower test  to  that
    in Article 3, whereas what she should have considered was  whether  the
    appellant's  return  to  Kabul  would  meet  the  high   threshold   of
    establishing an Article 3 claim.

    16.   The  approach  taken  by  Mr  Mohammad  in  responding   to   the
    respondent's grounds was to challenge the grounds as an attempt  to  go
    behind the judge's findings on the medical evidence and the weight  she
    accorded to that evidence in finding that the Article 3  threshold  was
    met. He submitted that there had  been  no  challenge  to  the  medical
    evidence at the hearing before Judge Andrews and  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to give the weight that she did to that evidence.  However,  I
    find his approach to  be  mistaken  as  the  grounds  do  not  seek  to
    challenge the medical evidence nor to go behind the judge's findings on
    the medical evidence. What the grounds  challenge  is  the  absence  of
    reasoning by the judge as to why the medical evidence was not found  to
    be sufficient to establish an Article 3 claim on  health  grounds,  yet
    found that same evidence to be sufficient to  establish  an  Article  3
    claim on  the  basis  of  "vulnerabilities".  The  point  made  in  the
    respondent's grounds at [3] and [4], in the written submissions at  [5]
    and by Ms Cunha was that the judge's own finding at [51] and  [54]  was
    that the medical evidence was incomplete and that there was as  yet  no
    proper diagnosis of the appellant's condition.  Indeed,  that  was  the
    judge's observation at [53] when considering the medical report from Dr
    Durward of 19 November 2018 (page 284 of the appeal's bundle). In  such
    circumstances it is difficult to see how she considered the appellant's
    medical condition to give rise to vulnerabilities  sufficient  to  meet
    the Article 3 threshold. In addition, the respondent properly makes the
    point at [5] of the grounds that the  judge  made  no  findings  as  to
    whether the appellant would be able  to  access  medical  treatment  in
    Kabul. The significance of  such  an  assessment  is  set  out  in  the
    respondent's written submissions at [9]  to  [11].  As  such,  I  agree
    entirely with the respondent that the judge simply  failed  to  explain
    the basis upon which she concluded that the  Article  3  threshold  had
    been met and it is impossible to determine from her  findings  how  and
    why she allowed the appeal on the basis that she did.

    17.  Accordingly, I set aside  Judge  Andrew's  decision  allowing  the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds. It was quite properly agreed by  Ms  Cunha
    that, whilst the appellant had not challenged the judge's  findings  on
    Article 3 at [49], an entirely new decision would have to  be  made  on
    Article 3 given that the appellant's medical condition was  essentially
    the main issue in this case. It was also noted that there  had  been  a
    change in the jurisprudence concerning Article 3  medical  cases,  with
    the judgment of the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17 and the evidence would  need  to
    be assessed in light of that judgment. In  addition,  no  decision  was
    made by the judge on Article 8, no doubt because the appeal was allowed
    on Article 3  grounds.  A  re-making  of  the  decision  would  require
    arguments and evidence on Article 8 as well as Article 3. Both  parties
    were content for the decision to be re-made on the basis of submissions
    and further medical evidence without the need for further oral evidence
    and for that to take place at a resumed hearing, again remotely by  way
    of Skype for business. In regard  to  Mr  Mohammad's  reference  to  an
    intention to cross-appeal  the  judge's  findings  on  the  section  72
    certification, it is too late for such an appeal. There was no previous
    cross-appeal in that regard and that was confirmed by  Mr  Mohammad  at
    the  commencement  of  this  hearing.  However,  the  question  of  the
    appellant's risk of re-offending may  well  be  a  relevant  issue  for
    consideration when assessing Article 8 and, as such, any  evidence  and
    submissions produced in that regard would be considered."

Hearing and Submissions

The case was then listed for a resumed, remote hearing and  came  before  me
again to re-make the decision.  Both  parties  had  prepared  and  submitted
skeleton arguments for the hearing  and  a  supplementary  bundle  had  been
produced for the appellant which included a further witness  statement  from
the appellant, a country expert from  Dr  Giustozzi  and  a  second  medical
report  from  Dr  Durward,  together  with  further  information  about  the
treatment of epilepsy in Afghanistan and the judgment of the  Supreme  Court
in AM (Zimbabwe).

Mr Mohammad submitted that the focus of the re-making  of  the  decision  in
the appeal was on Article 3 and Article 8,  and  the  relevant  test  in  AM
(Zimbabwe) and Paposhvili v. Belgium - 41738/10 - Chamber  Judgment  (French
Text) [[2016] ECHR 1113. He  submitted  that  the  second  report  from  Dr
Durward confirmed the diagnosis of epilepsy which had previously  been  only
a putative diagnosis, and which was a continuing  and  permanent  disability
and would make  it  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  find  employment  in
Afghanistan. Likewise, for PTSD. Both were  indefinite  diagnoses  and  were
related to mental health. Mr Mohammad relied on the country guidance  in  AS
(Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 130 which found that  internal
relocation to Kabul would not be unduly harsh or unreasonable for  a  single
adult male in good health. Since the appellant was not in  good  health,  Mr
Mohammad submitted that he did not fall within this category.  He  submitted
that the appellant had been diagnosed with  a  lifelong  illness  which  was
controlled by medication and which the evidence showed was not available  in
Afghanistan.

Mr Mohammad relied upon the report of Dr Giustozzi  which  referred  to  the
lack of medication in Afghanistan  and  to  the  evidence  of  a  survey  of
students in Afghanistan on attitudes to epilepsy, both of which referred  to
people with such conditions being seen as being "possessed" by djins and  at
risk of being chained and sedated. The Secretary of State had an  obligation
to dispel any doubts as to the medication being available to  the  appellant
in Afghanistan and had not done so. As such, the test in AM  (Zimbabwe)  and
Paposhvili v. Belgium - 41738/10 - Chamber Judgment  (French  Text)  [[2016]
ECHR 1113, was met and the appellant had made out his  claim  under  Article
3. As for Article 8, the appellant's private  life,  including  the  age  he
came to the UK, his relationship with  his  foster  family,  his  job  as  a
keyworker, his reformed character and  his  strong  links  to  the  UK,  all
outweighed the public interest in his deportation.

Mr Melvin submitted, in response, that the  respondent  had  concerns  about
both  diagnoses,  of  epilepsy  and  PTSD.  With  regard  to  epilepsy,  the
appellant was prescribed medication in 2017 by his doctor at that  time,  Dr
Thomas, following the incident in 2016 when he was attacked,  and  that  had
not been reviewed since then. Dr Durward expressed his  concerns  about  the
diagnosis in his first report in 2018 and his current report confirming  the
diagnosis relied solely upon the evidence of the appellant's  foster  family
in regard to the appellant's relapses. There  was  no  psychiatric  evidence
confirming  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD  and  insufficient  evidence  overall  to
conclude that the appellant suffered from mental  health  problems.  In  any
event, the evidence did not show that there was no medication available  for
epilepsy in Afghanistan. Even if the particular brand of medication used  by
the appellant was not available, there was no evidence  that  another  brand
was unavailable. The appellant's condition  was  managed  by  drugs  and  he
could lead a normal life in Kabul. As  for  Article  8,  the  appellant  was
unable to show that there were very significant obstacles to his  return  to
Afghanistan. There was no  definitive  finding  by  Judge  Andrew  that  the
appellant had no family remaining  in  that  country  to  provide  him  with
support. It would be reasonable for him to relocate to Kabul.

Mr Mohammad reiterated his previous points in response.

Discussion and Findings

It is relevant to note, as a starting point, that there was no challenge  to
Judge Andrew's finding on Article 3 at [49],  that  there  was  insufficient
reason, on the evidence available to her, to  conclude  that  the  appellant
would meet the threshold for an Article 3 or 8 claim on  the  basis  of  his
health difficulties alone.

Having again read all  the  documents  in  detail  and  had  regard  to  the
appellant's history, I can understand that Judge Andrew  had  some  sympathy
for the appellant and no doubt that was what led her to  allow  the  appeal.
However, for the same reasons that she erred in law in her decision, I  have
difficulty in being able to conclude that  the  evidence  is  sufficient  to
meet the high threshold for an Article 3 claim.

The main issue before me, in  re-making  the  decision  in  the  appeal,  is
whether the evidence now before me shows that the appellant's  circumstances
as a whole, including his medical condition, reach  the  high  threshold  to
establish an Article 3 claim. In AM (Zimbabwe), the  Supreme  Court  decided
that it should depart from the well-known and long-standing  test  in  N  v.
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31 and  accepted  the
slightly lower threshold established in the case of Paposhvili. The test  in
medical cases for establishing an Article 3 case is therefore that  set  out
at [183] of Paposhvili, namely:

    "substantial grounds ... for believing that he or she, although not  at
    imminent risk of dying, would face a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the
    absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country or  the  lack
    of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a serious,  rapid  and
    irreversible decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense
    suffering or to a significant reduction in life expectancy."

It is asserted on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  appellant's  mental
health conditions are sufficiently debilitating  to  reach  that  threshold,
when taken with the lack of support and lack  of  access  to  medication  in
Afghanistan. However, as was the case before Judge Andrew, the  evidence  is
sadly lacking. Whether this is due to  there  being  a  lack  of  effort  to
obtain full and conclusive medical reports, or whether it is simply  because
the severity of the conditions claimed has been over-played,  as  Mr  Melvin
submitted, the fact is that there is no clear  and  recent  confirmation  of
any diagnosis of either epilepsy or PTSD and  no  adequate  recent  evidence
that medication equivalent to that taken by the appellant in the UK  is  not
available if required. I note  that  this  is  despite  the  respondent  and
Tribunal  having  repeatedly  referred  to  the  lack  of  adequate  medical
evidence, in the grant of permission in September  2019  by  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Martin, Mr Tufan's SSHD's response to directions from  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Canavan dated 9 June 2020 (paragraphs 9 and 10) and my  error  of  law
decision of 14 July 2020, and despite the ample  opportunity  the  appellant
has had to provide further  evidence  in  response  to  numerous  directions
given for such evidence to be adduced.

The only new medical evidence produced since the appeal before Judge  Andrew
is a second report from Dr Durward which, I have to agree  with  Mr  Melvin,
adds very little to his previous report. Although Dr Durward concludes  that
he is satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  epilepsy,  his  reasons  for  so
concluding are simply based upon observations from  the  appellant's  foster
parent, that he had witnessed incidents which he considered to be  seizures,
which appeared to be linked to the  appellant  not  taking  his  medication.
However, what is clear from Dr Durward's report is that  the  appellant  has
not been reviewed since he was first prescribed the medication  three  years
ago, in March 2017, by Dr Thomas and Dr Durward therefore  recommended  that
he be reviewed. It is relevant to consider the  letter  from  Dr  Thomas  to
which Dr Durward was referring, at  page  127  of  the  respondent's  appeal
bundle and page 302 of the appellant's appeal bundle, because  it  is  clear
that Dr Thomas had little information before  him  when  deciding  what  was
causing the appellant's blackouts and he therefore recommended  referral  to
a neurorehabilitation for further assessment, yet the following document  at
page 304 confirms  that  the  appellant  did  not  continue  to  attend  the
Neurorehab Clinic and so was discharged in July 2017.

Further, Dr Durward, in  his  first  report,  stated  that  the  appellant's
condition, leading to his appointment with Dr  Thomas,  could  have  been  a
result of the recent trauma he had suffered when he was  assaulted  and  was
not necessarily actually  epilepsy.  Accordingly,  I  would  agree  with  Mr
Melvin that Dr Durward's second  report  does  not  constitute  a  full  and
proper medically confirmed diagnosis of epilepsy. I fail to  understand  why
the appellant has not sought to have his condition and  medication  reviewed
since March 2017 and why he has not sought to obtain a medical  report  from
a team actually reviewing and treating him, particularly given  the  evident
significance of such evidence for his deportation appeal.  It  seems  to  me
that the state of the  evidence  is  such  that  it  is  not  satisfactorily
established that the appellant has a debilitating  medical  condition  which
requires medication that is not readily available in Afghanistan.

As for the assertion that the appellant has  PTSD,  again  the  evidence  is
significantly lacking. The only  new  medical  evidence,  from  Dr  Durwald,
concedes that he is not a specialist in that field. Judge  Andrew  expressed
concern in her  decision  that  there  was  an  absence  of  recent  medical
evidence and the situation is no different before me. The  reports  from  Dr
Komarzynska, an Inreach Psychologist at the prison where the  appellant  was
incarcerated, are dated 13 June 2017 and 11 March 2019 (pages  297  and  278
of the appellant's appeal bundle) and refer  to  the  appellant's  immediate
mental health issues following the traumatic incident of  the  assault,  but
there is nothing more recent to confirm a diagnosis of  PTSD.  Again,  given
the significance of such evidence  in  these  proceedings,  it  is  of  some
concern that no further evidence has been produced, and  the  indication  is
therefore that  there  are  no  serious  mental  health  concerns  requiring
medical or other intervention.

In addition to the above concerns, the appellant is certainly  not  assisted
by Dr Durward's observation at page 36  of  the  supplementary  bundle  that
"the writer does not discover  substantial  grounds  at  present  that  [RJ]
deported to Afghanistan would face a real risk  of  "a  serious,  rapid  and
irreversible decline in his state of health" or "a significant reduction  in
life expectancy", albeit qualified  by  "However,  the  writer  requires  to
emphasise that [RJ] claims neither family nor friends who would support  him
in Afghanistan."

I accept, from the evidence, as did Judge Andrew,  that  the  appellant  has
suffered two traumatic incidents when he was  attacked  and  badly  injured,
requiring hospitalisation, and has had trauma-based mental health  struggles
following the latter incident. However, on the basis  of  the  very  limited
evidence I have before me, and the lack of any recent  medical  evidence  of
particular weight, I have to agree with Mr Melvin that the  appellant  comes
nowhere near to meeting the high threshold to make out an  Article  3  claim
on medical grounds, even on the lower test in Paposhvili and AM  (Zimbabwe).


Although Judge Andrew considered that there was otherwise a case to  be  met
for Article 3, I have found already that she failed  to  identify  what  the
further issues were that led to the threshold  being  met.  Given  that  the
appellant has failed to demonstrate that he would be at risk of  persecution
in his home area, even if it was accepted that he  would  not  return  there
and that internal relocation to Kabul was the relevant issue, he would  have
to show that he would be at  Article  3  risk  in  Kabul,  which  I  do  not
consider that he is able to do.

I accept that the appellant has health issues  and  has  suffered  traumatic
events in the  past,  having  been  violently  assaulted  on  at  least  two
occasions in the UK, and I have regard to the fact that  the  appellant  has
lived in the UK since the age of 12 years and has a close relationship  with
his foster family, but he is now an adult who is able to work in the UK  and
who would be able to re-establish himself in  Kabul. It appears  to  be  the
case that the appellant's family have not been traced  in  Afghanistan,  but
there is no definitive finding that he has no family remaining there and  it
may be that he would have some support in that respect. However, even if  he
did not, he has his foster family in the UK who would no doubt  be  able  to
offer some support from the UK and there is no reason  to  believe  that  he
would be destitute in Kabul. Whilst it would certainly not be easy  for  the
appellant, I cannot see how he can show  that  his  return  to  Kabul  would
breach Article 3 or that he would fall outside the category described in  AS
(Afghanistan) at (iii) to (v) of the headnote. I have of course  considered
Dr Giustozzi's report in that regard, but that is very much predicated  upon
the fact that the appellant has been  diagnosed  with  epilepsy  and  mental
health conditions, whilst I have stated above  that  there  is  insufficient
evidence to confirm the  appellant's  medical  and  psychological  state  of
health. Likewise with the  Neurology  Asia  2017  article  submitted  by  Mr
Mohammad, in relation to attitudes to epilepsy, which in any event is  three
years out of date and, being a survey of  Afghan  economics  students,  does
nothing to add weight to the appellant's case.

Turning to Article 8, there is no suggestion that the appellant  could  meet
the exceptions to deportation in paragraph 399 and 399A of  the  immigration
rules, and in any event he could not benefit from the exceptions  given  the
length of his sentence. The question is  therefore  whether  there  are  any
very compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions  which  outweigh
the public interest in the appellant's deportation. I have to  conclude,  on
the limited evidence before me, that there  are  none.  I  accept  that  the
appellant would face significant obstacles to  integration  in  Afghanistan,
given the length of time spent outside the country  and  the  young  age  at
which he left, together with his past experiences of trauma  in  the  UK.  I
consider the impact of Covid 19 to which Dr Guistozzi refers  in  regard  to
limited employment opportunities in  Kabul,  but  that  is  a  matter  which
severely impacts upon life all over the  world  including  the  UK.  I  have
regard to the close relationship the appellant has with his  foster  family,
although I note that there has been no  recent  evidence  produced  for  the
resumed hearing before me. I also  have  regard  to  the  previous  finding,
which was not challenged by  way  of  a  cross-appeal,  that  the  appellant
remains a risk to the community. I note that no further  evidence  has  been
produced in that regard, despite my indication at the  end  of  [17]  of  my
error of law decision. On the  limited  evidence  before  me,  therefore,  I
simply cannot conclude  that  the  appellant's  circumstances,  taken  as  a
whole,  amount  to  very  compelling  circumstances  for  the  purposes   of
paragraph 398 of the immigration rules.

I would suggest that if the appellant's physical and mental health  were  as
debilitating as claimed, any further resistance to  deportation  would  have
to be supported by strong evidence. However, such evidence is sadly  lacking
before me and on the limited evidence before me I  can  only  conclude  that
the appellant has not demonstrated that his deportation would be  in  breach
of Article 3 or 8 of the ECHR.



DECISION

The original Tribunal was found to have made an error of law in relation  to
the findings on Article 3 and the decision was  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  Article  3  and  8  human
rights grounds.

         Anonymity

         The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  13  of  the
         Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) Rules 2014. I continue that order pursuant to rule  14  of
         the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 26 October 2020
