
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05963/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2019                     |On 29 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     R S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, Counsel instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil  ethnicity.  His  date
    of birth is 13 October 1980.  He came to the UK on 6 December 2015.  He
    made a claim on protection grounds on 15 January 2016.

2.   The Appellant's account in a nutshell is as follow; he is from  Jaffna.
    His brother and sister were members of the LTTE. His sister surrendered
    to the Sri Lankan Army on 19 May 2009. She has not seen since then.  He
    does not know the whereabouts of his brother.  On 10 February 1999  the
    Appellant was forcibly recruited by the LTTE and  underwent  compulsory
    training until 15  March  1999  when  he  was  released  subject  to  a
    condition that he returned and completed training.  The  Appellant  and
    his parents were placed in an IDP camp in 2000.  On 4 March 2000 he was
    detained for ten days.   During  this  time  he  was  interrogated  and
    beaten.  He was made to sign a document in Sinhalese which he  did  not
    understand.  He was taken to  court  but  he  did  not  understand  the
    proceedings.  He pleaded guilty and he was released unconditionally.

3.   From 2003 to 2017 whilst he was in Colombo the  Appellant  accommodated
    people from the LTTE. In addition, he collected money from  abroad  for
    the organisation.  On 27 June 2007 CID officers came looking  for  him,
    he moved and he continued to  work  for  the  LTTE  looking  after  the
    wounded.  The Appellant and his family were moved to another  IDP  camp
    in 2009 and released after about a month.   On  8  March  2015  he  was
    arrested by the CID and accused  of  being  an  LTTE  member.   He  was
    assaulted during detention. He was released on 28 June 2015 subject  to
    a bribe. He was assisted by an agent to leave the country.

4.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused by the Secretary  of
    State on 25 April 2018.  He appealed  against  that  decision  and  his
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham in a  decision
    that was promulgated on 31 October 2018,  following  a  hearing  on  19
    September 2018.  Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Keefe on 18 February 2019.   Thus,  the  matter  came  before  me  to
    determine whether there was an error of law.

The decision of the FTT

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected  the  Appellant's  account.  The
    judge found him not credible.  She had before her the  evidence  of  Dr
    Callaway which the Appellant relied on in support of  his  appeal.  The
    judge made the following findings at paragraphs 34, 35 and  36  of  the
    decision:

         "34. I have considered the findings of Doctor  Alison  Callaway  in
             her Medico-Legal  Report  dated  23rd  May  2018  (appellant's
             bundle at 7-26) which makes findings on the appellant's mental
             state and the  appellant's  scars.   Doctor  Callaway  is  the
             appellant's GP, Doctor Callaway accepts she has no  specialist
             psychiatric training.  I find there is no evidence to indicate
             that Doctor Callaway has  undertaken  specialist  training  in
             torture/trauma injuries.  Therefore I am bound  to  find  that
             Doctor Callaway is not qualified either to  make  findings  on
             scarring or to make an expert psychological assessment of  the
             appellant's mental state.  Accordingly,  I  am  only  able  to
             attach  minimum  evidential  weight   on   Doctor   Callaway's
             psychological findings.

         35.  In relation to the scars on the appellant's body  as  detailed
             in the report, the appellant explains all  but  three  of  the
             scars  as  resulting  from   either   accidental   injury   or
             immunisation.  The appellant says the  remaining  three  scars
             (numbered (1), (4), and  (8)  in  the  Report)  resulted  from
             injuries sustained during his detention in 2015.   In  respect
             of the first scar which consists of a  hard  swelling  on  the
             crown of his head Doctor Callaway considered that  whilst  the
             scar was consistent with a blow to the  head  as  claimed,  it
             could have been sustained in alternative circumstances such as
             a fall or a car accident.  In respect of the  other  scars  (4
             and 8) which consist of a scar on the  appellant's  upper  arm
             and on both sides of his back, the appellant stated that these
             scars were the result of being burned during torture.   Doctor
             Callaway considered these scars to be highly  consistent  with
             injuries caused by burns.  Also, as injuries on the  back  are
             not a common area for accidental injury, Doctor Callaway could
             not think of an  alternative  explanation  for  the  injuries.
             However,  I  find  that  Doctor   Callaway   conclusions   are
             undermined by her acceptance that it is not possible  to  date
             these scars.  This means that there is no evidence  before  me
             to link the scars to the date of the claimed torture.

         36.  Even if it were accepted that  the  scars  were  intentionally
             inflicted by a third party, this  does  not  necessarily  mean
             they were inflicted by the authorities, the appellant said  he
             did not complete his training with the LTTE and absconded from
             the training camp.  He moved on a number of occasions to avoid
             repercussions from the LTTE.  In  all  these  circumstances  I
             find the Medico-Legal report does not assist  the  appellant's
             appeal and I have attached minimal weight to it."

6.   There were other reasons why the Appellant's account was not  believed,
    for example, the judge found that the circumstances  that  led  to  his
    arrest in 2000 were "fanciful".   She  considered  a  letter  from  the
    regional coordinator of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka  dated
    15th March 2000 to be unreliable for reasons she expressed at paragraph
    39.  The judge found that the account of the Appellant moving around to
    avoid the adverse attention of the authorities and the LTTE was at odds
    with his account that he had assisted the LTTE (see paragraph 42).  The
    judge found that the circumstances of the attempt by the CID to  arrest
    him in 2007 was lacking in credibility. She did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant came to the attention of the authorities  in  2007  or  2015.
    She found that the account of the arrest in  2015  was  not  consistent
    with the country guidance case GJ (post-civil war returnees) Sri  Lanka
    CG [2013]. The judge did not accept the Appellant's account  of  having
    come to the adverse attention of the authorities as  a  result  of  his
    father  having  made  complaints  about  the   disappearance   of   the
    Appellant's sister.  The judge found that the  Appellant's  account  of
    his release in 2015 was internally inconsistent.  The  judge  concluded
    that  the  Appellant's   account   was   embellished   and   materially
    inconsistent and implausible.  She rejected the evidence of  sur  place
    activities would put him at risk.



The grounds of appeal

7.   The first ground of appeal challenges the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    medical evidence and the decision of the judge to attach minimal weight
    to it.  It is asserted in the grounds that the judge failed to consider
    the medical evidence with anxious scrutiny and failed  to  consider  Dr
    Callaway's CV detailing her  experience  and  training.  She  erred  in
    finding that a GP is not qualified to conduct a psychiatric assessment.
     The judge found that Dr Callaway was not qualified to make findings on
    scarring or to make an expert psychological assessment.



The error of law

8.   There is merit in the grounds, as fully conceded by Ms Everett  at  the
    hearing before me.  Dr Callaway's CV was appended to the report and  it
    is capable of establishing that she was trained and experienced in  the
    assessment of torture. It is conceded by Ms Everett that the judge  did
    not properly take this into account and that this amounts to a material
    error.

9    Dr Callaway found  that  two  of  the  Appellant's  scars  were  highly
    consistent with  injuries  caused  by  burns  and  that  the  Appellant
    suffered from severe depression. The judge attached "minimum evidential
    weight" to the psychological findings.  She concluded that the  witness
    had no specialist training in torture  /trauma  injuries  and  was  not
    qualified to "make findings" on  scarring  or  the  Appellant's  mental
    state. The judge found that the conclusions in respect of scarring were
    undermined by the ability to date the scars.

10.  In her  report,  at  page  5,  Dr  Callaway  stated  that  she  had  no
    specialist psychiatric training.  However,  a  proper  reading  of  the
    report and the CV disclosed a level of experience in assessing physical
    injuries as a result of torture and assessing psychological conditions.
         The grounds set out the relevant parts of  Dr  Callaway's  CV  and
    parts of the report which the judge in my view did  not  consider  when
    deciding what weight to attach to that evidence.

11.  Whilst a judge may decide  to  attach  more  weight  to  an  assessment
    conducted by a medical expert at consultant level rather than a general
    practitioner, the reasons the judge gave for attaching  minimal  weight
    to the evidence of Dr Callaway are flawed because  the  judge  did  not
    take into account the expert's experience and training in this area.

12.  I have had regard to SS (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  155  specifically  paragraph  22  of  this
    decision which states as follows:

         "Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert  (or
         indeed any) evidence is a matter for the trial judge  (here  Senior
         Immigration Judge Spencer).   A  judge's  decision  not  to  accept
         expert evidence does not involve an  error  of  law  on  his  part,
         provided he approaches that evidence with the appropriate care  and
         gives good reasons for his decision.  Ultimately, therefore,  there
         are only two issues as to the Senior Immigration Judge's  treatment
         of the medical evidence:

         Did he address that evidence with appropriate care and did he  give
         good reasons for his conclusion?

         Those two questions are interrelated.  It is difficult to  conceive
         of a state  in  which  a  judge  gives  adequate  reasons  for  his
         conclusions on expert evidence, yet he has held to  have  exercised
         sufficient care.  His reasons demonstrate his care."

13.  I conclude that the  judge  did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
    decision to attach minimum weight to Dr Calloway's evidence. She failed
    to address the evidence of Dr Callaway with appropriate care.  For  the
    reasons that I have given the assessment of credibility is as  conceded
    by Ms Everett materially flawed.

14.  It follows that the medical evidence is capable  of  establishing  that
    the Appellant is  a  vulnerable  witness  and  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance No. 2 of 2010 applies.  I do not need to engage with ground  3
    in any details suffice to say that the judge erred in his  approach  to
    the medical  evidence  and  thus  the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility is flawed.

15.  Having found a material error of law I set aside the  decision  of  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.  Mr
    Halim was of the view that the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a rehearing.  Ms Everett did not  have  a  particular
    view on the matter.    Having taken into account the Practice Statement
    of the Senior President of Tribunals of 25 September 2012,  I  conclude
    with specific reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Practice  statement,
    that remaking the decision will require  the  Tribunal  to  conduct  an
    extensive fact finding exercise. I remit the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing. No findings are preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 25 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
