
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05002/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2018                              |On 2 May 2018                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                          recuan (aka Rezhwan) [f]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer of Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on [ ] 1998.  He  is  a  Sunni
    Kurd.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum-
    seeking child but attained majority before the date of the Respondent's
    decision under appeal.

 2. He claimed he left Iraq following the destruction  of  his  village  by
    ISIS/Da'esh and that he cannot safely return as there is nowhere to  go
    to and because he cannot relocate in  his  home  area  of  the  Kurdish
    Regional Governate (KRG) because his family are the subject of a  blood
    feud following his father's killing of  his  brother,  the  Appellant's
    uncle.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 3. By a decision promulgated on 19  July  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Greasley accepted the Appellant's account of his family's move
    from Erbil in the KRG to a village near Mosul but not that  his  family
    was the subject of a blood feud.  He noted the Appellant  had  made  an
    asylum claim in Hungary where he had claimed to be a  Syrian  national.
    He made adverse credibility findings and dismissed the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. On 13 December 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Foudy refused  the
    Appellant permission to appeal.   The  application  for  permission  to
    appeal  was  renewed  to   the   Upper   Tribunal.    The   application
    unnecessarily addressed at length the basis upon which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had refused permission to appeal and then relied on  the  same
    grounds as had been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. On 6 March 2018  Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Norton-Taylor
    granted permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge arguably failed to  make  sufficient  findings  or  give
    sufficient reasons in respect of core elements of the Appellant's claim
    and arguably may not have adequately considered the  relevance  of  the
    Appellant's travel and arrival in the United Kingdom as a minor.

 6. The Respondent filed a response under Procedure Rule 24  asserting  she
    had made appropriate allowance for the Appellant's youth and had  given
    adequate reasons for his conclusions.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 7. Mr Bramble accepted that the Appellant  had  travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom while a minor. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    mentioned the claimed blood feud. The Respondent would rely on her Rule
    24 response to the decision of the Upper Tribunal to grant permission.

 8. Mr Palmer relied on the grounds upon which permission had been granted.
    The Judge's treatment of the claimed blood feud had  been  cursory  and
    was insufficient to support the decision to treat it as not credible.

Findings and Consideration

 9. The Judge accepted the Appellant had lived in Erbil in the KRG and that
    his family had moved to a village outside Mosul but rejected his  claim
    he could not return to the KRG because of a blood feud.   At  paragraph
    38 of his decision the account of the blood feud was rejected for  want
    of evidence.  Corroboration of a claim is not required in international
    surrogate protection claims and other than  a  reference  to  the  late
    mention of the Appellant's paternal uncles being  police  officers,  no
    adequate reason beyond the lack  of  corroboration  is  given  for  the
    rejection of the Appellant's claim that his family  is  involved  in  a
    blood feud in the KRG.  There was  no  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    claim that he had left the village near Mosul because  ISIS  or  Da'esh
    had taken over his village.  These omissions cast sufficient  doubt  on
    the reliability of the  Judge's  adverse  findings  that  his  decision
    should be set aside and re-heard.

10. Findings of fact will need to be made particularly in relation  to  the
    claimed blood feud and risk  on  return.   Having  regard  to  Practice
    Statement  7.2(B)  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-finding
    required, I consider it appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

11. Generally, I am reluctant to preserve findings of fact  about  part  of
    any Appellant's narrative but having considered the Judge's decision  I
    find it is appropriate to preserve  the  findings  that  the  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom as a minor and attained his majority  before
    the Respondent's decision under appeal; that he was born  in  Erbil  in
    the KRG and at some point and for some reason the family moved from the
    KRG to a village near Mosul outside the KRG which in 2015 was  attacked
    by ISIS/Da'esh.  The issue why the family moved  to  the  village  near
    Mosul which ISIS/Da'esh attacked and what the Appellant did  thereafter
    will have to be considered  and  findings  re-made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside, save as already  specified.   The
    appeal is remitted for hearing afresh on the  basis  specified  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal by a Judge other than Judge Greasley.

     No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 01. v. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

