
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05099/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th June 2017                             |On 27th June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [h a]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Dhaliwal, promulgated on 8th November  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 30th September 2016.  In the determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on [  ]
    1998.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 27th April 2016 refusing his asylum claim and his claim for
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that at the age of 11 years, he  was  at  home
    with his mother, and his brothers, when a person came from the  village
    to tell them that his father had been killed on  his  farm.   When  the
    mother and the Appellant and his siblings went to the farm  they  found
    his father lying in a pool of blood having  been  shot.   His  father's
    body was brought home and a funeral was arranged the same day.  At  the
    funeral itself, some villagers were all heard to  be  saying  that  the
    Appellant's father was a spy and that the Taliban had found  this  out,
    and had killed him.  Thereafter, the Appellant and his family  remained
    at the same family home for five months, following which, fearful  that
    the Appellant will be targeted, his mother made  arrangements  for  the
    Appellant to move to  another  village,  and  from  there  agents  were
    contacted, to enable the Appellant to escape to the United Kingdom.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge accepted  that  the  Appellant's  core  claim  was  credible,
    namely, that the father was working on his farm, when  he  was  killed,
    and all the family went to the farm to find him  lying  in  a  pool  of
    blood, such that the judge held that, "I  accept  this  aspect  of  the
    claim as the Appellant has been able to give  sufficient  detail"  (see
    paragraph 15(i)).

 5. The judge rejected the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  was  in  fear  of
    persecution and ill-treatment for the following reasons.   First,  that
    the Appellant claimed to come from the Logar Province, where there  was
    a large Taliban presence in his village, and this  meant  that  if  the
    Taliban were interested in the Appellant, they would have been able  to
    locate him during the five months that he continued to live in the same
    house as his  father.   Second,  the  suggestion  that  villagers  were
    overheard saying that the  Appellant  must  have  been  killed  by  the
    Taliban because he was a spy was "based solely on  speculation  and  in
    the absence of any adverse interest by the Taliban, there was no  risk"
    (see paragraph 15).  Third, the Appellant did  not  make  a  claim  for
    asylum en route to  the  UK  when  he  disembarked  in  Italy  and  was
    fingerprinted there.  He was approximately 13 years of age at the  time
    and, "if he was in such a danger, then the expectation is that he would
    claim asylum immediately" (paragraph 17).  Finally, the  judge,  having
    referred to the applicable authorities in  relation  to  Afghan  asylum
    seekers, concluded that, "I find  it  is  more  than  likely  that  the
    Appellant will have a family network on his return to support  him  and
    he can be reunited with his family" (paragraph  25).   The  judge  also
    held that, "it thus appears that the Appellant is not likely to  be  at
    risk if returned from the United Kingdom" (paragraph 26).  She went  on
    to conclude that, "I am of the view that it  is  more  than  reasonably
    likely that he will be able to locate his family ..."  (paragraph  26).
    The judge then held that, "taking into account all of these factors,  I
    conclude that the core  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  not  reliable"
    (paragraph 27).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  took  insufficient
    account of the risk to a group, namely men and boys of fighting age  in
    a contested province, who would face a real  risk  on  return  of  ill-
    treatment and persecution.  Second, the judge also did not take account
    of what has been said in JK v Sweden (Application No.  59166/12)  dated
    23rd August 2016, where the Grand Chamber of the European Court  stated
    that where an applicant alleges that he or she is a member of  a  group
    systematically exposed to a practice of ill-treatment, then the general
    situation of a general peril in the country of  destination  cannot  be
    used to deprive such a person of protection.  It is unnecessary to show
    further special distinguishing features.   The  judge  also  failed  to
    apply the correct standard  of  proof  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
    Appellant would have a family network to support  him  upon  return  to
    Afghanistan because the judge used language such as "more than  likely"
    (at paragraph 25) and "not likely" (at paragraph 26),  and  "more  than
    reasonably likely that he will" (at paragraph 26).

 7. On 23rd January 2017, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on this basis, together with the basis that the judge erred in
    treating the failure of the Appellant to claim asylum en route  to  the
    United Kingdom as a matter adverse to his  overall  credibility,  given
    that he was aged only 13 years when that journey was undertaken.

 8. On 10th February 2017 a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me on 13th June 2017, Mr  Bedford,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the following  submissions.   First,  the
    Upper Tribunal had granted permission on the basis that the standard of
    proof had been misunderstood by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  a
    number of places in the  determination.   The  Upper  Tribunal  made  a
    reference to paragraphs 25, and 26.  What  the  judge  had  effectively
    done  was  to  have  applied  the  civil  standard  on  a  balance   of
    probabilities which was inappropriate for an asylum  claim.   This  was
    not least because here one was considering the possibility of  internal
    relocation for the Appellant and such a standard  was  simply  not  the
    correct standard.  Second, the conclusions that the judge had  come  to
    were unsustainable in the light of the express acceptance by the  judge
    that the Appellant's core story was correct in that his father had been
    killed while working on  a  farm  and  that  the  Appellant  had  given
    detailed evidence in relation to this.  Third,  in  terms  of  internal
    relocation, the Appellant was now faced with  the  prospect  of  moving
    with his mother, a lone woman, from a rural area to a  urban  area  and
    the UNHCR 2016 Guidelines (at page 324 at paragraph 2) makes  it  clear
    that this would not be a viable option for a woman.   Fourth, the Grand
    Chamber of the European Court had decided in JK v  Sweden  (Application
    No. 59166/12) that the Appellant need only put  forward  a  cogent  and
    plausible claim and then the burden shifted on the Secretary  of  State
    to explain why any doubts about  internal  relocation  were  unfounded.
    Finally, the judge had wrongly applied jurisprudence in the case of  PM
    (Afghanistan) CG [2007] UKAIT 00089,  because  that  case  referred  to
    adults who were claiming asylum, and  in  that  case  there  were  hard
    bitten insurgents, whereas the instant case involved a minor child (see
    the judge's reference to this case at paragraph 19).

10. For her part, Ms Aboni, appearing on behalf of  the  Respondent  stated
    that the usual term such as "more than likely" or "not likely" or "more
    than reasonably likely" may have been a poor choice of words, but  they
    did not demonstrate that a higher standard of proof had  been  applied.
    The Appellant's claim simply had not been made out.  Second, the reason
    given by the judge at paragraphs 21 to 26 showed why the  appeal  could
    not succeed.  Third, the Appellant could rightly be criticised for  not
    claiming asylum in Italy, because this was not  a  case  where  he  had
    simply passed through Italy, but had  actually  been  fingerprinted  in
    that country, and should at that point have claimed asylum.

11. In reply, Mr Bedford submitted that the Appellant was 13 years old when
    he passed through Italy, and he could not be expected to  claim  asylum
    as a minor in that country.  He was also a person  coming  from  "Logar
    Province".  Furthermore, his story that his father had been  killed  at
    the  farm  through  a  gunshot  wound  had  been  accepted.   In  these
    circumstances, it was enough if the Appellant could show that  he  came
    from the Logar Province and that his father had been shot, for  him  to
    have been granted sympathetic consideration as a  minor.   He  was  not
    required to give direct evidence of how his  father  was  killed.   His
    direct evidence was that he and his  family  heard  about  the  killing
    while they were at home, whereupon the rush to the  farm  to  find  the
    father's blood soaked body there.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

13. First, the judge has plainly applied the wrong  standard  of  proof  by
    using language such as "more than likely" and "not  likely"  and  "more
    than reasonably likely" at paragraphs 25 to 26.

14. Second, this has had  a  practical  effect  on  the  decision  actually
    reached by the judge because this is a case  where  the  judge  made  a
    clear finding that, "I accept this aspect of the claim as the Appellant
    has been  able  to  give  sufficient  detail"  when  referring  to  the
    "consistent account" that the Appellant's father was working on a  farm
    when he was shot and killed.

15. Third, the suggestion that the account of the  father  being  shot  and
    killed "is based solely on speculation" (paragraph 15) is unsustainable
    because the direct evidence of the Appellant, which the judge  accepted
    as being plausible, was that he and his family were at home  when  news
    got to them that the father had been shot and  killed,  and  the  judge
    actually refers to the Appellant being able to "give sufficient detail"
    (at paragraph 15).  It is not "speculation" for the Appellant  to  give
    direct evidence on what he was told by villagers coming  to  his  home.
    This is especially  given  that  when  the  Appellant  and  his  family
    returned to the farm they found his father's blood soaked body there.

16. Fourth, the Appellant was only 13 years old when he was passing through
    Italy, and although  he  may  have  been  fingerprinted  there  by  the
    authorities, it cannot be held  against  him  that  he  did  not  claim
    asylum.

17. Fifth, the judge recognises that the Appellant's claim was that  "there
    was a large  Taliban  presence  in  his  village  and  indeed,  country
    guidance supports the fact that the Taliban have presence in the  Logar
    Province" (paragraph 15(ii)(c)).  This being so, it is simply wrong for
    the judge to conclude that, "taking into account all these  factors,  I
    conclude that the core  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  not  reliable"
    (paragraph 27).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Dhaliwal, in accordance with Practice Statement 7.2(1).   This  appeal
is allowed only to that extent.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th June 2017

