





Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal numbers: PA/05058/2019 (P)

                                                           PA/05200/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 July 2020                    |On 5 August 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                  BR and KR

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



For the appellant:     Mr I Khan, instructed by Eric Smith Law Limited

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred
to are in the bundles submitted to the Tribunal, the  contents of which I
have noted and taken full account of. The order made is described at  the
end of these reasons.


 1. The two appellants, citizens of Albania and cousins, have appealed with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated 12.2.20, dismissing their linked  appeals  against
    the respondent's decisions  of  16.5.19  to  refuse  their  claims  for
    international protection.

 2. At the date of the respondent's decisions, BR was 17 years of  age  and
    KR was 15 years  of  age.  They  are  now  18  and  16  years  of  age,
    respectively.

 3. The appellants did not attend the hearing but Ms L Johnson from  Oxford
    Social Services attended as an appropriate  adult.  I  also  understand
    that  the  appellant's  solicitor's  representative  Mr  H  Khuram  was
    listening in to the hearing.

 4. The essence of the appellants' claim is that  they  were  together  the
    victims of repeated attempts by two unknown men to abduct them, telling
    them that they could make "easy money" to support their families.  They
    claim to have been told that nothing would happen if their parents made
    a complaint to the police, as  the  men  knew  the  police,  and  their
    families would suffer the consequences. They  originally  claimed  that
    'Uncle Ramadan' helped them flee Albania  in  December  2016  and  they
    claim to have entered the UK clandestinely in January 2017. It was also
    claimed that the appellants were of adverse interest  to  the  Albanian
    authorities. Although their grounds of appeal  had  claimed  they  were
    estranged  from  their  families  and  their  families  could  not   be
    contacted, at the appeal hearing they admitted that they had been taken
    out of Albania by their respective fathers and that  they  remained  in
    regular contact with their families in Albania.

 5. As they had not been the victim of trafficking, and as  case  authority
    has held that women in Albanian, even at risk of domestic abuse, do not
    form a Particular Social Group (PSG), the  respondent  did  not  accept
    that their claim fell within those categories protected by the  Refugee
    Convention. Their account of events in Albania was rejected  and  there
    was no credible evidence that the non-state agents they claimed to fear
    had any influence with the authorities. It followed that they  did  not
    qualify for humanitarian protection. In any event, it was asserted that
    there was a sufficiency of protection for them in Albania. The  private
    life claim was assessed and found not to meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules. Whilst they had extended family members in the UK, none of those
    persons had any lawful leave in their own right so  that  any  familial
    relationship between them could continue  in  Albania.  The  respondent
    considered that there were no exceptional circumstances  to  warrant  a
    grant of leave outside the Rules.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge entirely rejected their factual claim  as
    not credible and, in the alternative,  found  that  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection on return to Albania.

 7. There has been no Rule 24 response to the grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal.

 8. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that  it
    was arguable that "the judge has failed to make a decision  in  respect
    of one of the grounds of appeal namely that the  respondent's  decision
    was unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998 and that this amounts to a
    material error of law." Whilst the other  grounds  were  considered  to
    have less merit, permission was nevertheless granted on all grounds.

 9. I am grateful to both representatives for their helpful submissions and
    responses to my queries during the hearing. I confirm that I have taken
    these fully into account before reaching my decision. At the conclusion
    of the hearing I informed the parties that I did not find  an  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  whilst  I
    briefly summarised my reasons orally, I made it clear  I  reserved  the
    full reasons to be given in writing, which I set out below.

10. The grounds of application for permission to appeal  first  argue  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  consider  TD  and  AD
    (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC). Complaint is  also  made
    of the judge's treatment of the expert report. Mr Khan elaborated  upon
    these grounds during his oral submissions, arguing that the  judge  had
    failed to  apply  the  Country  Guidance  to  look  at  the  individual
    circumstances and any support network that  may  be  available  to  the
    appellants on return.

11. In relation to the case law in relation  to  trafficked  women,  it  is
    clear that the appellants' factual claim was  entirely  rejected.  They
    were not trafficked women  and  found  not  be  at  any  such  risk  of
    trafficking. It follows that the case law is irrelevant, as Mr  McVeety
    submitted.

12. In relation to the expert report, Mr  Khan  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to properly reason its rejection as not  objectively  supported.
    However, on the factual findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  rejecting
    the claim of attempted abduction,  the  expert  evidence  could  be  of
    little assistance to the appellants. Nevertheless, the judge devoted  a
    lengthy paragraph at [5] of the decision to consideration of the expert
    report and giving reasons for according limited weight to it, including
    that some of the 'evidence' being relied on was personal anecdote  from
    the expert's family members or others. Nevertheless, it is  clear  that
    the findings were  made  after  giving  careful  consideration  to  the
    opinion of the expert in the report; the judge noting the acceptance of
    the expert that it was for the court to  decide  whether  the  accounts
    given by the appellants are true.

13. Whilst the judge found the evidence of the appellants inconsistent,  Mr
    Khan argued that changing the account to admit that it was not an uncle
    who helped them leave Albania was not an  inconsistency.  However,  not
    only did they lie about having family support to leave Albania but they
    also lied when claiming to have no contact with or  be  estranged  from
    their families. That is  a  sufficient  discrepancy  to  undermine  the
    credibility of the rest of their account and make it open to the  judge
    to reject their factual claim.

14. In addition, it is complained that at [12] of the  decision  the  judge
    misdirected herself and  applied  the  wrong  standard  of  proof  when
    stating, "On the  balance  of  the  evidence  I  believe  that  if  the
    Appellants  required  protection   then   the   state   would   provide
    protection." It is not clear from this whether the judge  was  in  fact
    applying a higher threshold or whether it was careless drafting, as  Mr
    McVeety suggested. The possibility that the judge may  have  applied  a
    balance of probabilities when finding a sufficiency of protection  does
    not assist the appellants, as the higher standard includes  the  lower.
    There is, therefore, no prejudice to the appellants. In any event,  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal as to sufficiency of protection are
    in the alternative and not determinative of the appeal and,  therefore,
    not material to the outcome of the appeal.

15. In respect of the human rights claim, the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal were generic and unparticularised, merely asserting
    that the removal of the appellants from the UK would be unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The grounds in the  application
    for permission to appeal assert simply at [2(v)] the the  judge  failed
    to consider or at all or in any event Article 8 or 276ADE private  life
    - there is no consideration or assessment on this point at all  in  the
    determination." At [15] of the grounds it  is  further  asserted  that,
    "the judge has not  assessed  the  Appellants  (sic)  very  significant
    obstacles in integration upon return under 276ADE  or  Article  8  ECHR
    proportionality."  The  appellants'  skeleton  argument  and  the  oral
    submissions at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing also referred  to
    the human rights claim in very general terms and without particularity.
    The tribunal has no satisfactory evidence as to any significant private
    life in the UK and Mr  Khan  advanced  no  such  circumstances  in  his
    submissions. In the circumstances, it is doubtful whether the judge was
    even required to address such an unparticularised claim.

16. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not address  article
    8 ECHR at all in the impugned decision. The human rights  claim  having
    been raised in very brief and generalised terms, it ought properly have
    been  addressed  in  the   decision,   however   briefly,   given   the
    circumstances. However, even if the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    had specifically addressed article 8  ECHR,  I  am  satisfied  for  the
    reasons set out below there is no basis upon which such a  claim  could
    succeed for either appellant, so that the error was not material to the
    outcome of the appeal.

17. Neither appellant claimed a partner or children in the UK.  Whilst,  as
    referenced above, there were various extended family members in the  UK
    with whom the respondent conceded the may have a familial relationship,
    such relationships were insufficient to engage the Rules in respect  of
    family life and could only be considered as part of their private  life
    pursuant to article 8 ECHR outside the Rules. There was no evidence  of
    any ties going beyond those to  be  expected  between  extended  family
    members. More significantly, none of those extended family members have
    any lawful status in the UK, so that any familial  relationship  either
    appellant may have with such family members can reasonably be  expected
    to continue in Albania. There was  no  lawful  basis  upon  which  such
    relationships could continue in the UK.

18. It was not argued before  me  that  either  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules,  either  under  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE (very significant obstacles to  integration).  On  the
    rejection of their protection claim it follows that there was no  basis
    for finding very significant obstacles to integration in the relatively
    short time that has elapsed since they arrived in the UK.

19. Whilst they came to the UK as minors and have attended schooling in the
    UK, they have spent the vast majority of their lives in Albania.  Given
    the judge's rejection of their factual claim and that they admitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to having lied about 'Uncle Ramadan', admitting
    that at least one of their  respective  fathers  brought  them  out  of
    Albania, and that they both remain in regular contact with their family
    members in Albania, there is no reason why they  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected to return to their respective families in  Albania,  of  which
    country they speak the native language and are fully familiar with  the
    culture and society of their nationality. On the findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal, there is nothing for them to fear on return  to  Albania
    and they are certainly young enough to pick up their  lives  there  and
    pursue further education and/or careers. It is beyond debate that their
    best  interests,  which  the  Tribunal  has  to  take  as   a   primary
    consideration pursuant to Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009, are to return to their  families  in  Albania  as
    soon as possible. They are not entitled to  remain  in  the  UK  simply
    because that is their wish and because they have managed to  enter  and
    remain here illegally for some three years.

20. Further,  pursuant  to  s117B  of  the  2002  Act,  in  any  article  8
    proportionality assessment, the Tribunal must consider that immigration
    control is in the public  interest.  The  statute  also  requires  that
    little weight be accorded to private life developed in  the  UK  whilst
    immigration status is either unlawful  or  precarious,  both  of  which
    criteria apply. I have carefully considered the submissions of Mr Khan,
    but in reality nothing has ever been advanced  in  respect  of  private
    life that could either meet the  Rules  or  amount  to  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances sufficient to justify granting leave to remain
    on the basis that otherwise removal to Albania would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh. In the circumstances, it must follow that the  the  decision  of
    the respondent was unarguably proportionate and not disproportionate to
    the respective human rights of either appellant.

21. In summary, even taking the human rights aspect of their  case  at  its
    highest, I can see no  basis  upon  which  either  appellant,  even  as
    minors, could possibly have succeeded on human rights  grounds,  within
    or without the Rules. It follows that even if the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had gone on to make a reasoned  article  8  assessment,  their  appeals
    would inevitably have failed on human rights grounds,  in  addition  to
    the appeals being  dismissed  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds. It serves no purpose to set aside the decision for this  error
    when inevitably it would be remade by also  dismissing  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds in addition to the  dismissal  of  the  protection
    claim. It follows that the error,  if  there  was  an  error,  was  not
    material.

Decision

    There was no material error of law in the making of the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal;

    The appeal of each appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed on  all
    grounds;

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  of  each
    appellant against the decisions of the respondent is dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed:  DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    27 July 2020

Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed:  DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    27 July 2020
