
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05444/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2018                           |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                 ALIREZA [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L. Profumo, instructed by Migrant Legal Project.
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Iran, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against the respondent's rejection of his asylum  claim.   Judge  Boyes
    dismissed his appeal.  He now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The grounds  of  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  are  somewhat  discursive.
    Permission was granted specifically on a  ground  going  to  procedural
    fairness.  So far as that ground is concerned it has, so far as we  can
    see, no factual basis at all; and Ms Profumo, who attempted to rely  on
    it, had no evidence to support it  other  than  what  was  said  to  be
    Counsel's attendance note, not accompanied even by a statement of truth
    identifying it, and which had not been served on  the  respondent.   In
    our view this ground should not have been raised, and  if  it  was  not
    going to be properly, fairly and professionally pursued it should  have
    been promptly withdrawn.

 3. The judge who granted permission said, without  giving  any  reason  in
    relation to the other grounds, that "the grounds may be  argued".   One
    of the grounds pleaded, to which  Ms  Profumo  came  belatedly,  is  of
    merit.

 4. The appellant, whose case is that he is at risk as a Christian convert,
    has always said that he is married, with a son.  Part of the  basis  of
    his claim is that his wife  comes  from  a  strictly  observant  Muslim
    family.  The Secretary of State treated him as a married  man  and  the
    fact is simply set out in  the  letter  of  refusal,  without  comment.
    Judge Boyes considered the credibility of the appellant's account as  a
    whole, as he was bound to.  In relation to his family status, the judge
    remarked that the appellant's account of his marriage  and  his  wife's
    family was "the most puzzling aspect" of his account.  He could not see
    that the family would have allowed their daughter to marry a person who
    was uncommitted to Islam or that the appellant's wife could, given  her
    upbringing, share his religious nonchalance.  He decided  that  he  was
    not "satisfied that the appellant is even married".  He said that there
    was "no evidence at all of a wife and child".

 5. That was clearly wrong.  There was evidence of a wife  and  child:  the
    appellant  had  spoken  of  them  in  his   evidence;   he   had   also
    (consistently) given details of them in two  previous  interviews;  and
    they are noted on his Iranian  identity  card  which  was  in  evidence
    before the judge and which the judge regarded as genuine.   So it seems
    clear that in making his findings on the appellant's family status  the
    judge failed to take into account relevant evidence.  In  addition,  it
    is not easy to see that it was fair to investigate this  issue  without
    further input, bearing in mind that the status of the  appellant  as  a
    married man with a son was part of the data accepted by the respondent.
     It may be that if the evidence of the marriage had been nearer to  the
    front of the judge's  mind  he  would  not  have  had  the  worries  he
    expressed in his  decision.   It  may  be  that  if  he  had  given  an
    indication at the hearing that he was concerned about  the  reality  of
    the marriage his attention would have been drawn to the evidence of it.
      We  do  not  know.   A  judge  is  certainly  entitled  to  make  his
    determination on all disputed points, on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before him, without taking the parties through his doubts  and  seeking
    specific explanations, for it is the parties' job  to  establish  their
    cases; but that does not mean that the judge is entitled to  reach  his
    own conclusion on points not in dispute, by  failing  to  look  at  the
    evidence before him.

 6. This was an appeal that depended to a large extent on  the  appellant's
    personal credibility on a number of issues.  An  unsupportable  finding
    on the credibility  of  the  evidence  on  a  central  feature  of  the
    appellant's personal identity and circumstances would be bound, in  our
    judgment, to infect the rest of the judge's assessments and findings of
    fact.  For this reason we are satisfied that this appeal will  need  to
    be considered afresh by a different judge.

 7. Because the whole of the evidence will need to be considered again,  it
    is more convenient and likely to be more expeditious for the matter  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. For the foregoing reasons we set aside the decision of Judge Boyes.  We
    remit the appellant's appeal for determination afresh by the First-tier
    Tribunal, differently constituted.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 26 November 2018.

