
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/05314/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 April 2018                          |On 11 May 2018                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              mr shirwan karim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W McCready, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Sharkett of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on  17
    July 2017 dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  respondent
    dated 23 May 2017 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The appellant's written grounds contend that the  judge  erred  firstly
    by making a finding without any evidential basis that the appellant had
    lived in the IKR (either in Makhmour or in Jastan).   Compounding  this
    error, it was argued that the judge did not raise this issue  with  the
    appellant or his representative  to  afford  them  the  opportunity  to
    submit or give evidence in the matter.  The appellant's  second  ground
    alleges that the judge failed to  make  findings  of  fact  as  to  the
    genuineness or otherwise of the two identity documents produced by  the
    appellant to the respondent (and which the  respondent  concluded  were
    counterfeit).  Ground  3  focuses  on  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant originates from Gwer which the respondent accepts is  in  the
    Ninewah province of Iraq, i.e. Central  Iraq,  not  the  IKR.   It  was
    submitted that the appellant could not be returned to Erbil.  The judge
    was also said to have failed to have proper regard to and/or to  follow
    the country guidance of AA (Iraq) [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  Further, it
    was submitted that (in the alternative to ground 3) the judge failed to
    make a proper assessment of the reasonableness of relocation to the IKR
    or the practicality of travel from Baghdad to Erbil.

3.   I am grateful to Mr McCready and Mr McVeety for their submissions.

4.   In addressing the grounds, I  would  first  of  all  observe  that  the
    appellant was cross-examined both about where he was born and where  he
    had lived and both representatives were  afforded  the  opportunity  to
    make submissions on both these matters.   I  am  quite  satisfied  that
    there was no procedural unfairness on the part of the judge in  dealing
    with this issue.

5.   The second observation is that both parties agree that the  judge  made
    at least one incorrect factual finding, in  particular  the  judge  was
    incorrect to find that Jastan was in the Erbil governorate  (para  55).
    Jastan as a matter of fact is not in the Erbil governorate or  anywhere
    in the IKR.

6.   The next important matter is that the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal
    are somewhat  equivocal  about  the  appellant's  position  as  regards
    whether the two identity documents he  had  produced  when  he  claimed
    asylum were genuine.  At para 9 they contend that if  the  judge  found
    these documents reliable, then

         "This was a matter in  the  Appellant's  favour  in  assessing  his
         credibility in the round, and ought to have been taken into account
         when determining if his account of events leading to him  to  leave
         Iraq was reasonably likely to be true".


7.   At para 65  the  judge  records  the  submissions  of  the  appellant's
    representative that "the Appellant seeks to wholly rely on the identity
    documents he has submitted as genuine, despite they having  been  found
    not to be so by the Respondent".  However, ground 10  goes  on  to  say
    that if on the other hand the documents were not reliable,  that  could
    be said to assist the appellant's return to Iraq.

8.   Having considered the competing submissions, I am  persuaded  that  the
    judge materially erred in law.

9.   I concur with the grounds that the judge failed to make clear  findings
    on the identity documents.  These documents stated that  the  appellant
    was born in Erbil.  In his  witness  statement  and  oral  evidence  he
    denied this and the  respondent  for  her  part  did  not  resile  from
    considering that these documents were counterfeit.  Instead of making a
    finding on the issue the judge held at 66 that:

         "The documents provided show the Appellant and his parents to  have
         been born in Erbil.  It is the Appellant's evidence  that  this  is
         for political reasons only because he comes from a  disputed  area.
         However, this does not detract from the fact  that  Kurdistan  have
         registered the Appellant and his family  as  having  been  born  in
         Erbil so even if Iraq do not accept that Gwer belongs to Kurdistan,
         the Kurdistan government clearly considers that it does.   If  that
         is the case and the Appellant's nationality can be  confirmed  then
         according to objective evidence he will be able to return to  Erbil
         airport."

10.  The difficulty with that reasoning  is  that  it  assumed  without  any
    apparent evidential basis  that  the  documents  would  be  treated  as
    genuine by the Kurdistan authorities.  The respondent's contention  was
    that these documents were counterfeit.  If they were, then it is a real
    possibility that the Kurdistan authorities would know this.

11.  The matter of the  reliability  of  these  documents  is  really  quite
    central to the case.  If (as the appellant claimed in his SEF  and  his
    representative contended at  the  hearing  before  the  FtT)  they  are
    genuine, then his asylum appeal looks tenuous because he will  be  able
    to return directly to Erbil and any issues of possible risks in Central
    Iraq will be irrelevant.   The  appellant  may  have  great  difficulty
    establishing  that  return  to  Erbil  would  be   either   unsafe   or
    unreasonable.  If he originates from Erbil, he will not need a sponsor.
     If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  appellant  is  to  be  considered  as
    originating in an area outside the IKR, then  any  judge  deciding  the
    appeal would have to assess  the  case  by  reference  to  the  country
    guidance set out in AA - something Judge Sharkett clearly did not do.

12.  In such circumstances, I see no alternative to the case being  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal (not before Judge Sharkett).  No findings of
    fact can be preserved.

13.  Because the next Tribunal will be  having  to  assess  the  appellant's
    appeal ex nunc in the light of the latest country guidance and  country
    information, it  would  be  inappropriate  to  set  strict  directions.
    However, the following suggestions may or may not assist.

14.  I suggest that the next Tribunal judge first makes  a  decision,  based
    on all the evidence, as to whether the appellant originated from  Erbil
    (as stated in the two  identity  documents  and  as  submitted  by  the
    appellant's representative  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Sharkett).
    Erbil is in the IKR.

15.  If the judge finds the appellant does originate from  Erbil,  then  the
    judge should go on to decide whether return to Erbil  would  be  either
    unsafe or unduly harsh for the appellant.  If the judge  were  to  find
    that return to Erbil would be both safe and reasonable, the appellant's
    appeal should be dismissed.

16.  If, however the judge finds that the appellant did not  originate  from
    Erbil or anywhere else in the IKR, then the judge  will  need  to  make
    findings on where the appellant's home area is.  Although it will be  a
    matter for the next judge,  it  may  be  that  in  this  context  Judge
    Sharkett's finding that he "lived" [not the same as where he originated
    from] in Gwer is capable of being adopted with the  agreement  of  both
    parties.  For the avoidance of doubt, both parties agree that Gwer (and
    indeed Makhmour and Jastan) is not in the IKR.  On  the  basis  of  the
    next judge's finding on where the appellant's home area is, he  or  she
    will first need to establish whether that area  is  still  a  contested
    unsafe area or one that would give rise to a real risk of serious  harm
    if the appellant were to return there.

17.  If the judge concludes that  the  appellant's  home  area  is  still  a
    contested/unsafe area, then the judge will need  to  go  on  to  assess
    whether he would have available a viable option of internal  relocation
    either to Baghdad or to the IKR - and should do  so  applying  Tribunal
    country guidance in place at the date of hearing.

Notice of Decision

18.  For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted  to  the  FtT  (not  before  Judge  Sharkett).  No
    findings of fact are preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 3 May 2018
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

