
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05587/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th October 2018                          |On 19th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [A N]
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Perry, promulgated on 29th December 2017, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 13th December 2017.  In the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  [~]
    1997.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  1st
    June 2017, refusing his claim to asylum  and  humanitarian  protection,
    pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that his family supplied parts to
    foreign armies such  that  he  is  now  targeted  for  his  refusal  to
    volunteer for a suicide attack on behalf  of  the  Appellant.   He  had
    supported western occupation and is at risk on return.  He is  also  at
    risk  from  Massod's  uncle,  who  works  for  the  Government  and  is
    influential; Massod was one of the persons that he was travelling  with
    in a car who was killed following an incident when he was targeted.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge accepted that the Appellant was traumatised when he  came  to
    the UK and that this had continued for some time until after a  suicide
    attack in  2016.   However,  he  had  then  converted  to  Christianity
    attending the Oasis Church, which had stabilised  his  condition.   The
    judge had evidence  from  Pastor  [H]  confirming  that  the  Appellant
    started attending the Oasis Church on 5th March  2017,  and  there  was
    also evidence from [BJ], who was  a  regular  attender  at  the  church
    (paragraph 13).  The judge, however, did not proceed  to  explain  what
    view he took of these two church witnesses who had provided evidence on
    behalf of the Appellant.

 5. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed for reasons given  by  the  judge,
    particularly,  the  Appellant's  failure  to  provide  a  chronological
    account of the events that led him to leave Afghanistan (paragraph 26).



Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge has simply not referred
    to the evidence that the Appellant was a  genuine  Christian  from  the
    church witnesses.  Further, he had  made  unsafe  credibility  findings
    with regard to the historic account given by  the  Appellant.   It  was
    also suggested that the judge had failed to properly assess the risk to
    the Appellant based upon his sur place activities in the UK.

 7. On 22nd January 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the  Tribunal
    on the basis that the judge had failed to give reasons for disregarding
    the evidence from two witnesses (at paragraph 13) from the  church  who
    had attended to give evidence on the Appellant's  behalf.   Also  there
    was evidence of the Appellant's conversion, in terms of  the  posts  on
    Facebook, which had not been properly evaluated.





Submissions

 8. In the hearing before me on 29th October 2018, Mr Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, took  the  opportunity  to
    speak first, and stated that he would have to concede that there was an
    error of law in the judge's determination, notwithstanding the Rule  24
    response that had been furnished  by  the  Respondent  because  of  the
    failure by the judge to explain how he viewed  the  evidence  from  the
    church  witnesses,  who  vouched  for  the  Appellant's  conversion  to
    Christianity.  The judge did not explain what weight  he  gave  to  the
    evidence of  these  witnesses.   This  was  the  centre  plank  in  the
    Appellant's claim and the failure to address the issue raised  in  this
    regard was an error.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied, given  the  concession  made  by  Mr  Mills,  which  is
    unopposed by Mr Holmes on behalf of the Appellant, that the decision of
    the judge involved the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law  (see
    Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision.



10. My reasons are those given by Mr Mills, namely, that the  judge,  in  a
    decision that is otherwise careful and meticulous in its detail,  fails
    to address what weight is given to the evidence of [RH], the pastor  of
    the church, that the Appellant attends, and  [BJ],  who  is  a  regular
    attender of that church.  I come to this conclusion reluctantly  given
    the otherwise comprehensive reasons given by the  judge  for  rejecting
    the appeal.  The judge in fact, even  gives  credit  to  the  Appellant
    where this is due, making no adverse credibility findings  against  him
    (see paragraph 29).  He does expressly refer to the letter from  Pastor
    [H], highlighting the precise nature of the evidence, namely, that  the
    Appellant was baptised on 14th May 2017, and that  the  Appellant  had
    attended the Oasis Church prior to that once a day (see paragraph  32).



11. However, what the judge did not do, was to explain what weight would be
    attached to this evidence.  This is notwithstanding the criticism  that
    the judge has to make himself of the Appellant,  namely,  that  it  was
    significant that the Appellant gave no day-to-day  detail  of  how  his
    life had been changed by a conversion other than to  say  that  it  had
    helped his mental wellbeing (paragraph 32).  Also the judge  was  right
    to have pointed out that the Appellant only had  a  limited  number  of
    followers on Facebook, such that it was incumbent upon him  to  explain
    why in those circumstances, having Facebook posts, would place  him  at
    risk in Afghanistan by bringing him  to  the  notice  of  people  there
    (paragraph 34).  All of this, careful as it is in its analysis  of  the
    evidence before the Tribunal, does not compensate for the absence of  a
    decision on how the judge had treated the evidence given by Pastor  [H]
    and by [BJ].

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge Perry,  pursuant
    to practice statement 7.2A because the nature of any fact-finding  that
    has been undertaken is such as to not comply with the  requirements  of
    procedural fairness and the overriding principle.

13. An anonymity direction is made.

14. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018


