
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05330/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2021                  |On 04 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    H A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of Iraq, aged 32.  His wife and  son
    are dependants on his claim.  He and his wife now also have a daughter.

 2. The appellant claimed to be at risk from (a) his wife's cousin (M)  who
    had wanted to  marry  her,  and  who  is  a  member  of  the  Kurdistan
    Democratic Party (KDP), and (b) the general situation in his area.

 3. The respondent refused his claim by a letter dated 10  April  2018,  on
    the view that apart from his nationality and ethnicity, his account was
    not credible, and that even if there were difficulties in his area,  he
    could return to Erbil.

 4. Designated Judge Murray dismissed the appellant's appeal by a  decision
    promulgated on 11 March 2019, concluding  at  [58]  that  there  is  no
    credibility in the claim, and the appellant is from Erbil.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT, on grounds  framed
    mainly in terms of the FtT applying too high a standard of proof.   The
    FtT and the UT refused permission.

 6. The appellant petitioned the Court  of  Session.   By  an  interlocutor
    dated 3 March 2020, the Court reduced the decision of the UT  (refusing
    permission) in terms of the parties' joint minute.  On 23  March  2020,
    the UT granted permission, in that light.

 7. The appellant filed quite extensive written  submissions.   These  cite
    the material part of the joint minute, as follows:

         The parties are agreed that the UT arguably erred in law in:

         Holding in its [refusal  of  permission]  that  there  was  no  ...
         arguable ... error ... relative to the FtT's treatment of the issue
         [at [15] - [16] of the petition]  ...  The  FtT  erred  in  law  in
         placing weight upon the [appellant's] failure to mention the attack
         at the market in his screening interview ... without addressing the
         circumstances in which the screening interview took place (at  1:30
         am immediately following ... having disembarked from a lorry in the
         UK with his wife and child)  and  the  request  to  provide  "brief
         details" ... of his claim.  There is no indication in the  decision
         that  the  circumstances  of  the  ...  screening  interview   were
         considered.

         For the avoidance of doubt:

         (i) the [appellant] maintains all ... the grounds of appeal; and

         (ii) while accepting there was an error ... in the  terms  narrated
         above, the respondent does not accept that this  was  ...  material
         ... or that the challenge ... is otherwise well-founded.

 8. The submissions go on to deal with materiality, and with  other  errors
    alleged in the grounds.  They ask for a rehearing in the FtT.

 9. Mr Diwnycz, properly, drew attention to a decision I made in this  case
    at a previous stage, remitting  it  to  the  FtT;  but  representatives
    agreed that was no obstacle to my resolution of this appeal.

10. The main points which I noted from the submissions by  Mr  Caskie  were
    these:

      i) At [54] the judge said, "The appellant's evidence is not conclusive
         as he made no mention of the attack  at  market  at  his  screening
         interview".  The expression "not conclusive" was not a fatal error,
         but it was problematic, and could stand only if everything else  of
         relevance had been considered.

     ii) The circumstances of the interview had not been mentioned.

    iii) The appellant, in effect, was not believed because he complied with
         a request to give only brief details.  Similar errors  appeared  at
         [53].

     iv) The judge looked for corroboration of the rank of M  whereas  there
         was nothing to suggest that such evidence might be easy to  obtain.
         The opposite might be the case.

      v) The appellant  produced  strong  evidence  about  injuries  he  had
         sustained, injuries to his son, and court proceedings he instigated
         in Erbil, where his brother is a lawyer.  There was  no  reason  to
         doubt the  court  documents,  which  corroborated  the  appellant's
         account.  It  was  inconceivable  that  he  might  have  fabricated
         evidence in 2011 to use in a false claim, not made until the end of
         2017.

     vi) The judge identified a discrepancy between the  evidence  from  the
         appellant and from his wife, over whether threats continued  during
         a time  when  M  was  confined  to  a  wheelchair,  which  did  not
         accurately reflect their evidence.

    vii) The evidence, on proper scrutiny, was so strong that the UT  should
         substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

   viii) Alternatively, the case might be retained for re-making in  the  UT
         at a further hearing.

11. Mr Diwnycz submitted:

      i) It was for the judge to decide if the evidence of the appellant and
         his wife was probative.  She was entitled not to  be  impressed  by
         their evidence.  She gave legally sufficient reasons.

     ii) The medical evidence about the appellant and  his  son,  on  direct
         reference, was not strongly corroborative.  It did very  little  to
         advance the  claims.   It  was  doubtful  if  it  showed  that  the
         appellant had been shot, rather than injured  in  some  other  way;
         although shooting appeared to have been accepted.

    iii) The court documentation established nothing beyond a complaint made
         in 2011.  The appellant could have taken this further, particularly
         as his brother is a lawyer on the spot.

     iv) If the decision were to be set aside, the case required an entirely
         fresh hearing, which should be in the FtT.

12. Mr Caskie replied:

      i) The respondent's points about the medical and court evidence  might
         have been apt for the FtT but were not relevant to error of law.

     ii) Although Mr Diwnycz mentioned "redocumentation" issues,  this  case
         was not put on any such basis.

13. I reserved my decision.

14. Judges are entitled, with  appropriate  caution,  to  take  failure  to
    mention matters at screening interview as adverse  to  a  claim.   Each
    such instance turns ultimately on its own facts and circumstances.

15. In the present case, as well as the passage at [54], the judge said  at
    [53], "The appellant did not mention this  incident  in  his  screening
    interview although this  forms  an  extremely  important  part  of  his
    claim", and, "I do not believe this happened ... the fact this was  not
    mentioned  at  screening  interview  ...  means  that  the  appellant's
    credibility is lacking".

16. I was not taken directly to the interview record, but the relevant part
    appears to be at 4.1:

         Q.  Please BRIEFLY explain ALL of the reasons why you cannot return
         to your home country?

         A.  Problem with wife's paternal cousin.  We got  married  in  2011
         and he didn't like it and he shot me in the leg.  In 2013 we had  a
         child and he started to threaten me.

17. There is some tension between "briefly" and "all", both  emphasised  in
    the question, which looks for a very succinct and accurate reply.

18. The attack by vehicle on the appellant's wife, mother and  son  at  the
    market  was  an  important  part  of  the  account.   A   judge   might
    legitimately take absence of specification at screening interview as an
    adverse matter.  However, the judge's comments verge on  treating  this
    as conclusive, without reference to the particular circumstances of the
    interview (conceded by the respondent) and in absence of  any  specific
    self-direction.

19. I conclude that this was an error on a point of law,  on  a  matter  so
    central to the decision that it cannot stand.

20. The submissions for the appellant  do  not  disclose  a  case  of  such
    obvious strength that the UT should simply substitute a decision in his
    favour.

21. While it is unfortunate that the case is remitted for  a  second  time,
    the requirement is for an entirely fresh hearing, which is more apt for
    the FtT.

22. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The case is remitted for a fresh
    hearing, not before Judge Murray or Judge Kempton.

23. An anonymity direction remains in place.

        Hugh Macleman

      25 February 2021
      UT Judge Macleman



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.










