
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05495/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 April 2017                      |On 26 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     f d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


I make an order  under  rule  14(1)(b)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
This order applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Paul)  dismissing  his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision of 25  May  2016  refusing  his  application  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection.

Background.

2.   In brief outline the background to this  appeal  is  as  follows.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Albania  born  on  [  ]  2000.   On  his  own
    account, he left Albania on 15 November 2014 travelling  to  Montenegro
    where he remained until 30 November 2014.  He then travelled  by  lorry
    across Europe making an unlawful entry into the UK on 2 December  2014.
    He subsequently claimed asylum on 27 January 2015  when  the  screening
    interview took place.  There was a full  asylum  interview  on  29  May
    2015.  The appellant claimed asylum firstly on the basis that he was  a
    victim of trafficking, secondly because of his sexual orientation as  a
    homosexual, thirdly because he was in fear from his family and fourthly
    because of Jevg ethnicity.

3.   On 29 May 2015 a referral was made to the competent authority  to  make
    a decision on whether there were reasonable grounds to believe that  he
    had been a victim of trafficking but on 18 February 2016 the  competent
    authority concluded that the appellant had not established such grounds
    for believing that he had been trafficked either  for  the  purpose  of
    organ harvesting or for sexual exploitation.

4.   The respondent then considered the appellant's claim for  asylum.   His
    identity and nationality was accepted but the respondent did not accept
    that he was of Jevg ethnicity or that he would be at  risk  because  of
    his sexual orientation.  The respondent also rejected  the  appellant's
    claims that he would be at risk from his father because of  his  sexual
    orientation and  did  not  accept  that  he  had  been  the  victim  of
    trafficking as claimed.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   The appellant  appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  and  his
    appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 24  October  2016.   The
    judge summarised the appellant's account in [5]-[15] of  his  decision.
    The appellant said that he came from an area in the  north  of  Albania
    where strict Kanun law was practised.  His family moved to Tirana  when
    he was about 7 or 8 months old for economic reasons.  As his father was
    a Jevg he had difficulties finding  work.   The  Jevg  are  treated  as
    belonging to a gypsy tribe  and  as  a  result,  they  lived  in  total
    isolation from other families.  He said that he had  suffered  constant
    abuse from ethnic Albanians and  this  continued  at  school  where  he
    suffered discrimination from both classmates and teachers.

6.   When he was 13  the  appellant  said  that  he  realised  that  he  was
    homosexual revealing this to his friends and then his class, school and
    community found out.  In November 2014 he was confronted by his  father
    and was told that according to Kanun law he was  expected  to  marry  a
    woman and that, if he did not  do  so,  he  would  kill  him.   He  was
    subsequently beaten and his father said that, if he did not change,  he
    would be expelled from home.

7.   The appellant then met another person, G, from his community, who  said
    the appellant could shelter with him for a few days and then  he  would
    take him to Durres.  While staying at G's house  he  was  kidnapped  by
    Albanian men and was told that he  would  be  sold  to  people  outside
    Albania.  He suffered further abuse and was sexually molested.   On  15
    November 2014 there was a knock  on  the  door  and  a  man  introduced
    himself as the father of another friend, A.  He was able to leave  with
    A's father who told him there had been  a  gun  fight  outside  between
    criminal gangs.  He helped him leave Albania for Montenegro.

8.    The  appellant  was  asked  in  cross-examination  about   information
    obtained by the British Embassy which indicated that the appellant  had
    used his passport to travel to Italy.  He said that his passport, which
    he had had with him when he left home, had  been  taken  by  the  gang.
    When he left Albania, he did not have his  passport  but  when  it  was
    taken from him, he had been given a copy.

9.   The judge, however, did not find the account given by the appellant  to
    be credible.  He  set  out  his  reasons  in  [28]-[39].   He  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had given a truthful account  about  being
    victimised and brutalised while growing up in  Tirana.   He  considered
    that his account that he was homosexual had been created to provide the
    pretext  for  the  confrontation  with  his  father  in  November  2014
    prompting his flight from the family  home.   He  did  not  accept  the
    circumstances in which the appellant had left Albania or  that  he  had
    been the victim of a  criminal  gang.   The  judge  said  that  he  was
    satisfied that the appellant's journey to the UK was not as a young 14-
    year old fleeing on his own through Montenegro but was the result of  a
    much more carefully planned trip.

The Grounds and Submissions.

10.  In his grounds the appellant argues  that  the  judge  gave  inadequate
    reasons for his decision.  Firstly, it is argued that at [29] the judge
    gave inadequate reasons for rejecting his claim to be homosexual.   The
    main reason given appeared to be the fact that he came  from  a  highly
    traditional community but the judge failed to explain why  it  was  not
    credible that someone coming from such a community could be homosexual.
     Mr Gilbert submitted that whilst the grounds relied on  inadequacy  of
    reasons, the judge's finding on this issue amounted  to  irrationality.
    He appeared to be relying on nurture rather than nature to explain  why
    he did not find that the appellant was homosexual.  Mr Clarke submitted
    that the judge had not relied solely on the fact that the appellant was
    from a highly traditional community but was making the  point  that  it
    was right to take into account the community in which the appellant was
    living.  When the evidence was looked at as a whole and  in  particular
    the appellant's answers at interview at Q129 and  Q200-203,  the  judge
    was entitled to reject  the  evidence  that  on  the  basis  simply  of
    rumours, there had been a confrontation between the appellant  and  his
    father.

11.  Secondly, it is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  by  saying  that  the
    circumstances in which G appeared to befriend the appellant but in fact
    tricked him into becoming ensnared with a criminal gang was  incredible
    and that the judge had stated a conclusion but not  given  the  reasons
    for that conclusion.  Mr Gilbert submitted that the judge had not  made
    it clear whether he was looking at the evidence as a whole from a wider
    perspective but if he had simply picked  up  one  particular  incident,
    there was an onus on him to explain why he  regarded  that  account  as
    incredible.  Mr Clarke said that the judge had also said in  [30]  that
    it was an odd thing for a 14-year old boy, who simply could not stay at
    home because of parental pressure, to take his passport  with  him  and
    that this was a comment properly open to him.

12.  Thirdly, it is argued that the judge erred at [31] when he  found  that
    the simple manner by which the appellant had been able to escape and be
    taken to Montenegro was not credible  and  was  inconsistent  with  his
    account that he had been detained and carefully guarded by a  gang  and
    had left Albania with the assistance of an agent.  It is further argued
    that the judge failed to take account of the appellant's evidence about
    how he escaped.  His account was that the gang who  had  kidnapped  him
    were involved in a gun fight and fled.  Mr Clarke  submitted  that  the
    judge's comments were fair.  He was entitled to comment on the apparent
    relative ease of the appellant being able to escape from the  gang  and
    leave Albania and to reject the evidence that  there  had  been  a  gun
    fight.  These findings could not be categorised as irrational.

13.  Fourthly, it is argued that in [32] the judge was wrong to say that  it
    was  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  assertion  in  his   witness
    statement that he left Albania with the help of an agent  when  he  had
    said that his departure was facilitated by A's father and  that  begged
    the question of how a 14 year old would have the wherewithal to arrange
    such finance.

14.  Mr Gilbert argued that it was difficult to see what  the  inconsistency
    was.  The appellant had been able to secure his release by  people  who
    were not connected to the trafficking gang and, in any  event,  it  was
    wrong to suggest that there necessarily had to be complete  consistency
    in an account.  The question of paying the agent was  not  put  to  the
    appellant and an adverse inference should not have been drawn  in  such
    circumstances.  Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant's account of his
    escape had to be looked at in the context of the fact  that  there  was
    evidence that his passport had been used to travel to Italy.  The judge
    was entitled in the light of that evidence to reject what the appellant
    said about how he had left Albania.

15.  Fifthly, it is argued that at [33] the judge failed  to  give  a  clear
    explanation for rejecting the appellant's explanation of  how  he  left
    Albania or why he commented that it made no sense for his  passport  to
    be taken away from him by the gang or why he had been given a copy.  Mr
    Gilbert submitted that it was unclear why  this  made  no  sense.   The
    passport may well be a valuable piece of property  for  the  gang.   Mr
    Clarke argued that the judge was entitled to regard this as a troubling
    point amongst many others.  It added to  the  overall  picture  of  the
    problematic issues in the evidence which the judge was entitled to take
    into account.

16.  The final ground takes issue with the judge's comment in [35]  when  he
    described the evidence from a witness who has taught the  appellant  in
    the UK as most  telling.   She  had  described  him  as  motivated  and
    exceeding all expectations and  generally  described  his  conduct  and
    behaviour as exemplary with a great appetite for learning.  It was  her
    view that the appellant  had  had  the  benefit  of  several  years  of
    disciplined education but the judge commented that this was  completely
    inconsistent with the explanation he gave of his own  life  growing  up
    with relatively limited and brutal schooling.  It is  argued  that  the
    appellant had the benefit of several years of education in Albania  and
    the evidence of his school attendance  was  consistent  with  the  view
    expressed by his teacher.  Mr Gilbert submitted that  this  was  not  a
    case of the appellant not having an education but a patchy education in
    difficult  circumstances.   Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the  disparity
    between the appellant's own evidence about his education set out in the
    interview (Q88-90) and his own witness statement at [11] was such  that
    there was a proper basis for the judge's comment.

Consideration of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

17.  I must consider whether the judge erred in law  in  his  assessment  of
    credibility such that the decision should be set  aside.   The  grounds
    are phrased primarily as a reasons challenge, arguing  that  the  judge
    gave inadequate reasons for  his  decision  and  also  that  he  failed
    properly to consider aspects of the appellant's evidence.   Mr  Gilbert
    submitted that, in relation to the judge's reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim to be homosexual, the judge's finding could  properly
    be categorised as irrational.  The thrust of Mr Clarke's submission was
    that the judge had  reached  findings  properly  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence and that when the determination was read as a  whole,  it  was
    clear why he had not accepted the appellant's account.

18.  I am not satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  law  for  the  following
    reasons.  So far as the first ground is concerned I  am  not  satisfied
    that the judge relied simply on the fact that the appellant was from  a
    highly traditional community as the basis for rejecting his claim about
    his sexuality.  Before assessing the appellant's credibility, the judge
    reminded himself of the fact that when the appellant travelled  to  the
    UK he was  a  boy  of  approximately  14�  and  that  if  he  travelled
    effectively as an unaccompanied minor it must have  been  an  extremely
    traumatic experience.  He said that he was subjecting  the  account  to
    scrutiny consistent with the appellant's age.  There is  no  reason  to
    believe that this was not the approach in fact taken by the judge.

19.  His  comment  about  the  appellant  living  in  a  highly  traditional
    community was in the context of the disclosure of his claimed sexuality
    as the trigger for his alienation from  his  family.   The  judge  said
    that, quite apart from the appellant's relative  youth  and  immaturity
    which would mean that he was not obviously sexually active, account had
    to be taken of the community in which he was living and that it  was  a
    traditional community and that traditional peer group  pressures  would
    dictate the way in which young people would grow up.  That was a factor
    the judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  but  it  was  not  a
    determinative factor and I am satisfied that the judge did not treat it
    as such.  On the issue of whether the judge was looking at the evidence
    as a whole, I  am  satisfied  that  he  did  not  compartmentalise  the
    evidence  but  considered  it  in  its  entirety.   The  fact  that  he
    inevitably dealt in turn with a number  of  different  aspects  of  the
    evidence does not mean that he was treating each aspect in isolation.

20.  In [30] the judge commented that it seemed an odd thing for a  14  year
    old boy who could not stay at home because of parental pressure to take
    his passport with him at the time and that the circumstances in which G
    appeared to befriend him and then trick him into becoming ensnared with
    a criminal gang were incredible.  The judge  did  not  err  in  law  by
    failing to give further reasons for those comments. They were  properly
    open to the judge and must be read in the context of the evidence as  a
    whole.

21.  Indeed, at [31] the  judge  went  on  to  say  that  "furthermore"  the
    circumstances in which the appellant  left  Albania  were  inconsistent
    with the account that he had been detained and carefully guarded  by  a
    criminal gang.  It was the appellant's evidence that he and other  boys
    had been kept in a house by men with guns who said that if they did not
    obey their orders, they would be killed.  It was then his evidence that
    on 15 November 2014 there had been a knock at the door and  A's  father
    had been able to leave with both him and A, they  had  been  told  that
    there was a gun fight outside the house  between  the  gangs  and  they
    should leave before the police arrived as A's father did not trust  the
    police, saying they were corrupt.  The judge was entitled to comment on
    what he described as the simple manner of the appellant's  escape  from
    the gang.

22.  I am also satisfied that he was entitled to  comment  at  [32]  on  the
    inconsistency in the appellant's evidence as to whether he left Albania
    with the help of an agent or whether it was facilitated by A's  father.
    This was an issue of fact for the  judge  to  resolve.   There  was  an
    inconsistency and it was for the judge to decide what inference to draw
    in the light of the evidence as a whole. It  was  argued  that  as  the
    appellant had not been asked about the issue of paying  the  agent,  no
    adverse inference should be drawn from this aspect of the evidence  but
    I am not satisfied that there is any substance in this submission.  The
    issues were clear and the fact that this matter was not raised in cross-
    examination does not without more support an argument  that  there  was
    any procedural unfairness.

23.  The judge said at [33] that he was satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    crossed into Italy in the way recorded by the British Embassy.  This is
    a reference to the evidence that,  following  inquiries,  it  had  been
    confirmed that the appellant's passport had been used to make a  lawful
    exit from Albania to Italy.  In reaching this decision  the  judge  was
    entitled to comment that it did not make sense that  if  the  appellant
    was going to be smuggled out of the country in any event, there was  no
    reason, if his original passport was taken from  him,  for  him  to  be
    given a copy.

24.  Finally, I am satisfied that it was open to the judge, in the light  of
    the evidence from the appellant's  teacher  that  his  performance  and
    progress had been such that it was her view that  he  had  had  a  good
    educational background based  on  a  number  of  years  of  disciplined
    education, to find at [35] that this was completely  inconsistent  with
    the appellant's own account of his  life  growing  up  with  relatively
    limited and brutal schooling.

25.  In summary, I am satisfied that the grounds are an attempt  to  re-open
    and re-argue issues of fact.  It was  for  the  judge  to  decide  what
    weight to give to the evidence and what inferences  could  properly  be
    drawn from it.  When the decision is read as a whole, it is  clear  why
    the judge did not accept the appellant's evidence.   He  explained  why
    numerous aspects of his account gave him cause for concern. When taking
    these factors together, it was open to him for the reasons he  gave  to
    reach a finding that the appellant's account was not  credible.   I  am
    therefore not satisfied that the judge erred in law in  his  assessment
    of credibility and, in the circumstances of this  appeal,  it  followed
    that there was no factual basis on  which  a  claim  for  international
    protection could succeed.

Decision

26.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.  In the light of the  appellant's  age  and
    the issues raised in this appeal I am satisfied that this is  a  proper
    case for the decision to be anonymised and I  have  made  an  anonymity
    order accordingly.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 22 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




