
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05654/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th January 2017                          |On 08 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                    s h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan  whose  appeal  against  the
    refusal of his asylum and human rights claim was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Burns in a decision  promulgated  on  20th  October
    2016.

 2. The judge gave a  number  of  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal  on
    credibility  concluding  that  the  account  was  "fabricated  in   its
    entirety" (paragraph 103).

 3. The grounds of  application  note  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    erroneously claimed that the Appellant had been in the UK for two years
    before  claiming  asylum  and  on  that  basis  had  claimed  that  the
    Appellant's credibility was undermined.  The judge had found  that  the
    two year mistake was only a typographical error.  The grounds  question
    whether the writer of the refusal letter was  not  more  inclined  than
    otherwise to  find  the  Appellant  untrustworthy.   In  terms  of  the
    Appellant not claiming asylum before he arrived here the  decision  did
    not disclose any consideration of whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant from Afghanistan to know of the requirement  under
    the Dublin Agreement.

 4. Ground 5.(i) states that there was no reason why either the  police  or
    the family would have been aware that  one  of  the  Taliban  had  been
    killed until the following morning - contrary to the judge's  findings.
    Further grounds are mentioned.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson
    considered the grounds were arguable and gave permission to appeal in a
    note dated 15th November 2016.

 5. A Rule 24 notice was lodged stating that the judge  had  made  reasoned
    credibility findings  which  were  open  to  her  and  there  had  been
    discrepant evidence with regard to whether the Appellant  had  gone  to
    Commander Sarwar's house.  Furthermore  there  was  delay  in  claiming
    asylum and reliance could not be placed on the  documents  provided  as
    per Tanveer Ahmed principles.

 6. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 7. For the Appellant Ms Hulse submitted that the two year delay point  was
    the kernel of the case and such an erroneous finding  had  tainted  the
    Secretary of State's reasoning and indeed the judge's.

 8. Given that there was no merit in this point I have to say I gave  short
    thrift to it pointing out that the judge (paragraph 77) had found there
    was not a delay in claiming and the  Appellant's  credibility  was  not
    thus damaged.  Ms Hulse was also critical of  the  judge  giving  "some
    limited  weight"  to  Section  8(4)  of  the  Asylum  and   Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 but it seems to me there is  no
    merit to this criticism either.  In terms of  the  Act  the  judge  was
    bound to consider the terms of Section 8(4) and cannot be  faulted  for
    giving "some limited weight" to it.

 9. I alerted Ms Hulse that what was of more concern  was the  findings  at
    paragraph 88 and 89 that there was an  inconsistency  in  the  evidence
    which damaged the Appellant's credibility in relation to the fact  that
    his mother would have known that one of the Taliban  had  been  shot  -
    duly challenged in the grounds.

10.  Ms  Hulse  submitted   that   the   Appellant   had   been   perfectly
    straightforward in recognising the document referred to in paragraph 83
    of the judge's decision although appeared  to  accept  that  the  judge
    cannot be faulted in saying that while this did not go to the  core  of
    his  claim  it  went  "some  small  way"  to  undermining  his  general
    credibility as to the truthfulness of his  evidence.   In  response  to
    submissions from Mr Singh Ms Hulse submitted the judge had gone too far
    in her assessment in paragraph  99  it  being  said  that  it  was  not
    credible the guard would release the Appellant as he would no doubt  be
    risking his own life.  Ms Hulse submitted that this took no account  of
    the fact that there were tribal allegiances in Afghanistan.

11. In all the circumstances I was invited to conclude  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the judge's decision, set that decision aside,
    and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. For the Secretary State Mr Singh relied on the terms  of  the  Rule  24
    notice.  The judge had acknowledged that the Appellant had not  delayed
    claiming asylum for two years.  Nothing turned on  that  anymore.   The
    judge had been entitled to conclude that the fact that he  was  missing
    for some eight months or more and that his  family  were  not  targeted
    during his absence did not sit well with the background  evidence.   If
    there was an error at paragraphs 88 and 89  about  whether  his  mother
    should have known what was going on since she was there the  error  was
    not material having regard  to  the  overall  findings.   As  such  the
    decision should stand.

13. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

14. While the Secretary of State's view on the Appellant's credibility  may
    have been tainted by the finding that there was a two year delay in the
    Appellant claiming asylum the same cannot be said for the judge who was
    quite emphatic that there was no such delay in claiming.  As the  judge
    put  it  "the  Appellant's  credibility  was  not  thus  damaged"  (see
    paragraph 77 of the decision).  The judge was careful  in  her  use  of
    language indicating that "some limited weight" should be applied  under
    the Section 8(4) point and that the core of his claim  was  reduced  in
    some "small way" (paragraph 83).

15. It is plain that  the  Appellant's  account  was  a  difficult  one  to
    properly assess given the manner in which it was  given.   One  of  the
    problems is the way  the  interview  was  conducted  from  question  47
    onwards.  The Appellant is asked a question and then spends two  and  a
    half pages answering it - apparently without any interruption from  the
    interviewer.  The judge was then not assisted by the witness  statement
    that the Appellant lodged before her in that this deals only  with  the
    terms of the Home Office refusal letter.  It is unclear why  the  terms
    of the witness statement are so limited.  The lack of  a  full  witness
    statement did not assist the judge in assessing the credibility of  the
    Appellant.  Much of the judge's decision is based on the implausibility
    of the Appellant's account but it is not easy to see how those  alleged
    implausibilities entitled the  judge  to  conclude  that  his  detailed
    account was "fabricated in its entirety" (paragraph 103).

16. One of the sections referred to in the judge's decision  is  the  fight
    between the Taliban and the police commencing at paragraph 87 with  the
    conclusion in paragraph 89  that  the  inconsistency  in  the  evidence
    damaged  the  Appellant's  credibility.   It  seems  to  me  that  this
    conclusion is not justified on the basis of the evidence presented.  As
    the grounds put it there was no reason why either  the  police  or  the
    Appellant's mother would have been aware that one of  the  Taliban  had
    been killed until the following morning. While the  Appellant's  mother
    was "present" (paragraphs 88 and 89)  when  the  fight  broke  out  the
    evidence suggests she was only present in the sense that she was inside
    the house and would therefore not know that one of the Taliban had been
    shot.  It therefore seems that the judge erred in saying there  was  an
    inconsistency which damaged the Appellant's credibility. Looking at the
    decision as a whole this was a material  finding;  the  fact  that  the
    judge's reasoning on this point cannot stand  is  arguably  enough,  in
    itself, to be categorised as a material error of fact  which,  in  this
    case, translates to a material error of law.

17. The next section of the judge's decision is headed "Commander  Sarwar's
    house?"  This passage is not easy to follow.  It  was  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence that he did not go to Commander Sarwar's house  but  went
    to the outpost with him having initially said  that  he  went  "to  his
    house in Maidan Wardak".  The conclusion of  the  judge  was  that  the
    Appellant had changed his account but it  is  difficult  to  glean  the
    reasoning for this at paragraphs 90 to 94 inclusive. While it might  be
    said that the evidence is unclear that  is  not  the  same  at  all  in
    concluding that the Appellant had changed  his  account.  I  very  much
    doubt that this finding can be relied  upon.  As  indicated  above  the
    finding that the Appellant has fabricated the account in  its  entirety
    is not adequately  reasoned  and  judging  from  the  extensive  detail
    provided by the Appellant is highly likely to be wrong.

18. In my view, for the reasons stated, the decision of the  judge  is  not
    safe and cannot stand.

19. In these circumstances the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    therefore set aside in its entirety.  No  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are to stand.  Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and
    of Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact
    finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  a
    making of an error on a point of law.

21. I set aside the decision.

22. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
