






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05144/2019

                             THE IMMIGRTION ACTS

|Decision on the papers, At Field     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 28 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    I M C
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

UPON the Respondent having refused to grant the Appellant asylum on  15  May
2018

AND UPON First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands having dismissed his  subsequent
appeal in a decision promulgated on 19 August 2019

AND UPON the Appellant having appealed against this decision and  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Landes having granted him permission to appeal on  6  January
2020

AND UPON the Secretary of State responding to the grounds  of  appeal  under
Rule 24 on 31 January 2020 and stating that:

"The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application  for  permission
to appeal as it appears that a procedural error has occurred before the  FTT
in failing to take into account the appellant's  claimed  vulnerability  and
failing to adjourn the hearing. The tribunal is invited to remit the  matter
back to the FTT for a de novo hearing".

AND UPON the Appellant consenting on 13 February 2020 to  the  appeal  being
considered on the papers with a view to the appeal  being  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for an oral hearing

AND UPON the error of law hearing being listed  for  28  February  2020  but
being vacated

                               ANONYMITY ORDER

     Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI/2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or  any  form
    of publication thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  that
    Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, both parties.

1.   As both parties had consented to my hearing the appeal  on  the  papers
    with a view to remitting it to the First-tier  Tribunal,  I  considered
    the appeal under the powers deriving from Regulation 34 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, as amended.

2.   It was clear from the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands,
    promulgated on 19 August 2019, that despite  being  informed  that  the
    Appellant had been referred to Freedom from Torture for  an  assessment
    and for psychotherapy, he failed to treat the Appellant as a vulnerable
    witness and grant an adjournment in order for him to  instruct  further
    legal representation. This was an error of law and procedure.

3.   The Judge also proceeded in the absence  of  a  copy  of  the  Rule  35
    medical report mentioned in the Respondent's Bundle and which  was  the
    basis of the Appellant's release from immigration detention. This  also
    amounted to an error of law as it went directly to the question of  the
    Appellant's credibility.

4.   For these reasons and with the consent of both parties, I find that  it
    is in the interests of justice to remit this appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing  before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judges Rowlands and Landes.

5.   The Appellant should seek  time  and  permission  to  rely  on  further
    evidence from the First-tier Tribunal.

Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 28 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

