
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05619/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 January 2020                 |On 04 February 2020                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     KQ
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K J Wood of Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, because this is a protection claim.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge AJ Parker promulgated on 26 September 2019,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born  on  04/04/1987  and  is  an  Iraqi  Kurd  from
Kirkuk. On  26/05/2019  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge AJ Parker ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  19  December
2019 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliams granted permission  to  appeal  stating
inter alia

    "It is arguable that the Judge has conflated the appellant's home  area
    and areas to which he could relocate. It is arguable that the appellant
    is from Kirkuk, and that the issue was  whether  he  could  safely  and
    reasonably relocate to Baghdad or IKR. The Judge found  that  he  could
    reasonably relocate to IKR: however, he also says that he is a  Kurdish
    national and is most likely from Kurdistan region.

    The grounds are arguable."

The Hearing

5.    Mr Tan, for the respondent, told me that  this  appeal  is  no  longer
resisted. He told me that the Judge's consideration of  what  was  then  the
country guidance caselaw was muddled and unclear. He described the  decision
as "jumbled". He agreed that since this  decision  was  promulgated  Country
guidance has changed. He asked me to set the decision aside and  remit  this
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

6.    Mr Wood, for the appellant, agreed with  Mr  Tan  and  joined  in  his
motion to have the decision set aside and to remit this case to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Analysis

7.    The accepted facts in this case are set out by the  Judge  at  [9]  of
the decision. The accepted facts are that the appellant  is  an  Iraqi  Kurd
from Kirkuk, and that the appellant is a Sunni Muslim.

8.    The Judge's findings and reasons bear to be set out between  [16]  and
[46] of the decision. Between those paragraphs of  the  decision  the  Judge
does not make many findings of fact. Instead, the Judge  expresses  surprise
at certain aspects of the evidence, and summarises the submissions made.  At
[34] of the decision the Judge appears to  accept  the  appellant  does  not
have a CSID card.

9.    At [55] the Judge takes guidance from AA  (article  15  (c))  Iraq  CG
[2015] UKUT 544 (IAC). The country  guidance  that  was  relevant  when  the
Judge was writing the decision was AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and  AAH
(Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212.

10.   The decision is tainted by material errors  of  law.  The  Judge  took
guidance from the wrong country guidance case. The Judge appears  to  become
confused about the location of Kirkuk. The  Judge  confused  the  place  the
appellant would be returned to. The appellant will be returned  to  Baghdad.
The Judge did not consider  how  the  appellant  would  make  his  way  from
Baghdad to his hometown.

11.   Because the decision contains material errors of law, I set it  aside.
The appellant's case will have now have to be considered  in  light  of  the
guidance given  in the case of  SMO,  KSP  &IM  (Article  15  (c);  identity
documents)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  400  which  replaces  all  earlier   country
guidance. None of the findings of fact can stand.  I  cannot  substitute  my
own decision because a further fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

12.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

13.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

14.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Manchester
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge AJ Parker.

Decision

15.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

16.   I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated  on  26  September  2019.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.





Signed
                Date 31 January 2020
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
