
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05717/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2019                   |On 20 November 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     KA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan instructed by Fisher Stone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Dimnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Moxon promulgated on 8 July 2019 in which the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen  of  Senegal  born  on  10  October  1979,
        entered the United Kingdom on 21 March 2011 lawfully as  a  visitor
        with leave valid to 17 August 2011. The appellant claimed asylum on
        the basis of an alleged fear of her ex-husband and  her  family  in
        Senegal although before the Judge stated she no longer fears her ex-
        husband and that the only source of fear  was  on  account  of  her
        family intending to undertake FGM upon her daughters.
     3. The appellant's representative had withdrawn on 27 June  2019.  The
        Judge considered whether it was fair to proceed given the appellant
        was no longer represented but  for  the  reasons  set  out  at  [6]
        concluded that it was fair in the interests of justice  to  proceed
        without an adjournment.
     4. The Judge had the benefit of seeing and hearing the appellant  give
        oral  evidence  together  with  the  documentary  evidence  in  the
        appellant's appeal bundle which had been  prepared  by  the  former
        solicitors.
     5. The Judge notes at [22] that the material issue  to  be  determined
        was whether it was reasonable for  the  appellant  to  relocate  to
        Dakar. At [23] the Judge noted much of the appellant's evidence was
        accepted by the respondent which enhanced her credibility.
     6. There are however a number of aspects of  the  appellants  evidence
        that the Judge rejected. At [25]  the  appellants  claim  that  her
        brother had moved to Dakar was not accepted. The Judge in that same
        paragraph concludes  that  the  appellant  will  be  able  to  live
        without, attracting the attention of her family, in Dakar in  light
        of it being a large city with a population of 2.4 million people.
     7. At [27 - 28] the Judge writes:


             27.  I also reject her account in oral  evidence  that  rather
                  than relocate to Dakar she would voluntarily surrender her
                  daughters to her family to have FGM undertaken upon  them.
                  I note  that  she  has  not  stated  this  in  her  asylum
                  interview or her witness statement and given  her  efforts
                  to flee her family I find it implausible  that  she  would
                  allow FGM to be undertaken upon her  children.  I  do  not
                  believe that she will be pressured to have FGM  undertaken
                  upon her children by anyone outside of her family in Dakar
                  and note  the  objective  evidence,  which  has  not  been
                  adequately rebutted, as to the far lower level of  FGM  in
                  that area then in the appellant's home area.


             28.  Whilst I  accept  that  the  Appellant  would  return  to
                  Senegal as  a  single  mother  who  fears  her  family,  I
                  nevertheless find is a  fact  that  she  could  reasonably
                  relocate to Dakar could  obtain  work  and  could  support
                  herself and her  children  and  that  she  would  be  both
                  willing and able to protect them from mutilation.


     8. Thereafter the Judge considered whether the appellant was  entitled
        to a grant of Humanitarian Protection but found she was not on  the
        basis the appellant had failed to make out she faced a real risk of
        serious harm on return. The claim pursuant to article 2 and 3  ECHR
        fell with the protection claim. In relation to the article  8  ECHR
        aspect the Judge finds at [32 - 33]:


             32.  Whilst the Appellant asserts family  life  with  her  two
                  younger children in the United Kingdom, this would not  be
                  interfered with by removal, as they have no status in  the
                  United Kingdom and so would travel to Senegal with her. It
                  would not interfere with her family life  with  her  older
                  daughter, who in any  event  lives  in  a  third  country.
                  Removal will be lawful and would be in the public interest
                  in light of immigration control and  the  financial  well-
                  being of the United Kingdom. Whilst I remind  myself  that
                  the best interests of  the  children  must  be  a  primary
                  consideration, their age is such that their best interests
                  are met by remaining with their mother regardless of which
                  country that may be. There are only three years of age.  I
                  have found as a fact that they would not  be  at  risk  in
                  Senegal. I have found as a fact that the Appellant will be
                  able to obtain work and will be able to care  and  support
                  them. There is no evidence before me that they  could  not
                  be suitably educated in Senegal or that there is a lack of
                  medical treatment available for any needs they may have.


             33.  The Appellant speaks  English.  She  is  not  financially
                  independent. The children are not qualifying children  nor
                  are they British citizens. Any private life was  developed
                  whilst the appellant's immigration status  in  the  United
                  Kingdom was at best a precarious.


     9. The Judge finds the respondent's decision proportionate.
    10. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  the  operative  part  of
        which is in the following terms:


             2.   The  grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  Judge  acted
                  unfairly in proceeding with the appeal  hearing  when  the
                  appellant had requested an interpreter in the language she
                  understood and was comfortable with. That the Judge  acted
                  unfairly in  not  adjourning  the  appeal  to  enable  the
                  appellant to be legally represented as her  representative
                  had decided a few days before the  hearing  to  no  longer
                  represent her and that the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  her
                  assessment of whether the appellant was able  to  relocate
                  to Dakar.


             3.   It is arguable that there  could  have  been  a  material
                  difference to the outcome or fairness of  the  proceedings
                  if the appellant had had a court-appointed interpreter  in
                  the language she was comfortable with. The  other  grounds
                  are arguable. Permission is granted.



Error of law


    11. The Judge has helpfully provided within the Tribunal file  a  typed
        verbatim transcript of the procedure and evidence given on the  day
        which both Ms Kaur and Mr Dimnycz were  given  the  opportunity  to
        read before making their submissions.
    12. Ms Kaur submitted that  an  interpreter  was  used  to  assist  the
        appellant with her asylum interview and that the  matter  had  been
        listed previously for which an interpreter had  been  provided.  It
        was submitted although the appellant speaks some English it was not
        clear she was able to  understand  all  and  that  she  needed  the
        assistance of an interpreter. It was submitted the  appellant  felt
        pressurised at the hearing even though she was able  to  understand
        some of the  questions  and  the  procedure  in  English.  Ms  Kaur
        submitted that even though she was able to have a conversation with
        the appellant in English the question was her understanding of  the
        same. It was submitted  the  appellant  has  always  asked  for  an
        interpreter.
    13. Ms Kaur specifically submitted that the internal  relocation  issue
        was not discussed with the appellant who was unable to  communicate
        her views upon the same.
    14. It was submitted the Judge should have stepped back and  considered
        if it was fair to proceed in all the circumstances. The appellant's
        position is that she believes internal relocation  is  not  a  safe
        option.
    15. Mr  Dimnycz  in  his  submissions  referred  to  a  note  from  the
        Presenting Officer Mr Spence who appeared before the Judge recorded
        the unrepresented appellant had been treated with care  and  in  an
        appropriate manner. It was submitted  the  appellant  was  able  to
        partake in the proceedings without difficulty and that the  Judge's
        conclusions were reasonably open to him.
    16. The Judge records in his Record of Proceedings (ROP) the following:


             Guinea Mandanka has been booked  which  is  not  the  same  as
             Senegalese and Gambian Mandanka.


             STOOD DOWN TO MAKE ENQUIRIES IF A SUITABLE INTERPRETER CAN  BE
             OBTAINED


             A informed that no suitable interpreter is available today.


             Becomes clear that A understands and speaks English.


             Are you ready to proceed today? Yes


             Do you want to proceed today? Yes, interpreter can help  where
             needed


             Procedure outlined.


    17. This clearly demonstrates that the Judge was  fully  aware  of  the
        issue that arose concerning the suitability of the interpreter  and
        that efforts were made to  establish  whether  another  interpreter
        could be made available. It appears clear that  had  the  appellant
        indicated to the Judge that she did  not  wish  to  proceed  it  is
        likely the hearing would have been adjourned. The  Judge  gave  the
        appellant the opportunity to decide whether she wanted the  hearing
        to proceed or not when it became  clear  the  appellant  understood
        English.
    18. The appellant's asylum interview conducted on the 16th  of  January
        2018 with the assistance of  an  interpreter  who  was  a  Mandinka
        interpreter, which Mr Dimnycz submitted was not  the  language  the
        appellant claimed to need assistance with, but which she  confirmed
        she understood and was content to be interviewed in Mandinka.  That
        is the language of the interpreter who attended and the appellant's
        indication  that  she  wished  to  proceed  in  English  with   the
        interpreter helping where needed is clearly an indication that  the
        appellant herself was happy to go ahead and  was  acknowledging  an
        ability to understand the appointed interpreter.
    19.  The  Judge's  note  records  the  appellant  adopted  her  witness
        statement which had  been  prepared  by  previous  representatives,
        signed a copy, and had nothing to add. There is then a recording of
        the questions put to the appellant by way of cross-examination  and
        the appellant's replies. There is also  a  recording  of  questions
        asked by the Judge and the appellant's  response.  The  Judge  then
        records submissions made by the Presenting  Officer  together  with
        the appellant's own submissions and intervention by the  Presenting
        Officer in the following terms:


             Appellant:


             Is there anything else you would like to  tell  me  before  we
             finish the hearing? If you send me back to  Senegal,  maybe  I
             will try to run from family but I would not be able to run for
             ever and I know that one day they will come and get  my  girls
             and maybe I will have no choice but to hand them to the  girls
             as running and hiding will be difficult with the girls and  it
             will be so hard that I will not have any choice  but  to  hand
             the girls to them.
             I myself will hand the girls to them as it will be hard to run
             and hide knowing that daughters life is in  danger  and  so  I
             will hand over the girls.


             Mr Spence:


             Not reasonable likely to do that, and never mentioned before


             Appellant:


             I am here trying to protect myself and want you to protect  my
             daughter, how can people  in  Senegal  protect  daughters,  it
             would be very hard.
             Is there anything else that you would like to tell me? I  want
             to stay here to protect my daughter and I know is that if I go
             to Senegal they will take my daughter and I know my family
             *becomes upset
              I know my family, they will take my daughters
             if you want that you can take them


    20. The transcript also clearly shows the issue of internal  relocation
        was discussed with the appellant who was able to  answer  questions
        in relation to that specific issue. These include being asked about
        other towns and cities,  any  problems  the  appellant  would  have
        staying on her own, whether she could get a job in Senegal, whether
        the police will protect her from her family in Dakar, and who   she
        was actually scared of amongst other points.
    21. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  it  was
        held that if  a  Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment
        request, such decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law  in
        several respects: these include a failure to take into account  all
        material considerations; permitting  immaterial  considerations  to
        intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair  hearing;  failing  to
        apply the correct test; and acting irrationally.  In  practice,  in
        most cases the question will be whether the  refusal  deprived  the
        affected  party  of  his  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   Where   an
        adjournment refusal  is  challenged  on  fairness  grounds,  it  is
        important to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is
        not whether the FtT acted  reasonably.   Rather,  the  test  to  be
        applied is that of fairness:  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
        affected party's right to a fair hearing?
    22. There is nothing  in  the  transcript  to  indicate  the  appellant
        claimed not to  understand  the  proceedings  or  even  sought  the
        assistance of the interpreter who was available  on  the  day.  The
        appellant was clearly able to understand the questions asked of her
        by the Judge and Presenting Officer and the replies given, allowing
        for the change relating to the alleged fear of her husband, do  not
        appear to  be  arguably  different  from  the  replies  given  when
        interviewed previously or in the appellant's case set  out  in  her
        witness statement prepared with the assistance of solicitors.
    23. I find the Judge took the appropriate degree of care to ensure that
        the appellant fully understood what  was  going  on  and  that  she
        understood English to the required degree to enable her to properly
        and fully participate in the appeal hearing. Whilst  the  appellant
        does not like the Judge's conclusions this does not  mean  she  has
        been denied a fair hearing or that her level of  English  was  such
        that the Judge's  decision  to  proceed  amounts  to  a  procedural
        irregularity sufficient to amount to an error of law. There was  no
        reason for the Judge to adjourn following  the  withdrawal  of  the
        appellant's representative either as the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
        experienced in dealing with self-representing appellants.
    24. I do not find it established that  the  appellant  was  denied  the
        right to a fair hearing such that material  legal  error  has  been
        established.
    25. It is not made out the Judge's findings are outside  the  range  of
        those reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.

Decision

    26. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    27. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15 November 2019

