
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05861/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided on the papers without a      |Promulgated                          |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On Thursday 29 April 2021            |On Friday 30 April 2021              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     D A
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
This appeal was brought partly  on  protection  grounds.  In  addition,  the
Appellant is a vulnerable woman.  Accordingly, it is  appropriate  that  the
Appellant's details be protected.  Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  or  any
member of her family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
    1. By a decision dated 18 September 2020, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Owens
       found an error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Rhys-Davies promulgated on 31 October 2019.  By his decision,  Judge
       Rhys-Davies   dismissed   the   Appellant's   appeal   against   the
       Respondent's decision dated 7 June  2019  refusing  the  Appellant's
       protection and human rights claims.


    2. As Judge Owens noted at [13] of her decision, there was no challenge
       to Judge Rhys-Davies' decision dismissing the appeal  on  protection
       grounds.  For that reason, Judge Owens set aside only that  part  of
       Judge Rhys-Davies' decision relating to  Article  8  ECHR  ([30]  of
       Judge Owens' decision).  She preserved certain facts which  are  set
       out at [31] of her decision.


    3. The resumed hearing was listed  to  take  place  as  a  face-to-face
       hearing on 14 January 2021.  As a result of the current restrictions
       due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the hearing was relisted and converted
       to a case management review ("CMR") before me.   That  hearing  took
       place before me on 14 January 2021 via  BT  Meet  Me.   The  parties
       confirmed to me on  that  occasion  that  it  was  agreed  that  the
       protection claim is not to be redetermined  and  Judge  Rhys-Davies'
       findings in that regard stand.

    4. As I noted in my decision following  the  CMR,  the  Respondent  was
       directed by Judge Owens to file with the Tribunal and serve  on  the
       Appellant any evidence relating to previous decisions including that
       curtailing her leave based on the ETS  allegation  as  well  as  any
       documents relied upon in relation to  that  allegation.   I  gave  a
       direction that the Respondent comply with that direction  within  28
       days from the date when my decision was sent and to file  and  serve
       on the same date her skeleton argument. My decision was sent  on  15
       January 2021 and therefore the Respondent should have complied  with
       that direction by 12 February 2021.

    5. On 19 February 2021, following enquiries  made  by  the  Appellant's
       solicitor, the Respondent sought an extension of time for compliance
       with that direction until 5 March 2021.  The extension was sought on
       the basis that Mr Walker who is representing the Respondent in  this
       appeal had only just received the files relating to  the  Appellant.
       Some earlier files had gone missing  and  the  Respondent  confirmed
       therefore that she could not produce any evidence  relating  to  the
       ETS allegation.  It was indicated that the  Respondent  intended  to
       enter into discussions with the Appellant's solicitor in relation to
       the other outstanding issues.  I granted the extension sought.

    6. On 1 April 2021, the Tribunal received a letter from  Mr  Walker  on
       behalf of the Respondent which reads as follows:

           "Following on from the Secretary of State's letter of  the  19th
           February  2021,  and  with  the  agreement   of   Duncan   Lewis
           Solicitors, the following concession on behalf of the  Secretary
           of State has been made.
           The Secretary of State accepts that [DA] has 10 years continuous
           lawful residence in the UK, as required by paragraph 276B of the
           Immigration Rules, and any reference to paragraph 322(2) of  the
           Immigration Rules that the Appellant's presence in  the  UK  was
           not conducive to the public good, on the basis of evidence  that
           the Appellant had fraudulently obtained an ETS English  Language
           test certificate, which showed an intention  to  use  deception,
           cannot now be maintained by the Secretary of State.
           Given that the Secretary of State is unable  to  provide  cogent
           evidence of the alleged deception in this particular  case,  any
           allegations of suitability must fall away.
           Therefore [DA] meets the requirements for  Indefinite  Leave  on
           the grounds of long residence.
           Duncan Lewis will I  understand  be  withdrawing  [DA]'s  asylum
           application.
           Both parties are in agreement  that  there  is  no  need  for  a
           further hearing, but request a  short  determination  to  ensure
           that given the current circumstances in place due to  the  COVID
           pandemic there will be minimum delay in the Secretary  of  State
           granting leave."

    7. I had anticipated that I would  subsequently  receive  communication
       from  Duncan  Lewis  confirming  that  the  asylum  application  was
       withdrawn.  However, on 22 April 2021, Duncan Lewis wrote asking for
       an update following the Respondent's letter.


    8. Having reviewed the file and having reminded myself of the terms  of
       the error of law decision which set aside only that  part  of  Judge
       Rhys-Davies' decision which dismissed the appeal on Article  8  ECHR
       (thereby preserving the decision on protection grounds), and  having
       noted the confirmation on behalf of the Appellant at  the  CMR  that
       the appeal was not pursued on protection grounds, I formed the  view
       that I do not need any formal withdrawal of the  protection  grounds
       in order to give a decision bringing this appeal to an end.


    9. In light of the Respondent's concession, I allow the appeal on human
       rights (Article 8 grounds).




    DECISION
    The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds on the  basis
    that her removal would breach her Article 8 ECHR rights.



    Signed       L K Smith                         Dated: 29 April 2021
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

