
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05833/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 |On 20 October 2020               |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                               MKD (Ethiopia)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is an Ethiopian national who was born on  12  June  1998.
    She appeals, with permission granted by Judge Adio, against a  decision
    which was issued by Judge Chohan  on  20  April  2020,  dismissing  her
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of her claim for  international
    protection.

 2. The appellant was granted asylum in Greece in 2016 but she travelled to
    the UK in 2019, whereupon she presented a  claim  for  asylum  in  this
    country, contending that she was in fear of the  Ethiopian  authorities
    on account of her imputed  political  opinion.   She  stated  that  her
    father was opposed to the authorities; that he had  been  killed  as  a
    result; and that she  had  been  detained,  ill-treated  and  raped  in
    connection with his activities.  The respondent  did  not  believe  her
    account and refused her application.  She appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and  her  appeal  came  before  the  judge,  sitting  at  the
    Nottingham Justice Centre, on 9 March 2020.

 3. In his reserved decision, the judge found that the  appellant  had  not
    given a truthful account of the reasons that she had left Ethiopia.  He
    gave two reasons for that conclusion.  The first, at [10],  related  to
    the appellant's disclosure of the claim that she had been raped by  the
    Ethiopian authorities.  The judge was concerned that she had not raised
    this in her screening interview.  He noted that the point had not  been
    raised by the Presenting Officer  or  in  the  refusal  letter  but  he
    considered that 'her legal representatives must be taken to  have  read
    the screening  interview'.   The  judge  went  on  to  agree  with  the
    Presenting Officer that the appellant had only mentioned rape  once  in
    her asylum interview, whereas she had mentioned  it  on  at  least  two
    occasions in her witness statement.  Then, at [11], the judge  went  on
    to find the appellant's  account  implausible,  as  he  was  unable  to
    understand why the authorities would have killed her father, who was of
    much more interest to them, whereas they  had  opted  to  question  the
    appellant about her father.  For  these  reasons,  the  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant had sustained injuries detailed in a  medical
    report in  the  manner  claimed.   He  rejected  the  account,  and  he
    dismissed the appeal.

 4. The grounds of appeal which persuaded Judge Adio  to  grant  permission
    may be stated quite shortly.  The first is that  the  judge  adopted  a
    procedurally improper approach when he attached weight to a point which
    had not been taken by the respondent, as regards the failure to mention
    rape in the screening interview.  The second is that the judge erred in
    failing to evaluate the  appellant's  account  against  the  background
    evidence when he made the findings he  did  at  [11],  as  regards  the
    likely actions of the Ethiopian authorities.

 5. The papers were placed before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  on  13  July
    2020.   On  15  July  2020,  she  issued  directions  to  the  parties,
    expressing a provisional view that the appeal might fairly  and  justly
    be determined on the papers.  She sought submissions on that course  of
    action  and  on  the   merits   of   the   appeal.    The   appellant's
    representatives filed and short submissions by email on 28  July  2020.
    The respondent has not responded.

 6. I consider, firstly, whether it is appropriate to determine the  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal without a hearing.  Rule 34(1) confers a power to
    do so.  By r34(2), I am required to consider the views of the  parties.
    The appellant's solicitors have submitted that a hearing  is  necessary
    and that it could be conducted remotely.  The respondent has  expressed
    no view.  I have considered the appellant's submissions in this regard.
     I have borne in mind  the  over  riding  objective  and  I  have  also
    considered what was said by the Supreme Court in Osborn  v  The  Parole
    Board [2014] 1 AC 1115.  I consider that I am  able  to  determine  the
    appeal fairly and justly without  an  oral  hearing.   The  issues  are
    straightforward and the proper outcome of the  appeal  is  quite  clear
    from the papers.

 7. I consider both grounds of appeal to be borne out.  As to the first,  I
    have no doubt that it was procedurally improper for the judge  to  hold
    against the appellant the fact that she did not  mention  rape  in  her
    screening interview when this point  was  not  raised  at  all  by  the
    respondent.  It did not suffice for the judge to hold,  as  he  did  at
    [10], that the appellant's representatives must have read the screening
    interview.  There might be any number of reasons why the claim of  rape
    was not raised in that interview and the point should have been put  to
    the appellant if it was to form one of the two  bases  upon  which  her
    entire claim (which had seemingly been accepted in Greece)  was  to  be
    rejected.

 8. It is well established that a screening interview is not the forum  for
    full exploration of an asylum claim, and that the subject of  any  such
    interview might not provide full details of their claim at  that  stage
    for a variety of reasons: YL (China) UKIAT 145.  Equally,  it  is  well
    established that there might be a  variety  of  reasons  for  the  late
    disclosure  of  an  account  of   serious   sexual   ill-treatment:   R
    (Ngirincuti) v SSHD [2008] EWHC 1592 (Admin).  It did  not  necessarily
    follow, in other words, that there was no plausible explanation for the
    late disclosure and this was not a point of obvious contradiction  upon
    which the judge was entitled to seize without the appellant being given
    an opportunity to address it (contrast WN (DRC) [2004] UKIAT 00213,  at
    [28], for example).

 9. Ground two is equally clearly  established.   The  proper  approach  to
    considering the plausibility of an asylum claim has been  clear  for  a
    number of years.  The submission which was  often  encountered  at  the
    turn of the century - that British judges were unable to determine what
    might or might not be plausible in an asylum seeker's country of origin
    - has been categorically rejected.  Instead, the Court of  Appeal  held
    that a judge is not  required  to  accept  at  face  value  an  account
    proffered by an asylum seeker, no matter how contrary to  common  sense
    it might be.  In conducting such an evaluation, however, the  judge  is
    required  to  consider  the  plausibility  of  the  claim  through  the
    spectacles provided by the country information before  him:  Y  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1223, at [25]-[26], per Keene LJ.  In  concluding  that
    the appellant's account was  implausible,  the  judge  in  this  appeal
    failed to have any  demonstrable  regard  to  the  country  information
    before him.  He was not entitled, in those circumstances,  to  conclude
    that the  behaviour  of  the  Ethiopian  authorities  was  implausible.
    Without considering the background material, he was  simply  unable  to
    assess whether what was claimed was or was not  an  account  which  sat
    uneasily against the backdrop presented by the country information.

10. In the circumstances, I consider both grounds of appeal to  be  clearly
    established and I consider the decision of the FtT to  be  vitiated  by
    legal error.  The decision on the appeal will  be  set  aside  and  the
    appeal will be remitted to the FtT was redetermination afresh.  That is
    the proper course in light of the procedural failing on the part of the
    judge and the scope of the issues which will need to be reconsidered.

11. The appellant would be well advised to prepare  an  additional  witness
    statement dealing  with  the  absence  of  reference  to  rape  in  the
    screening interview.  The Tribunal will also wish to give consideration
    to the wide-ranging changes in Ethiopia  since  the  election  of  Abiy
    Ahmed in 2018, two years after the appellant left.  The appellant might
    properly expect the respondent to submit that she is no longer at risk,
    even if all that she has said is reasonably likely to be true.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law
and that decision is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to  the  FtT  to  be
considered afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction because this is a protection-based appeal and because of  the
allegations of rape made by the appellant.


                                M.J.Blundell
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                               20 October 2020
