
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05129/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 12 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                    M F N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 9 March 1992.  His
appeal came before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether or not there was
an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla. In a
Decision and Reasons promulgated on 11 April 2019, I found a material error
of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to the judge's
assessment of the safety of internal relocation to Kabul.  In light of the
fact that the judgment of the Court of Appeal in AS (Safety of Kabul)
Afghanistan was pending, I adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing on
the first available date after promulgation of that judgment.  A copy of
that Decision and Reasons is appended.

At the hearing before me on 4 June 2019, Mr Bandegani on behalf of the
Appellant produced a skeleton argument.  I proceeded on the basis of
submissions only, there being no real dispute as to the facts or findings,
which were that the Appellant would be at risk of persecution in his home
and local area of Herat [32] and that it was accepted that the Appellant
worked for the civil service and then for the intelligence service in
Afghanistan [34].

Mr Jarvis submitted that, following the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
AS [2019] EWCA Civ 873 that the appeal had been remitted back to the Upper
Tribunal on the following basis:

"Lord Justice Underhill:

It seems to me that remittal to the Upper Tribunal can and should be on the
basis that it need consider its conclusions only on the question of the
extent of the risk to returned asylum seekers from security incidents of
the kind considered in paragraphs 190 to 199 of its reasons.  Although of
course the relevance of that risk is to the overall issue of whether it is
reasonable for asylum seekers to be expected to relocate to Kabul it is in
practice a self-contained element within that assessment, and since I would
hold that there was no error of law in the Tribunal's approach to the other
elements I see no reason why those elements require to be reconsidered",

and at [82]:

"Those limits on the scope of the remittal are subject to one important
qualification.  We were told that last year, after the decision of the
Upper Tribunal, UNHCR produced further guidelines on returns to
Afghanistan, which, unlike the 2016 version, unequivocally recommend that
'given the current security, human rights and humanitarian situation in
Kabul, an IFA/IRA is generally not available in the city'.  It will be for
the Tribunal, no doubt after hearing submissions, to consider whether that
assessment requires a reconsideration of its country guidance on a more
extensive basis than is required by the remittal of this appeal.  If it
decides that it does, it is likely to make sense either for the scope of
hearing to be increased or (which may be procedurally more correct) for the
remittal in this case to be heard along with whatever appeal is the vehicle
for that wider consideration."

Mr Jarvis submitted that the Appellant's profile is that he worked in the
civil service and was perceived to be a spy.  In respect of the expert
report from Mr Foxley, Mr Jarvis submitted that he had not quite applied
the approach advocated in MOJ (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT
00442 (IAC) as to country guidance and experts, in particular, his
dependence on the report of Professor Giustozzi, whose evidence of a
blacklist held by the Taliban was expressly rejected by the Upper Tribunal
in AS at [175].  The Upper Tribunal also went on in any event at [181] to
find that the evidence did not show that the Taliban had any real
sophistication in its networks or were able to identify those of adverse
interest.  He submitted that there had been vast population movements over
the last few years and that there was no real system in place nor was it
possible for someone to be identified by name.  The Upper Tribunal in AS
found that there was no blacklist and that it was fanciful to think that
somebody could be identified.  MOJ (op cit) and AAW (expert evidence -
weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 00673 (IAC) make plain that an expert needs to
state why he is departing from a country guidance decision, and this aspect
of the appeal had not been impacted by the judgment in the Court of Appeal.

At [182] of AS the Upper Tribunal indicated that the evidence was not
particularly forthcoming and one must put the evidence in the context of
the fact that the population in Kabul is between 3,500,000 and 7,000,000.
At [183] the Upper Tribunal placed significant weight on the EASO report,
which indicated in respect of their expert evidence that there are only a
few dozen people and the Taliban would have to devote significant time and
planning to identify and track down targets.  Mr Foxley acknowledged at
[37] that different Taliban groups act in different ways.  It is also the
case that the Taliban will be most concentrated in Kabul because this is
where the prime military and security targets are to be found.  However, as
Mr Foxley acknowledged at [46] and [47], the Taliban do not have direct
influence and control in Kabul and cannot just move around freely.

Mr Jarvis submitted this reduced the likelihood that the Taliban would know
if the Appellant has even returned to Afghanistan. He submitted that in
terms of findings of fact, the likelihood of the Appellant coming into
contact with the Taliban in Kabul or the likelihood of them knowing he was
wanted in Herat is fanciful and that the Appellant was distinguishable from
someone who would be a key military or security target.  He submitted that
the report of Mr Foxley should not cause the Upper Tribunal to take a
different approach from that set out in the country guidance.  He submitted
that the reasoning of the Upper Tribunal in respect of the general
conditions in Kabul, e.g. accommodation, were authoritative and in light of
the Secretary of State's submissions as to the absence of the ability to
target, then it would be fanciful to find the Appellant would be targeted
on account of his past skills and experience.

In his submissions, Mr Bandegani asserted that his case is not that the
Appellant is a low-level person, such as those analysed in the country
guidance, but that the Appellant would be perceived to be a spy because of
the work he undertook for the security and intelligence services in Herat.
If the Appellant is not perceived to be a spy, then on the individual facts
of his case he falls within his own unique risk category not dealt with by
AS.  Mr Bandegani submitted that it was unreasonable in light of the UNHCR
guidelines to expect the Appellant to internally relocate.

Mr Bandegani submitted that the criticisms of Mr Foxley were not justified.
 He is a well-respected and qualified expert and any minor departure from
the country guidance findings was certainly not sufficient reason to reject
the entirety of his report.  Mr Bandegani submitted that the Appellant
falls squarely within the risk categories set out in AS because he is
perceived to be a spy.  At [48] the expert found that primarily much
depends on information known about the Appellant prior to arrival.  He
acknowledged that the Taliban do not generally target people but sets out
simply what Professor Giustozzi said and what the evidence is from both
sides.  Mr Bandegani submitted he cannot rationally be criticised for that.

In relation to [181] of the country guidance, Mr Bandegani submitted that
his case is that the Appellant falls within a risk category identified in
AS and that he will be perceived to be a spy.  Although it was not known
how many civilians living in Kabul are of interest, clearly, if one was a
spy or at risk of being perceived as such, one would be at risk of
persecution in Kabul.  He submitted that the Appellant would thus be at
risk on return to Kabul.  In relation to the Appellant's previous work, the
First-tier decision supported the Appellant's claim to be at risk on return
to Kabul.  The Appellant was travelling to Kabul as part of his work for
the Afghan government rather than simply as a civilian who was unprotected.
 The Taliban knew he was travelling to Kabul and his family would tell
them, the Taliban, he was travelling there.  Mr Bandegani submitted that
the blacklist does not apply.  The consistent and well-reasoned evidence
from Mr Foxley is that the Appellant would be perceived to be a spy.

Mr Bandegani sought to rely on the CPIN report.  He submitted it was
important to note that, where it is making reference to risks concerning
individuals moving from their home areas, Kabul is the main relocation site
in Afghanistan.  He submitted that whilst not determinative, the UNHCR
guidelines must be considered and that the Court of Appeal has made this
clear.  Mr Bandegani submitted that the appeal should allowed, that there
was clearly more than a fanciful prospect of persecution and that if the
country guidance were to be applied properly, then the appeal should be
allowed.

I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and reasons

I have concluded in light of all the evidence, particularly the CPIN
December 2016, the EASO report of June 2018, the expert report of Mr Tim
Foxley dated 10 December 2018 and the updated UNHCR guidelines dated 30
August 2018, all of which post dated the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
AS and bearing in mind the terms of the remittal to the Upper Tribunal by
the Court of Appeal in AS [2019] EWCA Civ 873, that it would be
unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect this Appellant, on his particular
facts, to internally relocate to Kabul. My reasons for so finding are as
follows:

12.1.    I find that there is a real risk that the Appellant would be
    perceived as a spy. This is because his evidence, which was accepted by
    the First tier Tribunal Judge, was that in 2013, whilst working for the
    Ministry of Affairs as a civil servant, he was recruited by the Afghan
    intelligence services as an informer, specifically to report
    individuals believed to be working for the Taliban and he provided
    information that led to the capture of a senior Taliban commander. He
    subsequently received threatening telephone calls and letters from the
    Taliban telling him to work for them and accusing him of working with
    the infidels. His family home was targeted in a grenade attack at the
    end of 2015, an incident for which the Taliban took responsibility; he
    was the victim of an attempted assassination and his uncle was
    kidnapped and murdered. This factual background was the basis of the
    Judge's finding that the Appellant would be at risk of persecution in
    his home area.

12.2. I find,  consequently,  that  the  Appellant  falls  within  the  risk
    categories set out in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2018]  UKUT
    00118 (IAC) as someone in respect of whom there is a real risk that  he
    would be perceived as a spy. However, the issue is not  simply  whether
    the Appellant would be at risk of persecution if returned to  his  home
    area of Herat, but whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    internally relocate to Kabul. The Upper Tribunal in AS set out the test
    in the following terms:

         "173.    We consider first the risk of persecution by the Taliban
         in Kabul to a person who is accepted to be at risk on return from
         them in their home area. The two main ways in which it is said that
         this may arise is first, through specific targeting of an
         individual in Kabul, and secondly, through a chance encounter with
         a person, for example at a temporary checkpoint in or around the
         city. We deal with each in turn.


         174. The risk of a specific individual being successfully targeted
         depends upon their identification as a target (for example, due to
         past or present actions/circumstances) and the ability of the
         Taliban to locate and then carry out an attack on that person, as
         well as their will or priorities in doing so. The evidence was
         broadly in agreement as to the order of importance of targets for
         the Taliban in Afghanistan being (i) senior serving government
         officials and the security services, (ii) spies, and at the lower
         level, (iii) other collaborators (including the wider security
         forces, government authorities, foreign embassies, the UN, NGOs and
         anyone passing information to the government about the Taliban) and
         deserters.


    Whilst the Upper Tribunal then went on to reject the evidence of
    Professor Giustozzi that there is a blacklist, due to the absence of
    supporting evidence of this and a lack of detail, they then went on to
    find as follows inter alia at [183]-[185]:

         "183.    ... Overall, this adds an additional level of remoteness
         such that in totality, there is insufficient evidence to support a
         real risk of a low-profile person being identified, located and
         targeted even if there is a blacklist on which their name appeared.
         In the absence of a blacklist at all, that risk is fanciful at
         most.


         184. As to the prospect of a chance encounter placing a person at
         risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban, we find little evidence
         to support any real risk arising from such a situation. There is
         evidence (which is uncontroversial and has not been specifically
         challenged) of the Taliban setting up temporary checkpoints in and
         around Kabul city based on specific intelligence, although no
         quantification or estimate of the number or range of locations
         (other than including main routes in and out of the city) used was
         submitted by either party. That specific intelligence is said to
         include the expected movement of a targeted person (or persons -
         such as employees of the state, other countries or NGOs), including
         the day and time of travel, means of travel (up to and including
         identification of a specific vehicle) and destination, or at least
         expected route. We find that such specific intelligence indicates
         targeting of the most high-profile people, given that significant
         or at least very well-placed resources would be required to
         identify such specific information. The specific intelligence
         identified also suggests higher-profile targets as opposed to lower-
         level individuals are far, as a matter of practicality, far less
         likely to be travelling in specific vehicles or have such
         predictable movements.


         185. There is of course the possibility that a checkpoint set up to
         target a specific person or group may also involve others being
         stopped either randomly or because of a suspicion based on a
         particular feature. The features suggested in evidence could be
         that a person is wearing a shirt and tie (which may indicate that
         they are a state employee of some sort) or has English contacts on
         a mobile phone. There is however no specific evidence of such
         incidents regularly occurring or at all. The only example that
         appears in the evidence is of an Australian man taken off a bus by
         the Taliban, but the evidence is inconsistent as to whether he was
         specifically targeted by name or coincidentally by his appearance
         or other feature. Although we accept that a person is likely to
         need to travel in and around Kabul for work and other daily
         necessities, the chances of encountering such a checkpoint, being
         stopped at it, being questioned by the Taliban, being identified as
         a target and suffering harm as a result are, cumulatively, too
         remote to give rise to a real risk of harm. For the reasons set out
         above, there is no real risk that even if a blacklist exists and a
         person's name is on it, that that information could or would be
         obtained at a temporary checkpoint because of the lack of
         availability of access to a complete or searchable list; or that
         the person's name would, coincidentally, happen to be one of a very
         small number given to a local Taliban member."


    I find that it is unclear from the Upper Tribunal's findings, which
    focus on the risk to a low profile person, whether or not someone such
    as the Appellant, who was considered by the Taliban to be a spy and so
    falling within (ii) would face a real risk of being targeted. Despite
    the clear and helpful submissions made by Mr Jarvis, I have concluded
    that a real risk to the Appellant as someone who falls within this
    higher profile category is not simply fanciful but cannot be excluded,
    given that the Appellant was specifically targeted by the Taliban in
    Herat and previously travelled to Kabul on a weekly basis in connection
    with his work and thus may already be known to the one or other of the
    various Taliban groups operating in Kabul [20].

12.3.In any event, the evidence that post dates the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal and will be considered upon remittal to the Upper Tribunal by
    the Court of Appeal, in particular the UNHCR guidelines of August 2018
    would indicate that internal relocation to Kabul is not viable, in
    light of the negative trend in the security situation for civilians in
    Kabul. This is, however, general guidance and the individual's
    circumstances are clearly relevant. The First tier Tribunal Judge found
    at [34] that the Appellant should be able to sustain himself in Kabul
    without much problem given the fact that he was an educated man who
    came from a well-off family in his home area and he could even get a
    government job. This aspect of the Judge's decision was, however, set
    aside as the Judge failed to factor into his assessment the fact that
    the Appellant fled Herat because of the kidnap, torture and murder of
    the Appellant's uncle, as a consequence of the Appellant's refusal to
    assist them and his inconsistent finding as to the risk category under
    which he fell for consideration. I find that the Appellant could not
    reasonably be expected to obtain a government job because that would
    place him directly at risk of targeting from the Taliban, both on that
    account and because of his past history, which was expressly found to
    be credible.

12.4. Consequently, for the reasons set out above, I find that the
    Appellant's education and potential access to financial support from
    his family do not render internal relocation to Kabul reasonable as
    there remain a real risk, on the lower standard of proof, that he would
    be targeted by the Taliban because of his past history, in
    circumstances where it is accepted that at the current time there is no
    sufficiency of protection by or on behalf of the State.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 4 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

