
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05654/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th October 2018                          |On 19th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     s h
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richard Martin (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes,  promulgated  on  27th  July  2017,  following  a  hearing   at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 10th July 2017.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  [~]
    1982.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  19th
    May 2016, refusing his application  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has been threatened by the Taliban  to
    join them, he lived in the mountains for several months  without  being
    discovered by them, and if he was now returned to Afghanistan he  would
    be caught  by  the  Taliban  and  killed,  especially  given  that  the
    Appellant  was  harboured  by  a  commander  and  then   suspected   of
    involvement in this commander's murder, detained and then permitted  to
    escape before making his way to the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4.  The  judge  held  that  the  Appellant's  account  had   an   inherent
    inconsistency.  He said he hid in the mountains but returned home on  a
    monthly basis even though the Taliban had retained  their  interest  in
    him and were actually looking for him.  His ability to hide for such  a
    long period of time was not consistent with the evidence of  the  steps
    being taken to enforce compliance by putting  pressure  on  his  family
    members.  His ability to return home on a regular basis will also  fall
    into question the reality of there being any interest  in  him  by  the
    Taliban (paragraph 22).

 5. The judge also went  on  to  discuss  the  report  of  the  expert,  Dr
    Giustozzi, who had said  that  there  was  Taliban  activity  in  Logar
    Province, which had increased over the years.  He had gone  on  to  say
    that the Appellant's claim was plausible that the commander might  have
    lobbied for the Appellant's release.  The judge rejected this report as
    lacking in credibility.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge had overlooked the fact
    that the Appellant had claimed that the guard who enabled the Appellant
    to escape was from his father-in-law's tribe and had helped him  escape
    through that association.  Moreover,  Judge  Parkes  had  neglected  to
    attach the appropriate weight to the 37 page report from the expert  by
    treating it as lacking in credibility.

 7. Indeed, the judge had stated that,

         "Given the  nature  of  accusation,  the  loyalties  and  treachery
         involved,  the  Dr's  suggestion  is   entirely   speculative   and
         inconsistent.  These issues are discussed further below  but  given
         the inconsistency of the Dr's conclusion against  the  evidence  he
         cites I do not find that the report takes the Appellant's case  any
         further forward" (paragraph 19).

    It was said however that the judge did not at any  stage  then  discuss
    the alleged speculations and inconsistencies in the expert report by Dr
    Giustozzi.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Plimmer on 17th January 2018 on
    the basis that the Tribunal had  arguably  erred  in  finding  that  Dr
    Giustozzi's country expert report did not take the Appellant's case any
    further forward (at paragraph 19).   It  was  also  arguable  that  the
    contradictions identified at paragraphs 17 and 18  were  more  apparent
    than real and there has been an arguable failure  to  acknowledge  that
    specific aspects of the Appellant's  claim  were  consistent  with  the
    country background evidence.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 29th October 2018, Mr  Martin  appeared  on
    behalf of  the  Appellant.   He  placed  reliance  upon  the  grant  of
    permission by UTJ Plimmer.  He submitted that the nub of the  criticism
    lay in the judge's rejection of the expert report.  This  was  for  the
    following reasons.

10. First, he had referred to  there  being  "a  number  of  contradictions
    within the report" when describing the "nature of Arbakai commanders in
    paragraphs 6 and 7" of Dr Giustozzi's report.  Mr Martin submitted that
    if one looks at paragraphs 6 and 7 of  the  report,  there  is  nothing
    contradictory about it.  What the  expert  states  is  that  the  local
    militia work on a tribal basis and that "it is therefore plausible that
    one  of  the  authorities  may  have  lobbied  to  have  the  Appellant
    released".  This, submitted Mr Martin, was a neutral description of the
    situation  on  the  ground.   It  was  difficult  to   see   what   was
    contradictory  about  it.   There  certainly  were  not  "a  number  of
    contradictions" in this respect.  The judge did not identify any.

11. In the same way, secondly, Mr Martin submitted that in relation to "the
    issue of blood feuds", the judge had given two  reasons.   First,  that
    the intensity of the obligation to honour a blood feud the decision  to
    keep the Appellant alive, particularly  in  view  of  his  having  been
    released as mentioned was difficult to reconcile,  given  that  he  had
    killed the commander who had helped him, and there was now a blood feud
    against him.  Second, the suggestion that the guard might have released
    the Appellant was not credible as it did not invite tribal retaliation.
     The report did not comment on  the  Appellant's  suggestion  that  the
    guard was from his father-in-law's tribe.  However, the judge had  said
    that "that still does not explain why he would take such a  risk  given
    the deaths of others involved ..." (paragraph 19).

12. Third, Mr Martin submitted that if one had regard to  paragraph  19  of
    the determination there is a reference to the fact that,

         "Given the nature of the accusation, the  loyalties  and  treachery
         involved in the doctor's suggestion  is  entirely  speculative  and
         inconsistent.  These issues are discussed further below  but  given
         the  inconsistencies  in  the  doctor's  conclusions  against   the
         evidence he  cites  I  do  not  find  that  the  report  takes  the
         Appellant's case any further forward" (paragraph 19).

    Mr Martin submitted that it was difficult to see what was  inconsistent
    or speculative.  It was  also  not  the  case  that  matters  had  been
    addressed further below.  What Dr Giustozzi had done  was  to  offer  a
    balanced approach to the situation.

13. All in all, therefore, Mr Martin  argued  that  the  influence  of  the
    Taliban and the local police, being the  problem  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's returnability, the credibility of the report, had  it  been
    properly evaluated, would have made a difference to the outcome in this
    appeal, had it not been so roundly rejected by the judge.

14. For his part, Mr Mills stated that he would have  to  accept  that  the
    references from paragraphs 17, 18, and 19 "are not  as  clear  as  they
    could be", but it was possible to work out what the judge was aiming to
    say about the expert report.  First, paragraph  17  itself  was  not  a
    standalone paragraph.  It provided the background.   If  one  looks  at
    paragraph 18 what the judge is concerned about is "the issue  of  blood
    feuds" and it was  simply  not  credible,  as  far  as  the  judge  was
    concerned, to say that the Appellant, who had been in  the  debt  of  a
    commander who had helped him, would then have escaped any threat to him
    on account of the murder of the commander.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First, the judge  has  rejected  the  country  guidance  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi at paragraphs 17 to 19 of the determination.   The  basis  of
    that rejection is not well made  out.   This  is  because  there  is  a
    reference to "the nature of Arbakai commanders in paragraphs 6  and  7"
    of Dr Giustozzi's report, so as to suggest that his  treatment  of  the
    way in which these commanders worked was  contradictory.   However,  if
    one looks at paragraphs 6 and 7 of the report, I agree with Mr  Martin,
    that the treatment of the expert here to the situation before  him,  is
    not contradictory.  It is neutral.

17.  Second,  the  Appellant  had  given  evidence  that  the  reason  why,
    notwithstanding any debt he might  have  owed  the  commander,  he  was
    released with the help of the guard was that the  guard  was  from  his
    father-in-law's tribe, and this too, was a matter that arguably did not
    touch on the issue of blood feuds, in the  way  contended  for  by  the
    judge (at paragraph 18).

18.  Third,  and  most  importantly,  however,  the  judge  refers  to   Dr
    Giustozzi's "entirely speculative and inconsistent" report, in relation
    to "the loyalties and treachery" that he describes.  The judge goes  on
    to say that "these issues are discussed further  below"  (at  paragraph
    19) but does not then discuss them".

19. Ultimately, however, it is important to bear in mind the basic approach
    to expert reports as set out in the jurisprudence in relation  to  such
    reports.  This makes it clear that if a  judge  decides  to  reject  an
    expert's advice, he or she (a) must have a sound basis upon which to do
    so; and (b) must explain why the advice has been rejected: see  M-W  (a
    child), Re [2010] EWCA Civ 12 per Wall LJ (at paragraph 39).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  I set aside  the  decision
of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.   This  matter  is
remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be decided  by  a  judge  other
than Judge Parkes pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(2A).

This appeal is allowed.

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018

