
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05389/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 3 December 2019                   |On 18 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     a A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ali
    who, following a hearing at Manchester on 17 July 2019,  dismissed  the
    appellant's protection appeal.  Permission to appeal was granted by the
    First-tier Tribunal on 21 October 2019.

 2. The respondent's decision which generated the appeal before  Judge  Ali
    was not the first that the respondent  had  taken  in  respect  of  the
    appellant.  He had previously made a claim to international  protection
    as a member of the Berti Tribe in Sudan.  He contended that  he  was  a
    non-Arab Dafuri person and as such at real  risk  of  serious  harm  if
    returned to Sudan.

 3. The appellant's appeal had come before Judge Birrell  in  2016.   Judge
    Birrell  made  a  number  of  trenchant  findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant.  These are recorded at paragraph 14 of Judge Ali's decision.
     They included that the appellant was not a member of the Berti  Tribe;
    he is not a non-Arab Dafuri person; and that  little  weight  could  be
    given to an expert report put forward on behalf of the appellant.

 4. Judge Birrell found appellant's own witness evidence to  be  vague  and
    not supportive of his claim.  Little weight was given to a letter  from
    an organisation called the Berti and Tunjour Community UK  because  the
    author did not attend the hearing to give evidence and  there  were  no
    written records of the interview that the letter's author said  he  had
    with the appellant.

 5. The appellant had, further, been discrepant in respect of his  evidence
    regarding alleged detention in Sudan  and  how  he  had  been  able  to
    escape.  He had also failed to claim asylum in Italy and France,  which
    the judge considered damaged his credibility.  Judge  Birrell  was  not
    satisfied the appellant had told her the truth about his identity.

 6. Further material had been submitted to the respondent by the appellant,
    subsequent to Judge  Birrell's  decision.   We  see  this  set  out  in
    paragraph  4  of  the  respondent's  decision  of  16  May  2019.   The
    respondent went through the material and gave reasons why she concluded
    that it was not such as, taken in the round with the remainder  of  the
    evidence and the findings of Judge Birrell, as to give rise to a  well-
    founded fear of harm on return to Sudan.

 7. That, then, was the background to Judge Ali's decision.   Beginning  at
    paragraph 24 Judge Ali  made  findings  of  fact.   He  said  that  his
    starting position, pursuant to Devaseelan, were the  findings  made  by
    Judge Birrell in the previous appeal.  But, he  stated  in  terms  that
    those were not his only considerations. He reminded himself  that  they
    were only  the  starting  point  and  that  he  needed  to  assess  the
    appellant's appeal as it was before him.  That important  statement  by
    Judge Ali serves to shed light on the findings that followed.

 8. At paragraph 25, Judge Ali concluded that it was  the  appellant's  sur
    place activities in the United Kingdom that were at the  heart  of  the
    appeal.  Mr Howard criticises this, in that it  is  apparent  from  the
    respondent's decision that there was more to the new documentation than
    merely evidence relating to sur place activities.  That is true.

 9. At paragraph 26, Judge Ali concluded  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    genuine  political  activist  and  that  his   purpose   in   producing
    photographs of him  attending  various  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom was "simply an attempt to fabricate and embellish his sur place
    claim".

10. Paragraph 27 sets out the evidence of the attendance at demonstrations.
     The judge, however, noted that the appellant was unable to mention the
    dates for any of the demonstrations that he  had  attended.   A  letter
    from the Union of the People of Darfur in the UK and  Northern  Ireland
    had  contended  that  the  appellant  had   organised   demonstrations.
    However, when asked about this in cross-examination, the appellant said
    that he had helped the community organise demonstrations but was unable
    to give any information about his specific role, despite  being  asked.
    The appellant was also asked about filming of the  demonstrations.   He
    confirmed that a friend had filmed the demonstration but that this  had
    not been distributed on the internet and no video was submitted as part
    of the appellant's evidence.  Nor had the photographs been shared  with
    anyone else, according to the appellant.

11. At paragraph 29, the judge found  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    produce  any  witnesses  from  any  community  groups  to  confirm  his
    involvement in organising demonstrations.   The  judge  concluded  that
    this undermined his  claim  that  he  was  responsible  for  organising
    demonstrations.

12. At paragraph 30, the judge said that, apart from the photographs of the
    appellant's attendance, he did not produce any further evidence of  his
    sur place political activities.  The judge concluded that the appellant
    had simply attended the demonstrations in  order,  in  his  words,  "to
    fabricate his claim that he has been involved in  sur  place  political
    activities in the UK".

13. At paragraph 31, the judge said this:-

         "I accept Mr Hall's submission that if the  appellant's  attendance
         at the demonstrations has not been  circulated  or  shared  on  the
         internet then the Sudanese authorities are unlikely to be aware  of
         his activities and so this will not place him at risk on return  to
         Sudan."

14. Beginning at  paragraph  32,  the  judge  dealt  with  various  letters
    produced on behalf of the appellant.  These included letters  from  the
    JEM movement, the Berti & Tunjour Community UK, and from the  Union  of
    the People of Darfur  in  the  UK  and  Northern  Ireland.   The  judge
    examined these letters in detail.  He placed little weight  upon  them.
    Part of the reason for this was that none of the authors of the letters
    had come to give oral evidence on behalf of the appellant.

15.  So far as the letter from the Union of the People of Darfur in the  UK
    and Northern Ireland was concerned, the judge noted that Mr  Dawelbite,
    who was the author of the letter, had concluded on the  basis  of  what
    the judge said were nine questions in total and a very short interview,
    that the appellant was  a  member  of  the  Berti  Tribe.   There  was,
    however, no evidence that Mr Dawelbite was qualified to be an expert in
    assessing a person's ethnicity or nationality.  In any event, the judge
    did  not  accept  an  interview  comprising  nine  basic  questions  as
    sufficient to assess that the appellant was from the Berti Tribe.   The
    appellant said that no one had asked him to produce witnesses to  speak
    to the letters.  The judge did not  consider  that  explanation  to  be
    credible, particularly as the appellant had  been  legally  represented
    throughout the proceedings.

16. At paragraph 37, the judge looked at various letters  said  to  emanate
    from Sudan, including a letter from a lawyer and various documents said
    to emanate from the authorities and to show that the  appellant  was  a
    wanted person in Sudan.  The judge observed he had not been  shown  the
    original documents, only copies.  The judge had already  explained  why
    he found the appellant's account to incredible;  but,  looking  at  the
    documents and applying the  guidance  in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  he  attached
    little weight to them.

17.  In conclusion, the judge found that the appellant  had  fabricated  an
    account in order to bolster his  asylum  claim.   The  judge  found  no
    reason, in his words, to depart from the findings of Judge Birrell.

18. The grounds of application for permission to appeal were not drafted by
    Mr Howard, who appears on behalf of the appellant. Ground 1  was  that
    the judge provided inadequate reasons for finding that the  appellant's
    account was  not  credible;  that  the  judge  failed  to  identify  at
    paragraph 25 all the core matters engaged in the appeal; that the judge
    provided inadequate reasons for finding the appellant was not a genuine
    political activist; and that the judge  had  also  provided  inadequate
    reasons for attaching  little  weight  to  the  appellant's  supportive
    documents.  All this comes under the heading  of  "Irrational  material
    findings of fact".

19. Ground 2 related to Article 8 and paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The ground contended that the judge had erred in law by failing
    to make findings as to why the appellant's  human  rights  claim  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was not made out.   The  judge  had  failed  to
    explain why the Rules were not satisfied in the  appellant's  case  and
    why there would not, in fact, be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in Sudan.  The judge had also, according to the  grounds,
    failed to give adequate reasons as to why the appellant's  claim  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR outside the Immigration Rules was not satisfied.

20. Finally, under ground 3, the judge was said to have  erred  in  law  in
    failing to make findings on the risk  to  the  appellant  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker.

21. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to  appeal  in
    relation to grounds 1 and 3, the granting judge considered  that  Judge
    Ali,  having  made  detailed   findings   regarding   the   appellant's
    involvement in activities in the  UK,  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    previous decision of Judge Birrell. The granting  judge  was  therefore
    "less persuaded" of  grounds  1  and  3.  However,  what  troubled  the
    granting judge was that the appellant had -

         "submitted an Article 8 private life claim.  This was considered in
         the refusal letter.  It was also included in the grounds of appeal.
          No reference was made to the appellant's private life claim during
         the hearing although counsel did refer  to  adopting  his  skeleton
         which included brief references to the appellant's private life  in
         the UK.  The appellant also adopted  his  witness  statement  which
         included his claim to have private life in the UK.   This  was  not
         dealt with by the Judge and this amounts to an  arguable  error  of
         law."

22. Taking the grounds in turn, despite Mr Howard's able submissions  I  am
    unable to accept any of them, even as elaborated by him.

23.  The judge was entitled at paragraph 25 to identify what he  considered
    to be the central aspects of the  appeal  advanced  by  the  appellant,
    namely his  sur  place  activities.   It  is  clear  from  my  previous
    description of the judge's findings, however, that the judge dealt with
    all other material matters, and did so by giving adequate  reasons  for
    his conclusions.

24. The judge was,  in  particular,  entitled  to  regard  Judge  Birrell's
    findings as the starting point.  Indeed,  the  judge  would  have  been
    rightly criticised for not doing so, having regard  to  the  Devaseelan
    principles, which have been approved on a number of  occasions  by  the
    higher courts.  Judge Birrell's conclusion  was,  in  terms,  that  the
    appellant is not a member of the Berti Tribe.  Having gone through  the
    material in some detail and having reminded  himself  at  paragraph  24
    that the findings were for him to make rather than simply  to  rely  on
    the decision of Judge Birrell, Judge Ali stated in terms  at  paragraph
    38 of the decision that he saw no reason to depart from Judge Birrell's
    findings.  All of this, the judge was entitled to do.

25. Criticism is made of Judge Ali's treatment of the  various  letters  of
    support.  However, the judge was entitled to regard it  as  significant
    that none of the writers of these letters had come  to  give  evidence.
    The appellant had no reasonable explanation to give for  this  failure.
    So far as the letter written by Mr Dawelbite is concerned, it is indeed
    extremely short.  The questions and answers, which are to be  found  at
    page  99  of  the  consolidated  bundle,  tell  us  nothing  about  the
    circumstances in which the interview was undertaken.  That, in  itself,
    seems to be a legitimate cause for concern.

26. In any event, as Mr McVeety points out, Judge Ali  gave  us  a  further
    reason for placing no material weight on the letter; namely,  the  fact
    that there was no indication that Mr Dawelbite was qualified to be  an
    expert.  Mr Howard points to him as being the Secretary General of  the
    Darfur Union in the UK and North Ireland, as it is described.  However,
    we know little or nothing about this  organisation;  including  whether
    being the Secretary General, whatever that might mean, makes the writer
    qualified to opine on ethnicity.

27. The fact that there may have been an additional letter in  the  bundle,
    to which specific reference was not made to by  the  judge,  is  of  no
    significance.  It is trite law that a judge is not  required  to  refer
    expressly to each and every item of evidence.  Nothing has  been  shown
    to suggest that there  was  any  qualitative  difference  between  this
    letter, compared with the others that the judge did specifically  refer
    to in the decision.

28. The issue of the sur place activities was also correctly dealt with  by
    Judge  Ali.   The  judge  noted  that  no  relevant  posting   of   any
    photographic material relating to the activities had been made.   I  am
    satisfied that, at paragraph 31, the judge dealt adequately with the so-
    called Danian principle; that is to  say  the  principle  whereby  even
    cynically   undertaken   sur   place   activities   may,   in   certain
    circumstances, give rise  to  a  real  risk  on  return.   The  judge's
    conclusion was that  there  was  nothing  to  show  that  any  of  this
    material, linking the appellant to what was no more  mere  presence  at
    demonstrations, was reasonably likely to have  found  its  way  to  the
    Sudanese authorities.  I say  that,  having  regard  to  the  objective
    evidence contained in the consolidated bundle.  It is clear that failed
    asylum seekers may be questioned  on  return  to  Sudan,  even  in  the
    present somewhat changed situation in which that country finds  itself.
    There is, however, in my view, having looked at this material,  nothing
    to show it is reasonably  likely  that  somebody  of  this  appellant's
    profile would be questioned in such a way that he would  be  likely  to
    reveal his presence at anti-government  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  There is,  accordingly,  no  issue  of  the  appellant  being
    required to lie about matters of that kind.  For these reasons,  rather
    like the judge who granted permission, I do not find any error  in  the
    conclusions of Judge Ali, leaving aside Article 8.

29. It is now necessary to turn to that  Article.   In  the  light  of  the
    judge's findings about the appellant's international protection  claim,
    it cannot in my view rationally be contended that the judge  was  wrong
    in failing to find that paragraph 276ADE  meant  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant returning to Sudan.  He had only
    relatively recently come from that country.   There  is  no  indication
    that he has lost his understanding of  the  culture  and  languages  of
    Sudan.

30. What troubled the granting judge, however, was  that  there  had  been,
    according to that  judge,  some  Article  8  private  life  claim  that
    compelled attention, with which Judge Ali had failed to  deal.   It  is
    true that the decision of the respondent had analysed private life.  It
    had done so, however, in terms of paragraph 276ADE, before going on  to
    look  at  whether  there  would  be  very  significant   obstacles   to
    integration.  For the reasons I have just articulated,  the  respondent
    concluded that  there  would  not.   There  was  then  an  analysis  at
    paragraph 57 of the respondent's decision on exceptional circumstances.
     It was found there that the appellant had provided no  information  or
    evidence to show that there were any such circumstances.

31.  The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against   the
    respondent's decision merely say  this  in  respect  of  human  rights:
    "Articles 2+3+8 of the ECHR will be violated should  the  Appellant  be
    forced to leave the UK".  So far as Article  8  is  concerned,  nothing
    more is said.

32. What appears to be the thrust of the case which found favour  with  the
    granting judge is, therefore, no more than  that  this  appellant,  who
    came to the United Kingdom relatively  recently,  has  a  private  life
    which commands respect, to the point at  which  the  respondent  cannot
    remove him, compatibly with Article 8.  But there is  no  such  private
    life of that character.  The appellant, like anyone else, has no  doubt
    friends; he may, indeed, have  friends  in  the  communities  that  are
    described in the bundle and, particularly, friends who are  members  of
    the Berti Tribe, as well  as  other  Sudanese  friends  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  But that, with respect, is no reason  at  all  to  allow  the
    decision of Judge Ali to be overturned.  Indeed, had Judge Ali  made  a
    finding on what was before him that the appellant's private life was of
    such a character as to defeat the respondent's requirements  to  comply
    with immigration control, that finding would,  undoubtedly,  have  been
    challenged by the respondent on rationality grounds; and rightly so.

33.  For these reasons, this appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date: 13 December 2019


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber



