
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05805/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Civil and Family Court     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th January 2019                          |On 18th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss G Patel of Counsel instructed by Rochdale Law
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against a decision of Judge  Holt  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on  20th  April
    2018.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the  Claimant.   She  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born in May 1991.  She has a partner who she met  in  the  UK,
    and they have a daughter  who  was  born  on  11th  August  2016.   The
    Claimant, her partner and their  daughter  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.
    They live together as  a  family  but  the  Claimant  and  her  partner
    although they have a genuine and subsisting relationship, do  not  wish
    to marry.

 3. The Claimant made an asylum claim based upon a  fear  of  her  aunt  in
    Pakistan, because the Claimant had refused to  marry  her  aunt's  son.
    The Claimant's case was that her family both in  the  UK  and  Pakistan
    have rejected her because she has commenced  a  relationship  with  her
    partner without  their  permission,  and  had  a  child  without  being
    married.  She claimed  that  her  aunt  and  other  family  members  in
    Pakistan would harass and torture her if  she  returned.   She  claimed
    that her aunt has made threats to kill her.  The Claimant's parents and
    sister live in the UK.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the claim for  international  protection
    on 7th June 2017 and the appeal was heard by the FtT on 5th April 2018.

 5. The judge found the Claimant's claim to be credible, with the exception
    of the element that related to the claim that the  aunt  had  commenced
    court proceedings against the Claimant in Pakistan, alleging  that  she
    is guilty of adultery.  The judge specifically rejected  that  part  of
    the claim.

 6. The judge found that if the  Claimant,  her  partner  and  their  child
    returned to Pakistan they would suffer "high levels  of  discrimination
    in Pakistan amounting to persecution".  The judge  found  the  Claimant
    would not be able to return to her home area.  The discrimination would
    be caused by the Claimant and her  partner  not  being  married,  which
    would cause difficulties for their child.  The judge allowed the appeal
    on the basis that the Claimant  would  be  at  risk  of  discrimination
    amounting to persecution upon return to Pakistan and found that removal
    from the UK would  breach  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It was submitted that the judge  had  erred  by  failing  to
    consider the country guidance decision  SM  (lone  women  -  ostracism)
    Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC).  It was submitted that the judge  had
    failed to establish that social ostracism amounted to  persecution  and
    it was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    Claimant's child would be unable to obtain  an  identity  card  as  the
    identity of the child's father was known.

 8. In addition it was contended that the judge had  erred  in  failing  to
    identify why discrimination referred to in  background  evidence  would
    amount to persecution, particularly as  the  Claimant  would  have  the
    protection of her male partner if she returned  to  Pakistan.   It  was
    submitted that the facts of this appeal are similar to SM, and in  that
    case it was found that the  Claimant  would  not  be  at  risk  if  she
    returned to Pakistan with her unmarried partner and three  illegitimate
    children, if they relocated.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge O'Garro of the FtT.

Error of Law

10. On 27th July 2018 I heard submissions from both parties in relation  to
    error of law, and concluded that  the  judge's  decision  must  be  set
    aside.  Full details of the application for permission to  appeal,  the
    grant of permission, the submissions  made  by  both  parties,  and  my
    reasons for setting aside the decision are contained in my error of law
    decision dated 2nd August 2018, promulgated  on  9th  August  2018.   I
    summarise below, in  brief,  my  reasons  for  setting  aside  the  FtT
    decision.

11. There was no challenge to the credibility findings made  by  the  judge
    and those findings were preserved.  The judge at paragraph  21  of  the
    decision records that the core elements of  the  Claimant's  claim  are
    accepted, and at paragraph 23 makes it clear that what is not  accepted
    is the claim that the aunt in Pakistan had issued court proceedings.

12. I found that the judge had erred  in  law  by  not  demonstrating  that
    applicable  country  guidance  case  law,  that  being  SM,  had   been
    considered.  Practice Direction  12.4  provides  that  any  failure  to
    follow a clear, apparently applicable country guidance case or to  show
    why it does not apply to the case in question is likely to be  regarded
    as  Grounds  for  Appeal  on  a  point  of  law.   The  judge  had  not
    demonstrated that SM had been considered, and had not demonstrated  why
    the principles did not apply.

Re-making the Decision

13. At the resumed hearing the Claimant and her partner  had  attended  but
    were not called to give  oral  evidence.   I  ascertained  that  I  had
    received all documentation upon which the parties intended to rely, and
    that each party had served the other with any documentation upon  which
    reliance was to be placed. I had the Claimant's  bundle  comprising  99
    pages, the Home  Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance  on  women
    fearing gender based harm/violence in Pakistan dated February 2016, and
    a further bundle submitted on behalf of  the  Appellant  comprising  97
    pages.  This bundle included an expert report dated 25th  January  2019
    prepared by Mrs Uzma Moeen.  In addition I received on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant a letter  dated  19th  September  2018  from  the  destitution
    project.

14. I heard oral submissions from both  representatives.   The  submissions
    have  been  recorded  in  full  in  my  Record  of  Proceedings.    The
    submissions are lengthy and will not be reiterated  here.   I  set  out
    below a very brief summary of the submissions that were made.

15. On behalf of the Secretary of State I was asked to find  that  reliance
    should be placed upon the country guidance  decision  rather  than  the
    expert report.  I was asked to note the Claimant has been educated to A
    level  in  the  UK.   Her  partner  has  family  members  in  Pakistan.
    Therefore although the Claimant's family would not support  her,  there
    could be some family support from her partner's family.

16. Miss Patel submitted that the Claimant did not wish to marry,  and  did
    not believe in marriage, and therefore was entitled to  live  with  her
    partner without being married.  I was asked to find that  the  scenario
    in SM was factually different and therefore SM could  be  distinguished
    and need not be followed.

17. I was referred to various paragraphs throughout the expert report which
    indicated that the Claimant would be at risk if  returned  to  Pakistan
    because she would be living with her unmarried partner and her daughter
    would be illegitimate.

18. If I found that SM could not be distinguished on the facts, I was asked
    to follow the expert report which indicates that SM should no longer be
    followed.

19. I was asked to conclude that the expert report demonstrated that  there
    would be no reasonable internal relocation option,  no  sufficiency  of
    protection, and therefore the Claimant would be at risk if returned  to
    Pakistan.  Miss Patel confirmed that the Claimant claimed asylum, or in
    the alternative humanitarian protection, and relied upon Articles 2 and
    3 of the 1950 European Convention.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. I have  considered  all  the  evidence  that  has  been  supplied,  and
    considered that evidence in the round.  In relation to risk  on  return
    the burden of proof is on the Claimant, to  the  lower  standard,  that
    being a reasonable degree of likelihood.

22. The credibility findings of the FtT are preserved.  These are that  the
    Claimant left Pakistan on 26th January 2010 travelling with her  mother
    and sister.  An agent was used to aid their journey,  and  she  used  a
    forged passport.

23. The Claimant's aunt helped fund the trip and it was understood that the
    Claimant would marry the aunt's son.  The Claimant did not  enter  into
    that arranged marriage but met her partner in the  UK.   They  began  a
    relationship and now have a daughter born 11th August 2016.  They  live
    together as a family unit.  The Claimant's family in the UK,  with  the
    exception of her sister,  do  not  have  any  contact  with  her.   The
    Claimant's fear is of her aunt in Pakistan who has threatened  her  for
    failing to enter the arranged marriage.

24. The issue that I have decide is whether the Claimant has proved she has
    a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason, and whether
    she would be at risk if returned to Pakistan or with her  daughter  and
    partner.

25. I have carefully considered the expert report.  I  will  not  reiterate
    all the paragraphs to which I was referred.  The expert  believes  that
    the Claimant would be  at  risk  in  Pakistan  of  being  charged  with
    adultery or fornication under section 496B of the Pakistan Penal  Code.
    The expert finds it plausible that the Appellant  may  be  at  risk  of
    honour killing.  The expert at paragraph 73 records that she  does  not
    know of any case of a couple living  together  in  Pakistan  without  a
    valid marriage, having children born  out  of  wedlock.   The  expert's
    opinion is that  the  Claimant  and  her  unmarried  partner  would  be
    prosecuted under Hudood laws and would not be able to relocate and  the
    authorities would not be able to provide protection for her.

26. The expert considers sufficiency of protection commencing at  paragraph
    127 of her report and does not believe that the police would offer such
    protection, because of the corruption that is endemic within the police
    force.

27. Internal relocation is considered commencing  at  paragraph  137.   The
    expert points out that citizens in  Pakistan  must  register  with  the
    National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) of  Pakistan.   It
    is mandatory for every citizen after eighteen years of age to  register
    with NADRA and acquire a Computerised National  Identity  Card  (CNIC).
    The expert  at  paragraph  139  believes  it  highly  likely  that  the
    Claimant's estranged extended  family  could  easily  gain  information
    about her whereabouts by bribing the police if she was in the Punjab as
    the police maintain a database of all tenants residing in rented houses
    or hostels.  It would appear that this does not however  apply  to  the
    whole of Pakistan.  However the  expert  at  paragraph  144  gives  the
    opinion that it is highly likely that the  Claimant's  extended  family
    could obtain greater  information  about  her  whereabouts  by  bribing
    police or clerks at the NADRA offices.

28. At paragraph 149 the expert gives the opinion that to  obtain  a  Child
    Registration Certificate (CRC) the child would need to be registered in
    the NADRA database and proof of birth would need to  be  submitted  and
    proof of the father or mother's nationality.  The status of the  father
    and mother would need to be  "married"  to  register  the  child.   The
    expert contacted an employee at the head office of NADRA and asked what
    would the position be if there was no proof of marriage or the child is
    illegitimate, and was told that the employee was not sure, but in  that
    case an affidavit or sworn statement of  the  father  would  be  needed
    acknowledging the child's paternity and  explaining  why  there  is  no
    proof of marriage.  The employee was asked if  he  could  confirm  that
    this is the procedure to which he replied he could not confirm it,  but
    there are cases where proof of marriage is not available, but  then  he
    did confirm that unless one of the parent's status is  married,  a  CRC
    cannot be issued by NADRA. The status or seniority of the  employee  is
    not disclosed in the report. It is not clear what authority he  has  to
    comment upon whether a CRC could be issued. I do not attach significant
    weight to the report on this point.

29. The expert's opinion does not accord with some cases previously decided
    by the Upper Tribunal in relation  to  Pakistan.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    decided in AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC)
    that there is in Pakistan a systemic sufficiency of  state  protection.
    However an individual's particular circumstances may  give  rise  to  a
    need for additional protection and the  facts  of  each  case  must  be
    considered.  In this case, the Respondent's position is that there is a
    sufficiency of state protection and a  reasonable  option  of  internal
    relocation.

30. I must follow country guidance case law if it is applicable, and  if  I
    do not follow that case law, I must provide cogent reasons why  I  have
    departed from it.  I do not find  that  there  is  a  material  factual
    difference between SM and the Claimant's case before  me.   In  SM  the
    Appellant was estranged from her husband.  She claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis that her estranged husband came from a rich and  powerful  family
    and if she returned to Pakistan  from  the  UK  she  would  be  killed.
    Following her separation from her husband, the Appellant had  formed  a
    relationship with another man of Pakistani  origin,  and  although  not
    divorced, she and her new partner had  three  children  together.   The
    Upper Tribunal had to consider the risk of ostracism of a  mother  with
    an illegitimate child in Pakistan.

31. The Upper Tribunal heard expert evidence from Dr Ballard, a  consultant
    anthropologist, who had prepared a report entitled "risk on  return  to
    Pakistan in the case of a single mother and her illegitimate children".
     The Upper Tribunal also heard evidence from a qualified social worker,
    in relation to the circumstances of the Appellant and her children.  In
    addition the  Upper  Tribunal  took  into  account  country  background
    reports and evidence.

32. It was found that where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in
    her home area for a single woman or female head of household there  may
    be an internal relocation option to one of Pakistan's  largest  cities,
    depending on the family, social and educational situation of the  women
    in question.

33. It would not normally be unduly harsh  to  expect  a  single  woman  or
    female head of household to relocate internally within Pakistan if  she
    can access support from family members or a male guardian in the  place
    of relocation.

34. It would not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off or older
    women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It helps if a  woman  has
    qualifications enabling her to get well paid  employment  and  pay  for
    accommodation and childcare if required.

35. Where a single woman with or without children is ostracised  by  family
    members and other sources of possible social support because she is  in
    an irregular situation, internal relocation will be more difficult  and
    whether it is unduly harsh will be a question of fact in each case.

36. The Upper Tribunal found that there would be the option of shelters for
    a period of time.

37. It was found that women in Pakistan are legally  permitted  to  divorce
    their husbands and may institute divorce proceedings from  the  country
    of refuge, although that it is not applicable in this  case.   A  woman
    who divorces her husband and returns with a new partner or husband will
    have access to male protection and is unlikely outside her home area to
    be at risk of ostracism still less of persecution or serious harm.

38. At paragraph 102 of SM the Upper Tribunal concluded that the  Appellant
    could return to  Pakistan  accompanied  by  her  children  and  by  her
    partner, the father of her children, and if they returned together  and
    relocated outside Lahore, which was her home area, there was "no reason
    why they should face problems as an unmarried couple and no reason  why
    the Appellant and her partner could not marry."

39. Therefore the Upper Tribunal was considering a woman returning with the
    three illegitimate children, and a new partner  to  whom  she  was  not
    married.  The conclusion was that they would not face  problems  as  an
    unmarried couple with three illegitimate children.

40. If the Claimant in this case returned, she would not be returning as  a
    married woman estranged from her husband, living with  a  new  partner.
    She would be returning as an unmarried woman, with a  partner  and  her
    daughter who was born out of wedlock.  I do  not  find  that  factually
    there is a material distinction to be made between SM  and  this  case.
    There is no satisfactory evidence to indicate that the Claimant's  aunt
    or extended family in Pakistan have any influence with the  authorities
    either locally or nationally.

41. I am therefore faced with an expert report  which  disagrees  with  the
    country guidance decision.  I do not find that the expert  has  pointed
    to a worsening of the situation in Pakistan since SM was decided.   The
    view of the expert is that SM should not be followed, but I do not find
    that any cogent reasons have been provided in the report, to show  that
    I can depart from a country guidance decision  which  deals  with  very
    much the same circumstances as are the circumstances in this appeal.

42. For that reason I feel that I am bound to follow the  country  guidance
    decision of SM, and  conclude  that  the  Appellant  has  a  reasonable
    internal relocation option away from her home area in Pakistan.   I  do
    not find that it has been proved that there is  not  a  sufficiency  of
    protection from the authorities should that be needed.  I do  not  find
    that the evidence indicates, even to the lower standard of proof,  that
    the Claimant's aunt would be aware if  she  returned  to  Pakistan  and
    would seek to bribe police officers and officials who operate the NADRA
    database.  I do not find that it is clear that the Claimant's  daughter
    could not be registered  in  Pakistan.   A  note  in  the  Respondent's
    Country Information and Guidance published in February  2016  at  9.2.1
    indicates that a child born out of wedlock  could  be  registered  with
    NADRA if the father's name was provided.

43. I therefore conclude that the Claimant has not proved that she would be
    at risk if returned to Pakistan and therefore  is  not  entitled  to  a
    grant of asylum or humanitarian protection, and  has  not  proved  that
    there would be a risk of treatment that would breach Articles 2 or 3 of
    the 1950 Convention.  I make no findings upon Article 8,  as  this  was
    not in issue before me.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law  and  is  set
aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

I dismiss the appeal of the Claimant on asylum grounds.

I dismiss the appeal of the Claimant on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 11th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the Claimant's appeal and therefore there  can  be  no  fee
award.


Signed                              Date 11th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
