
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05836/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 April 2019                            |On 01 May 2019                |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    WDPS
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)

                                         Appellant
                                     and

                    SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                              Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Blake of counsel, instructed by York
Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS








BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka,  who  is  Sinhalese  and  a
    Buddhist. He was born and brought up in the Colombo area of Sri Lanka.

2.   He entered the United Kingdom on 8 October  2009,  as  a  student,  and
    remained here with such leave until 14 February 2016,  when  his  first
    application for leave to remain on family and private life grounds  was
    refused. He made a further application on human rights  grounds  on  23
    May 2016 and this application was refused on 15 March 2017.

3.   The Appellant applied for asylum on 13 July 2017 on a sur place  basis.
     He did not assert that he had been politically active in Sri Lanka but
    relied on the  fact  that  his  girlfriend,  who  was  from  the  Tamil
    community had asked him to send her  money  in  order  to  support  her
    family. As a consequence, he had sent her sums of money in  2012,  2013
    and 2014; not knowing that she was using  this  money  to  support  the
    LTTE. It was his case that subsequently the authorities discovered that
    he had sent her this money and started to call  at  his  home  and  put
    pressure on his family to  encourage  him  to  hand  himself  into  the
    authorities.

4.   The Respondent refused his application on 20 March 2018. The  Appellant
    appealed  against  the   decision   and   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Barrowclough dismissed his  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
    December 2018. The Appellant appealed  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan refused him permission to appeal on 8 January  2019.  But  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Reeds granted him permission to appeal on 13 March 2019.







ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions  and  I  have  taken  them  into  account  before
    reaching my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds gave the Appellant permission to  appeal  on
    all three grounds of appeal.

VULNERABILITY

7.    The  first  ground  of  appeal  was  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Barrowclough had failed to take into  account  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance  Note  No.  2  of  2010  issued  by  the  Presidents  of   the









                                       Upper and  First-tier  Tribunals  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Chamber, entitled  Child,  vulnerable  adult
    and sensitive appellant guidance and, as  a  consequence,  take  proper
    account  of  the  opinion  provided  by  Dr.   Zapata,   a   consultant
    psychiatrist.

8.   The Guidance  recommends  that  judges  recognise  that  mental  health
    problems,  social  or  learning  difficulties,  religious  beliefs  and
    practices, sexual orientation, ethnic social and  cultural  background,
    domestic  and  employment  circumstances  and  physical  disability  or
    impairment can all  render  an  appellant  vulnerable.  In  particular,
    paragraph 3 states that:

     "The consequences of such vulnerability differ according to the  degree
    to which an individual is affected. It is a matter for you to determine
    the extent of an identified vulnerability, the effect on the quality of
    the evidence and the weight to  be  placed  on  such  vulnerability  in
    assessing the evidence before you, taking into account the evidence  as
    a whole".

9.   In paragraph 15 of the Guidance it is also said that:

     "The decision should record whether  the  Tribunal  has  concluded  the
    appellant (or a witness) is  a  child,  vulnerable  or  sensitive,  the
    effect the Tribunal considered  the  identified  vulnerability  had  in
    assessing the evidence before it and  thus  whether  the  Tribunal  was
    satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her case to  the
    relevant standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should  be  given
    to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a state  of
    mind"

10.   It  is  clear  from  her  decision,  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Barrowclough did not follow this guidance.   This is despite the  views
    expressed by the Court of Appeal in In AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123,  where  Sir  Ernest
    Ryder, Senior President, gave guidance on the general  approach  to  be
    adopted in law and practice by the First-tier and  Upper  Tribunals  to
    ensure that fair determination of appeals from children,  young  people
    and  other  incapacitated  or  vulnerable  persons  whose  ability   to
    effectively participate in proceedings may be limited.

11.  He also  noted  at  paragraph  21(f)  of  AM  that  "in  making  asylum
    decisions, the highest standards of procedural fairness are required".

12.   At  paragraph  25  of  his   decision,   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Barrowclough did note that Dr. Zapata had found that the Appellant  was
    suffering from PTSD and a moderate to  severe  depressive  episode.  He
    also noted that Dr. Zapata had  outlined  how  these  conditions  would
    impact on the ability of the Appellant to give cogent answers about his
    past experiences. However, in paragraph 31 of  his  decision,  he  then
    disregards this  medical  evidence  when  considering  the  Appellant's
    credibility.

13.  When doing so, he gives no reason for departing from  a  very  detailed
    and  cogent  report  by  a  consultant  psychiatrist  with  appropriate
    qualifications and who had adopted appropriate clinical  methodologies.
    Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Barrowclough failed to  adopt  the
    procedures necessary when an appellant was vulnerable. This  gave  rise
    to an error of law in his decision.

14.  The fact that Dr. Zapata did  not  find  that  the  Appellant's  mental
    conditions arose from his girlfriend's activities is not fatal  to  the
    Appellant's  case.  He  found  that  the  original  trigger   for   the
    Appellant's  PTSD  had  been  witnessing  a  bomb  attack  leading   to
    fatalities in Colombo. He also found that his PTSD had abated until  he
    heard that he was wanted in Sri Lanka and then it revived in  the  form
    of a fear of being returned to Sri Lanka. He also explained  why  those
    suffering from trauma often delay in seeking  medical  help  or  making
    applications which would involve them addressing previous trauma.

REASONS FOR REJECTING CORROBOATIVE EVIDENCE

15.  There was a detailed and cogent letter from the Appellant's  father  in
    the Appellant's bundle which described the visits by the authorities to
    the family home. It is also clear that the authorities were aware  that
    the Appellant had been away as they made enquiries as to whether he had
    returned to Sri Lanka and, if not, where he was.  There was nothing  in
    the letter which was inconsistent with the available objective evidence
    or any of the other evidence provided by the  Appellant.  Some  of  the
    dates and details were also internally consistent with the letter  from
    the Attorney at Law, Mr. Dhailamy.  In addition, the provenance of  the
    letter from the Appellant's father was strengthened by the fact that it
    was accompanied by the envelope in which it was posted and by the  fact
    that it was addressed to the Appellant's solicitors.


16.  There was also a letter from the Attorney at Law who confirmed that  he
    had been instructed by the Appellant's mother when his father had  been
    detained by the authorities. Again, the dates were consistent with  the
    letter by the Appellant's father and the Appellant's own evidence.  The
    letter was also detail and well-written and accompanied by  a  copy  of
    the Lawyers Directory 2017 produced by the Bar Association of Sri Lanka
    and a copy of the Attorney's Bar Association card.  The  provenance  of
    the letter was supported by these documents.

17.   Nevertheless,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Barrowclough   found   in
    paragraph 32 of his decision that he could not give any weight to these
    letters. When doing so he failed to  consider  the  provenance  of  the
    letters or consider  their  content  in  the  light  of  the  objective
    evidence. Instead, he relied on  two  letters  from  the  British  High
    Commission, dated 3 July 2015 and 5 June 2017 which were  not  specific
    to the Appellant's particular case. The second letter was not  relevant
    as the Appellant was not relying on  a  letter  from  a  court  or  the
    police.  The first went no further than asserting that within  a  small
    sample of 30  cases,  17  had  involved  attorneys  whose  evidence  or
    credentials had been found to be false and in 11 cases the attorney  in
    question could not be contacted.

18.  In addition, he did not consider this evidence as part  of  a  holistic
    assessment of the credibility of the Appellant's account as required by
    Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2000].  This
    gave rise to a further error of law.

    FAILURE TO PROPERLY CONSIDER THE COUNTRY INFORMATION

19.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Barrowclough only dealt with  one  aspect  of
    the findings in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC. This was the sophistication of the intelligence
    network developed by the authorities in Sri Lanka.

20.  He did not consider the core of the Appellant's fear which was  whether
    sending a comparatively large sum of money to  someone  thought  to  be
    active in the LTTE from  a  city  thought  to  be  a  centre  for  LTTE
    activists may give rise to a risk on return.


21.  As a consequence, there were  errors  of  law  in  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Barrowclough's decision.

Decision

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Barrowclough is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to be heard de novo  by  a  salaried  first-tier
    judge at Taylor House and, in any event, the appeal should not  be  re-
    listed before First-tier Tribunal Judges Barrowclough or Chohan.

Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 25 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


