
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05767/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2020                              |On 24 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  REZA ZARE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 13 June 1994 and is a male citizen  of  Iran.
    He entered the United Kingdom in January 2016 and claimed asylum. By  a
    decision dated 27 May 2016, the Secretary of State refused to grant the
    appellant international protection. The appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated  on  22  December  2017,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There has been a delay in the determination of this appeal pending  the
    making of new country guidance in the Upper Tribunal.  Mr  Holmes,  who
    appeared for the appellant, relied upon both the  original  grounds  of
    appeal and the renewed grounds. However, he  told  me  that  his  focus
    would be upon parts (a) and (b) of the initial grounds. His  client  no
    longer sought to rely upon part (c) of those grounds.

 3. First, the appellant submits that the judge reached  findings  of  fact
    which were not supported by the evidence. At [56], the judge wrote:

         "Overall, I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  manufactured  a
         claim  based  on  conversion  to  Christianity.  In  my  view,  the
         appellant had been advised to say that he had  been  introduced  to
         Christianity in Iran  and  that  the  authorities  had  an  adverse
         interest in him. In addition, the appellant  had  been  advised  to
         mention at the  earliest  opportunity  that  he  had  converted  to
         Christianity and that he had to attend church regularly in the  UK.
         I reject the appellant's account in its entirety."

 4. The appellant complains that the judge had not been provided  with  any
    evidence to indicate that the appellant had been 'advised' to say  that
    he had been introduced to Christianity in Iran or 'advised'  to  do  so
    'at the earliest opportunity.' The finding amounted to  speculation  on
    the part of the judge. It was not  for  the  judge  to  posit  his  own
    alternative scenario, having rejected the appellant's account.

 5. I find this ground is without merit. I agree that  the  judge  was  not
    required to take a view on whether the appellant had  been  advised  to
    fabricate a particular account or whether he had simply  come  up  with
    the idea himself. However, the  judge's  obiter  observation  makes  no
    material difference at all to the outcome of the appeal. The  appellant
    has put forward an account which the judge has rejected, giving  cogent
    reasons for doing so; the judge has not rejected the account because or
    to a greater extent because the appellant may have been  advised  by  a
    third party to adopt it.

 6. Secondly, the appellant asserts that the judge has failed  to  consider
    material evidence. The judge rejected the  appellant's  claim  to  have
    converted to Christianity. At  [44]  and  [45],  the  judge  found  the
    appellant's failure to 'share a  [Bible]  reading  or  story  that  has
    touched him' was 'wholly inconsistent with someone who claims to have a
    genuine  commitment  and  interest  in  Christianity.'  The   appellant
    complains that the judge had failed to have regard to  his  answers  at
    asylum interview [Q58/59] in which the appellant refers to a  'sentence
    [in the Bible]' which had 'caught my eye.' The  appellant  goes  on  to
    give chapter and verse for the passage to which he refers  (John1,  V).
    Moreover, judge had failed to mention a  supporting  witness  statement
    which was before him prepared by [ZG]. This witness stated [8] that the
    appellant's religion is 'is something spiritual for him as far as I see
    it.'

 7. I find that the ground is without merit.  The  reference  made  to  the
    gospel by the appellant at Q58/59 concerns an incident  which  occurred
    in Iran. At Q184, the interviewer specifically asked the  appellant  to
    tell about a particular story  or  teaching  which  the  appellant  had
    learnt whilst at church in  Bradford,  West  Yorkshire.  The  appellant
    replied, 'regardless of whether they  are  talking  about  proverbs  or
    stories of verses, my understanding is Christianity is  a  religion  of
    love and kindness forgiveness and being blessed.' I  consider  that  it
    was open to the judge to agree with the Secretary of  State  that  that
    answer is both vague and damaging of the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a
    genuine Christian. The fact that the appellant had referred to a  Bible
    passage in answer to a different question is wholly immaterial. Indeed,
    he could have referred to the same passage when asked about what he had
    learned from attending church in Bradford but he chose not to do so. It
    was open to the judge to find  that  the  appellant's  answer  at  Q184
    (which  I  have  quoted  in  full)  was  evasive  and  vague  that  the
    appellant's failure to refer  to  any  particular  Christian  story  or
    teaching but to  rely  instead  upon  vague  generalities  damaged  his
    credibility.

 8. So far as Ms [G]'s evidence is concerned, frankly this adds nothing  to
    support the appellant's claim to be a genuine Christian.  I  note  that
    the witness is married to a  relative  of  the  appellant.  She  has  a
    reason, therefore, to express  an  opinion  that  the  appellant  is  a
    genuine Christian. Moreover, to say that an  individual's  religion  is
    'something spiritual' for them  rather  like  saying  and  his  or  her
    membership of a political party is 'something political' for them.  The
    failure of the judge to refer to such a platitude in an analysis  which
    otherwise provides cogent and legally sound reasons for  rejecting  the
    appellant's credibility is of no significance.

 9. Consequently, given that I find that  neither  ground  of  appeal  upon
    which the appellant now relies has any merit, I find  that  the  appeal
    should be dismissed.

     Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                           Date 17 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



