
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05356/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Magistrates' Court  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 July 2017                       |On 14 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     MN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, MN, was born in 1997 and is a citizen  of  Algeria.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in November 2014 and applied for  asylum.
    By a decision dated 16 May 2016, the respondent refused  to  grant  him
    asylum.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Shimmin) which, in a decision promulgated on 28 March  2017,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appeared in person before the First-tier Tribunal and the
    Upper Tribunal.  His manuscript  grounds  of  appeal  are  lengthy  and
    somewhat difficult to read.  However, the appellant  did  not  disagree
    with me when I put it to him that the appeal grounds were as summarised
    by Judge Ford who granted permission on 4 May 2017 at [3]:

         It is arguable that the Tribunal may have erred in:

         (a)   not  adequately  assessing  the   evidence   concerning   the
             appellant's claim to be gay.   The  assessment  takes  up  one
             short  paragraph  [37]  and  simply  adopts  the  respondent's
             submissions;

         (b)  not treating the appellant as a vulnerable witness;

         (c)  proceeding in the absence of an up-to-date psychiatric report.
              Given that the appellant was not represented as  at  date  of
             CMR, it is arguable that the Home Office owed him  a  duty  of
             care to ensure that such an assessment was provided;

         (d)  making no findings on humanitarian protection issues given the
             appellant's vulnerability;

         (e)  failing to undertake in the Article 8 assessment.

 3. The appellant had the benefit of an interpreter (North African  Arabic)
    at the Upper Tribunal hearing although he chose to make his submissions
    in English.  I listened carefully to what the appellant had to say  and
    considered also the oral submissions of the representative for the Home
    Office, Mrs Pettersen.  I then reserved my decision.

 4. The appellant's claim before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  his
    father had been murdered.  Judge Shimmin rejected  that  claim  finding
    that the appellant had "failed to substantiate that anyone  is  seeking
    to harm him in Algeria" [35].  As regards  the  appellant's  sexuality,
    Judge Shimmin found [37] that:

         In the appellant's asylum interview he was given many opportunities
         to explain his sexuality and his claimed relationship  but  he  was
         vague.  I find that the appellant has failed to establish, even  to
         the lower standard, that he is homosexual.

 5. Whilst I acknowledge that the judge's finding is  briefly  reasoned,  I
    agree with  the  respondent's  submission  (set  out  in  the  Rule  24
    statement of 25 May 2017) the judge could have added little more  given
    the "limited evidence regarding the appellant's sexuality".   There  is
    no suggestion that the judge has failed to consider the totality of the
    evidence or that he has given inappropriate weight  to  any  particular
    item of evidence.  It was the judge's task to carry out a robust  fact-
    finding exercise on the basis of the evidence which he had before  him.
    I have no doubt that Judge Shimmin has carried out  such  an  exercise.
    Plainly, he reached a finding  which  was  available  to  him  on  that
    evidence.

 6. As regards the appellant's claimed vulnerability, Judge  Shimmin  wrote
    [30]:

         When giving  evidence  the  appellant  appeared  clear  cogent  and
         composed.  It was obvious to me that  he  understood  much  of  the
         English spoken in the hearing and also understood the  interpreter.
         The medical documents before  me  indicate  that  he  suffers  from
         seizures and psychotic behaviour.  These appeared to be  controlled
         by medication.  In assessing the appellant's evidence I have  taken
         into  account  his  medical  condition  and  made  an   appropriate
         allowance.

 7. I am satisfied  that  Judge  Shimmin  did  treat  the  appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness and I have no doubt that he took  into  account  the
    appellant's  medical  condition  when  assessing  the  evidence.  I  am
    satisfied that the judge made every effort to ensure that the appellant
    could be heard in  proceedings  which  concerned  him.  Indeed,  it  is
    difficult to see what else Judge Shimmin should have done in  order  to
    give the appellant a fair hearing.   I  note  that,  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the appellant was composed and  spoke  rationally  and  in  a
    measured way.  He appeared to have no difficulty expressing himself  or
    remembering what he needed to tell the Tribunal.  I am  satisfied  that
    the appellant was given every opportunity to put his case both  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and to the Upper Tribunal.

 8. Judge Shimmin had before him the medical evidence which  the  appellant
    had chosen  to  adduce.   Both  before  Judge  Shimmin  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the appellant was able to explain that he continued  to  take
    medication.  Before the Upper Tribunal, he explained that this  was  to
    control  "voices".   He  told  me  that,  if  he  took  the  medication
    prescribed, he did not hear these "voices".  There is no evidence  that
    he receives any other treatment for his condition.  Mrs Pettersen,  for
    the respondent, made the valid point that there was no evidence to show
    that the medication required by the  appellant  was  not  available  in
    Algeria.

 9. As regards humanitarian protection, the appellant claims  that  he  may
    suffer deteriorating health in  Algeria  but  he  has  been  unable  to
    establish that he would be unable to access the  necessary  medication.
    The appellant's claim to fear the individual (whom  he  was  unable  to
    identify) who had killed his father and his claim that he is at risk in
    Algeria because he is gay were both rejected by the judge.  I find that
    the appellant has failed to establish that those findings were  unsafe.
    At [43], Judge Shimmin made the very clear finding that  the  appellant
    would be able to obtain treatment for his condition in Algeria, relying
    on the analysis contained in the  refusal  letter.   That  analysis  is
    lengthy, and occupies paragraphs [100-114] of the letter.  On the basis
    of the very limited  evidence  available,  the  judge's  findings  were
    plainly available to him.

10. In summary, I am satisfied that Judge Shimmin did  everything  that  he
    could to ensure that the appellant had a fair hearing  of  his  appeal.
    The judge considered such evidence as was available and gave clear  and
    cogent reasons for dismissing the appeal.  Other than  claiming  before
    the Upper Tribunal that he has no family living in Algeria and that  he
    would find  difficulty  accessing  the  necessary  medication  for  his
    condition (claims which do no more than contradict the findings of  the
    judge) the appellant was unable to  offer  any  reason  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to conclude that Judge Shimmin had erred in law.  Accordingly,
    the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

11. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 11 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 11 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

