
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05322/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2020                    |On 15 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    A.C.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan, Solicitor, Prestige Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of India. She appeals  against  an  adverse
    decision of the respondent, dated 23 May 2019, refusing her application
    to remain in this country on international protection grounds.

 2. Her appeal against the respondent's decision was initially  refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Holt)  by
    means of a decision sent to the parties on 23 July 2019. The  appellant
    was granted permission to appeal to this Tribunal by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Neville on 5 November 2019. Following a hearing  held  in
    Manchester Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal by a decision dated 29  January  2020.  UTJ  Pickup
    observed, inter alia, at para. 23 of his decision:

         '23.  ... I adjourned the continuation and remaking of  the  appeal
             to the Upper Tribunal, preserving, of course, the  respondent's
             credibility findings set  out  in  the  refusal  decision,  and
             noting that the only  issues  to  be  addressed  are  those  of
             relocation and sufficiency of protection.'

 3. The resumed hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference
    hearing held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in  a  hearing
    room at Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the
    public. The hearing and its start time were listed in the daily list. I
    was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as  if  we
    were  together  in  the  hearing  room.  I  am  satisfied:  that   this
    constituted a hearing in open court; that the  open  justice  principle
    has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that,  insofar
    as there has been any  restriction  on  a  right  or  interest,  it  is
    justified as necessary and proportionate.

 4. The appellant did not attend the remote hearing. I  confirmed  with  Mr
    Khan that the appellant's non-attendance raised  no  adverse  concerns.
    The hearing was listed for submissions  alone  and  the  appellant  was
    entitled to rely upon her legal  representative  to  advance  her  case
    before this Tribunal. No member of the  public  attended  the  hearing,
    either remotely or in person at Field House.

 5. The representatives confirmed  that  they  and  the  Tribunal  were  in
    possession of all relevant documents. On the morning of the hearing Mr.
    Clarke filed and served the following documents: CPIN 'India: Religious
    minorities' version 2.0 (May 2018), CPIN 'India: Women fearing  gender-
    based violence'  version  2.0  (July  2018),  CPIN  'India:  Actors  of
    protection'  version  1.0  (January  2019),   CPIN   'India:   Internal
    relocation' version 1.0 (January 2019)  and  Country  Background  Note:
    India version 1.0 (January 2019). He further served three decisions  of
    this Tribunal: BK (Risk - adultery - PSG) India CG [2002] UKIAT  03387,
    MD (same-sex orientated males: risk) India CG [2014] UKUT  00065  (IAC)
    and AR and NH (lesbians) India CG [2016]  00066  (IAC).  Mr.  Khan  was
    given time to consider the documents and confirmed that he was ready to
    proceed before the hearing commenced.

 6. Save for one or two very short periods where the connection to Mr  Khan
    suffered buffering, the representatives and the Tribunal were  able  to
    see and hear each other throughout. On occasions where Mr Khan suffered
    buffering, the hearing stopped and upon Mr Khan's  connection  resuming
    the representatives returned to the point of their submissions  reached
    before the problems with the link arose. Both representatives expressed
    satisfaction with the hearing at its conclusion.




Anonymity

 7. An anonymity direction has previously been  made  in  this  matter  and
    neither party requested  that  it  be  set  aside.  This  is  a  matter
    concerning an application for international protection and I am mindful
    of Guidance Note 2013 No 1 which is concerned with anonymity directions
    and  confirms  that  the  starting  point  for  consideration  of  such
    directions in this chamber of the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts  and
    tribunals, is open justice. However, I  observe  paragraph  13  of  the
    Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is the present practise  of
    both the First-tier  Tribunal  and  this  Tribunal  that  an  anonymity
    direction is made in all appeals raising asylum or other  international
    protection claims. I am therefore satisfied that it is appropriate  for
    the anonymity direction to  continue  in  this  matter,  to  avoid  the
    likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from  the  contents
    of her protection claim becoming known to the wider public.

 8. The direction is detailed at the conclusion of this decision.

Background

 9. The appellant is presently aged 33 and hails from the State of Gujarat,
    situated on the west coast of India. She was awarded a Master's  degree
    in commerce. Prior to her travel to the United Kingdom she was employed
    as a teacher from 2015.

10. She met  her  husband,  MKS,  at  college  in  2011  and  a  friendship
    developed. At that date she was Hindu and MKS was  Muslim.  In  January
    2015, when aged 27, she informed her  family  that  she  wished  to  be
    engaged to MKS. Her family expressed their disapproval of events.

11. The appellant converted to  Islam  and  married  MKS  at  a  mosque  in
    December 2015.

12. Two or three weeks later, under pressure from her family, the appellant
    was engaged to another man, H, who is Hindu.

13. The appellant was granted entry clearance as a visitor and travelled to
    the United Kingdom in May 2016. On 8  August  2016  she  spoke  to  her
    mother and was informed that members of Shiv Sena, a Hindu  nationalist
    political party, had killed MKS by dousing him in  petrol  and  burning
    him alive. They also burnt down his  home.  She  understands  that  her
    sister found out about her marriage to MSK, having located a  photo  on
    the appellant's lap-top computer, and the information  was  relayed  to
    Shiv Sena who  then  took  adverse  action  against  her  husband.  The
    appellant's mother informed her that members of  Shiv  Sena  were  also
    looking for her. The appellant is further aware that the whole  of  her
    neighbourhood has been informed as to her having converted and  married
    a Muslim.

14. The appellant sought  international  protection  asserting  a  fear  of
    persecution at the hands of Shiv Sena,  her  family  and  her  deceased
    husband's family.

15. The respondent initially interviewed the appellant on 4  November  2016
    and conducted a substantive interview on 17 May 2017. In her  interview
    the appellant identified her family members as  either  living  in  her
    home city or in a neighbouring city some 40 kms to the south. I note at
    this juncture that no family member is said to reside in Delhi.

16. At Q31 of the interview, the appellant records her mother informing her
    during the phone call in August 2016:

         '31. It's better not to have a daughter than  to  have  a  daughter
             like you. You are dead as far as we are concerned and Shiv Sena
             are also looking for you.'

17. The appellant expressed her inability to approach  the  police  in  her
    interview:

         '211. Can you tell me why you could not approach the police in  IND
             if you were to have problems on your return?


             Because my family consider me as dead. Shiv Sena will  not  let
             me, they are very strong. There is nobody even if I go back  to
             IND, nobody will accept me, if I go Shiv Sena will kill me.


         212  How do you know the police will not protect you?


             Because, I have heard Shiv Sena are very strong, powerful


         213. Could you live elsewhere in IND such as Delhi, away  from  the
             people you fear?


             Shiv Sena would find me somehow and they will kill  me  because
             I'm very scared and they will kill me because I'm very  scared,
             they will not leave me alone and I love my life.


         214. How will the people you fear find out  you  have  returned  to
             IND?


             Shiv Sena and my family are bound to find out


         215  How?


             Because Shiv Sena are so widespread there, they  are  bound  to
             find out and I don't have anybody there and I'm scared'

18.  The  respondent  refused  the  applicant's  claim  for   international
    protection by means of  a  decision  letter  dated  23  May  2019.  The
    respondent accepted the appellant as being credible as to her  personal
    history:

         32.  Therefore, due to the consistencies of your oral  account,  it
             is accepted that you married without your family's consent  and
             converted to Islam.


         ...


         36.  In light of the consistencies of your oral account, and to the
             low burden of proof required, it  is  therefore  accepted  that
             your family found out about your marriage and your husband  was
             killed by the Shiv Sena.

19. The respondent further accepted at para. 41 of her  decision  that  the
    appellant had demonstrated a  genuine  subjective  fear  on  return  to
    India. However, it was considered that such genuine subjective fear was
    not well-founded because there is sufficient protection provided by the
    India authorities, as detailed at paras. 49 to 66 of the decision.  The
    respondent  further  concluded  that  the  appellant  could  internally
    relocate within India, at paras. 67 to 85.

20. Such reasoning was underpinned by the respondent's conclusion that  the
    appellant was not at risk upon return to India consequent to her  being
    a single female. Reliance was placed upon BK (Risk -  Adultery  -  PSG)
    India CG [2002] UKIAT 00387. The respondent observed at paras 46 to 47:

         46.  Consideration was paid to if you will struggle to get a job in
             India, away from your local area. As will be  seen  below,  the
             Home Office consider that you will be safe from any threats you
             may have from your family, your husband's family and  the  Shiv
             Sena, if you are to move away from  their  local  area.  It  is
             considered that you are capable of internally  relocating  away
             from your local area and expecting  you  to  do  so  would  not
             amount to being 'unduly harsh'. It is  noted  that  you  are  a
             highly educated and  have  previously  worked  in  India  as  a
             teacher. You are a woman of considerable fortitude who  managed
             to make a living in the UK, a totally  foreign  country,  under
             trying circumstances.


         47.  It is considered not unduly harsh to expect you to employ  the
             same skills and do as you have previously undertaken in  India,
             in  finding  employment  and  re-establishing  yourself  tehre.
             Should you face any issues in India as a single  woman,  it  is
             considered that you could rely on the domestic protection  from
             Indian authorities and also rely on  civil  society  and  human
             rights  organisations  that  operate  in   India   (see   under
             sufficiency  of  protection).  For  these  reasons  it  is  not
             accepted that there is a reasonable likelihood of you receiving
             treatment  amounting  to  persecution,  as  a   single   female
             returnee, on return to India.'

Decision

21. The parties agreed before  me  that  the  two  issues  outstanding  for
    consideration were sufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation.
    On behalf of the respondent Mr Clarke advanced his case on  the  ground
    that the appellant could be returned to and reside in Delhi.

22. During his thoughtful and concise submissions Mr. Khan accepted that he
    could  not  advance  three  potential  arguments.  Firstly,  Mr.   Khan
    confirmed that he had intended to submit that the  appellant  could  be
    traced by political extremists through her  registration  with  India's
    biometric ID system called Aadhar which  provides  an  identity  number
    that can be obtained voluntarily by residents or  passport  holders  of
    India,  based  on  their  biometric  and  demographic  data.   However,
    consequent to Mr. Clarke's submissions on this point, namely  that  the
    appellant had provided no evidence  to  date  as  to  whether  she  had
    actually  previously  registered,  or  alternatively,  that  she  would
    register upon  return,  Mr  Khan  accepted  that  he  had  insufficient
    instructions to advance this submission.

23. Secondly, whilst acknowledging that  the  appellant  had  converted  to
    Islam so as to marry her husband, Mr Khan accepted that  the  appellant
    had provided no evidence by  means  of  her  witness  statement  as  to
    whether she continued to practise her  religion  in  this  country  and
    further he had no instructions on this point. He therefore did not seek
    to  rely  upon  the  appellant  possessing  a  well-founded   fear   of
    persecution upon her return to India through the active practice of her
    Islamic faith.

24. Mr. Khan also accepted that whilst the appellant relied upon  a  letter
    from Newham University Hospital, dated  29  April  2017,  that  briefly
    refers to her suffering from bipolar disorder, there is  no  additional
    evidence before the Tribunal as to the nature of her  disorder  or  her
    present treatment. The only evidence as to medication concerns the  use
    of Phenergan, an antihistamine, and Ferrous Fumarate for the  treatment
    of iron deficiency anaemia. Consequently, Mr. Khan considered  that  he
    was not capable of advancing a case on the ground of mental health.

25. Paragraph 339O of the Immigration Rules confirms that the respondent is
    not  required  to  grant  refugee  status  to  an   applicant   seeking
    international protection if in part of the country of origin they would
    not have  a  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted,  and  they  can
    reasonably be expected  to  stay  in  that  part  of  the  country.  As
    confirmed by Lord Hope in Januzi v. Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2 A.C.  426,  at  [47],  the  question
    where the issue of internal relocation is raised is whether it would be
    unduly harsh to expect an appellant  who  is  being  persecuted  for  a
    Convention reason in one part of her country to move to a less  hostile
    part before seeking refugee status abroad. The words 'unduly harsh' set
    the standard that must be met for this to be regarded as  unreasonable.
    If the appellant can lead a relatively normal life there judged by  the
    standards that prevail in her country of nationality generally it  will
    not be unreasonable to expect her to move there.

26. In this matter Mr. Khan primarily relies upon the reach  of  Shiv  Sena
    and did not advance with any vigour the possibility of the  appellant's
    family, or her husband's family, tracking her down to a home outside of
    the State of Gujarat. He was correct to do so as the appellant does not
    state by her witness statement that  either  family  have  any  ability
    through their own means to track her down elsewhere in India. I observe
    the Country Guidance decision in MD (Same-sex orientated  males:  risk)
    India CG  [2014]  UKUT  00065  (IAC),  at  [154],  where  the  Tribunal
    confirmed:

            'There  is  very  little  evidence   before   us   of   families
            successfully using the police in an attempt to track down  those
            family members who have fled, with a view to those persons being
            'repatriated' back to the family.'

27. I observe that the appellant relies upon  no  objective  evidence,  let
    alone cogent evidence, that is  capable  of  establishing  very  strong
    grounds for not following a Country Guidance decision in this matter: R
    (SG (Iraq)) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 940, [2013] 1 W.L.R. 41.

28. Rather she details her primary fear in her witness statement  as  being
    that members of Shiv Sena will wish to make  an  example  of  her.  The
    appellant provides  little,  if  any,  objective  evidence  as  to  the
    capabilities of Shiv Sena to target her, relying in the main  upon  her
    fears as expressed in her witness statement.  Shiv  Sena  are  a  Hindu
    nationalist political party  primarily  located  within  the  state  of
    Maharashtra. Mr. Khan relied upon Shiv Sena having aligned itself  with
    the ruling  Bharatiya  Janata  Party  ('BJP')  and  being  in  national
    coalition as establishing a means  by  which  the  appellant  could  be
    tracked down elsewhere in India. However, I am aware that  though  Shiv
    Sena was a coalition partner in the National Democratic  Alliance  from
    1998 it withdrew from the coalition in 2019 following  the  Maharashtra
    elections in October when it claimed that the BJP has  failed  to  keep
    promises. At the present  time  Shiv  Sena  is  in  alliance  with  the
    Congress Party  and  Nationalist  Congress  Party  in  Maharashtra.  To
    facilitate the alliance, Shiv  Sena  has  been  forced,  outwardly,  to
    revisit its earlier position of Hindustan for Hindus and  subscribe  to
    the idea of  composite  nationalism  that  its  new  alliance  partners
    follow. In such circumstances, the party does  not  have  its  hand  on
    levers of power outside of Maharashtra and when applying the  requisite
    standard of proof, the appellant cannot establish that members of  Shiv
    Sena could locate her in Delhi by using information  available  to  the
    national and local authorities.

29. The respondent contends that the appellant can reasonably  relocate  to
    Delhi. Whilst  there  are,  in  general.  poor  societal  attitudes  to
    interfaith marriage, the situation on the ground varies depending  upon
    class and region. At para. 9.3.1 of the CPIN concerned  with  religious
    minorities it is observed that there is less  discrimination  within  a
    middle-class urban context and that in urban areas it is  not  uncommon
    for inter-religious marriages to take  place.  Consequently,  observing
    that the appellant  is  a  qualified  teacher  and  has  a  history  of
    employment in the teaching profession, I am  satisfied  that  upon  her
    return to Delhi she can secure employment as a  teacher  and  resume  a
    middle-class urban life where her history of having  married  a  Muslim
    would not cause her adverse consequences. As for her conversion, and  I
    proceed for  the  purpose  of  this  appeal  on  the  basis  that  such
    conversion is ongoing though the appellant's evidence is largely silent
    on this point, I observe that such act was  illegal  in  Gujarat  which
    adopted an anti-conversion law in 2003. However, there is no such legal
    ban in force in Delhi and so the appellant  would  not  be  subject  to
    adverse legal measures consequent to her conversion upon relocation  to
    Delhi.

30. The CPIN concerned with internal relocation confirms  that  Indian  law
    provides for freedom of movement  and  grants  citizens  the  right  to
    reside and settle in any part of the territory of India. I observe that
    upon her return the appellant may be required to register if she wished
    to access government services and accommodation. As a single woman  she
    would be required to provide the name either of her husband  or  father
    upon registering. As Mr Clarke observed there is no evidence before  me
    that the appellant cannot simply name her husband and confirm that  she
    is a widow if she were  to  seek  to  register.  Having  given  careful
    consideration to this matter  there  is  simply  insufficient  evidence
    before  me  to  identify  that  the  appellant  will   suffer   adverse
    consequences upon registering for such services so as to make  internal
    relocation unduly harsh. I observe that Mr Khan did not rely upon  this
    issue in his submissions.

31. In such circumstances I am satisfied that it would not be unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to relocate to Delhi. I observe at this juncture that
    such conclusion  may  possibly  have  differed  if  the  appellant  had
    established to the appropriate standard  that  mental  health  concerns
    would impact upon the reasonableness of internal  relocation.  However,
    as observed above Mr Khan accepted that on  the  very  limited  medical
    evidence presently before this Tribunal, he was unable to advance  such
    argument on behalf of the appellant

32. In Horvath v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 1  A.C.
    489 the  House  of  Lords  confirmed  that  the  sufficiency  of  state
    protection is not measured by the existence of a real risk of an  abuse
    of rights but by the availability for the protection of a citizen and a
    reasonable willingness of the state to operate it. This is a  practical
    standard. I am satisfied that the Indian authorities are  both  willing
    and able  to  provide  through  the  police  and  its  legal  system  a
    reasonable level of protection from non-state  agent  persecution  upon
    the appellant relocating to Delhi.  Whilst  the  police  services  have
    problems  of  being  overworked  and  underpaid,   they   continue   to
    investigate and prosecute criminal cases. There is no  cogent  evidence
    before this Tribunal that the police authorities  in  Delhi  would  not
    take steps to protect the appellant if problems were to  arise  because
    of her interfaith  marriage,  her  conversion  or  her  experiences  in
    relation to supporters of Shiv Sena.

33. In all the circumstances the appellant can reasonably exercise internal
    relocation within  India  and  upon  doing  so  will  enjoy  sufficient
    protection at the hands of the Indian State. Consequently,  her  appeal
    on international protection grounds must be dismissed.

34. The appellant advanced a human rights appeal relying upon articles 2, 3
    and 8 by means of her grounds  of  appeal  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in June 2019. However, as observed by UTJ Pickup at para. 2 of
    his decision, no submissions on those grounds were advanced before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and no appeal  was  filed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon human rights grounds. I further observe that Mr Khan  made
    no express submissions on human rights issues. I am satisfied that  UTJ
    Pickup only set aside the decision concerning international  protection
    as this was the  only  element  of  the  appellant's  appeal  that  was
    advanced before the Upper Tribunal and in such circumstances  there  is
    no human rights appeal before. In any event, an article 3 appeal  would
    stand and  fall  with  the  international  protection  appeal  and  the
    appellant does not assert that she enjoys  a  family  or  private  life
    capable of establishing article 8 obligations either under  or  outside
    the Immigration Rules. There  is  no  evidence  before  me  capable  of
    establishing that she enjoys a private or family life for the  purposes
    of article 8, let  alone  that  her  removal  would  disproportionately
    interfere with the exercise of such rights.

Notice of Decision

35. By means of a decision sent to the parties  on  29  January  2020  this
    Tribunal set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  21  March  2019
    pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal,  Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007.

36. The decision is re-made, and the appellant's  appeal  on  international
    protection grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

37. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 7 October 2020




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appellant did not pay a fee, and the appeal has been dismissed.  No  fee
award if made.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 7 October 2020

