
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/05979/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|26 April 2017                  |On 4 May 2017                     |
|                               |                                  |


                                   Before
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between
                                EN (Pakistan)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Mahmud of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1988.  He  appealed
      against the decision of the respondent dated 27 May 2016 to refuse  to
      grant the appellant asylum or humanitarian protection  in  the  United
      Kingdom.




   2. His appeal against the respondent's decisions were dismissed by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge AMS Green following a hearing at Sheldon Court  in
      Birmingham.  The appellant's  application  for  leave  to  appeal  was
      initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen  on  11  January
      2017 but subsequently leave was granted , stating that it was arguable
      that although the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not  contain  any
      errors of law in respect of the Immigration Rules but that  the  Judge
      may have material erred by not giving sufficient reasons  for  finding
      that the appellant was not entitled to further leave to remain in  the
      United Kingdom under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights.



    First-tier Tribunal judge's decision




   3. The Judge in his determination stated the following which I summarise.
      The appellant was a most  unsatisfactory  witness  who  came  to  this
      country in 2010 to be a student and in his own words was  looking  for
      an education and work so that he could eventually settle in the United
      Kingdom. His immigration history is consistent with those  intentions.
      Ultimately, when that course of action was no longer possible  and  he
      was facing removal from this country, he decided to claim asylum. This
      fatally undermines his credibility.



   4. The  core  factor  of  the  appellant's  account  is  that  he  had  a
      relationship with his cousin and got her pregnant. It was not accepted
      that he is of any interest to his cousin's brother's, his father  gang
      of the Pakistani authorities. The appellant did not claim asylum  when
      he arrived in this country in May 2010. The appellant has never been a
      genuine asylum seeker or a person at risk and he can safely return  to
      Pakistan. If he cannot  live  in  his  home  area  then  he  can  live
      elsewhere in that country and can go to the police for  protection  if
      needs be.



   5. In respect of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights the
      Judge found that the respondent's decision cannot be impugned  in  any
      way and there is no justification whatsoever to consider his Article 8
      claim  outside  the  Immigration   Rules.   The   decision   did   not
      disproportionately interfere with his private life and  was  justified
      in the public interest  for  the  purposes  of  maintaining  effective
      immigration control.



    The grounds of appeal




   6. The appellant in his grounds of appeal stated the  following  which  I
      summarise. The consideration of Article 8 is  notably  brief  and  the
      appellant also continues to rely on this  ground  of  appeal.  It  was
      imperative for the first-tier Judge to conduct a  fair  and  realistic
      balance of the factors in favour of the appellant against  the  public
      interest.




   7. There is a lack of evidence in the decision that the first-tier  Judge
      has taken this approach. If the judge had attached relevant weight  to
      deserving factors, including the appellant's length  of  residence  in
      the United Kingdom and  ties  established  over  the  years  and  then
      weighed the same cumulatively against the respondent's  decision  then
      the facts of this case might have called for  a  different  result  in
      favour of the appellant.



    Rule 24 response




   8. The respondent in her  Rule  24  response  stated  the  following,  in
      summary. The respondent opposes the  appellant's  appeal  and  submits
      that the Judge directed himself appropriately. It is  noted  that  the
      grant of permission only gives permission to consider Article 88.  The
      Judge  found  at  paragraph  23  that  the  appellant  was   a   "most
      unsatisfactory witness" and that his intention was to study, work  and
      then settle in the United Kingdom. Also,  the  judge  found  that  the
      appellant's evidence to be most unsatisfactory when  he  was  speaking
      about his living arrangements in this country with Tahir  Mehmood.  It
      is submitted that given the findings on the  appellant's  inconsistent
      evidence both concerning the events in Pakistan and the  circumstances
      in the United Kingdom, the appellant's appeal could not succeed  under
      Article 8.



    The hearing



   9. At the hearing, Ms Mahmoud in submitted that the  first-tier  Tribunal
      Judge did not go through  the  five  step  stages  of  Razgar  in  his
      evaluation of Article 8.




  10. Mr Singh on behalf of the respondent relied on the  respondent's  rule
      24 notice and  stated  that  the  judge  has  clearly  considered  the
      appellant's Article 8 claim although he has not set  it  out  under  a
      clear heading in his decision. I was referred to paragraph 22  of  the
      decision where the Judge took into account that a claim under  Article
      has been made on the basis of the appellant's length of  residence  in
      the United Kingdom. He said that at page 23  the  Judge  set  out  his
      evaluation of Article 8 and  took  into  account  the  extent  of  the
      appellant's private life and has made no error of law.



  11. In reply I asked Ms Mahmud exactly what private life is the  appellant
      relying upon which she says that the Judge did not consider. She  said
      that there is no further evidence about the appellant's private  life.
      She said that the Judge had not considered his private life  with  his
      friend who has been supporting him in this country and  with  whom  he
      lives.



Discussion and decision as to whether there is an error of law

12. I have considered the first-tier Tribunal  Judge's  determination  with
    care. Permission was granted only in respect of  the  Judge's  lack  of
    consideration of the appellant's right to a private life in the  United
    Kingdom under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    Otherwise, I concur with the decision of both First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Dineen and the Upper Tribunal Judge that there  is  no  material  error
    made by the Judge in his consideration of the Immigration Rules which I
    find is flawless.

13. In respect of his consideration  of  his  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, the Judge found that the appellant was  not
    a credible witness, his account was  not  credible  and  his  intention
    always has been to live in the United Kingdom and this is  corroborated
    by his long immigration history where the appellant only claimed asylum
    after a decision was made to remove him from this country, only to make
    an asylum claim which was found not to be  credible.  The  respondent's
    removal decision had to be cancelled due to his asylum claim which  was
    made at the very last minute to thwart removal.

14. In  light  of  these  findings,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  the
    appellant's   submissions   that   had   the   Judge   considered   the
    proportionality assessment, he could have succeeded  under  Article  8.
    One of the considerations which the appellant claims was not considered
    by the Judge was the length of his residence in this  country  and  the
    ties that he has established over the years which weighed  cumulatively
    his case might have called for a different decision in  favour  of  the
    appellant.

15. I cannot see under which  circumstances  the  appellant  would  succeed
    under Article 88 given the facts of this case and the findings made  by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  when  he  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules. At the hearing, I asked the appellant's counsel what
    evidence does the appellant claim that the Judge did not  consider,  in
    respect  of  his  private  life,  which  would  amount  to  exceptional
    circumstances. She said that the Judge did not consider  the  appellant
    has been in this country since 2007 and added that he has a  friend  in
    this country who has been supporting him and with whom he lives.

16. The judge did consider at paragraph 22 the appellant's evidence that he
    has been in this country since 2007 and has developed a private life in
    this country. There was nothing further  for  the  Judge  to  consider.
    Furthermore, the fact that the appellant has a friend in  this  country
    does not engage Article 8 rights given that this friend  did  not  even
    attend the hearing to support the appellant's appeal. The Judge  cannot
    be faulted for not considering evidence which was not before him.

17. Even at if the First-tier Tribunal Judge was brief in his reasoning is,
    it is evident that he considered all the evidence and  found  that  the
    appellant could not succeed under Article 8 which he was entitled to do
    on the facts of this case.

18. The Judge in a long and careful decision set  out  all  the  appellants
    evidence which demonstrates he decided based on all the evidence before
    him.   The   Judge   found   the   respondent's   decision   "did   not
    disproportionately interfere with his private life and was justified in
    the  public  interest  for  the  purposes  of   maintaining   effective
    immigration control".

19. Given the Judge's finding that the appellant is not  credible  and  has
    made a false asylum claim in the last desperate bid to remain  in  this
    country, the respondent's interest in maintaining a fair,  orderly  and
    effective immigration control would trump any rights that the appellant
    claims to have under Article 8 in respect of  his  private  life  which
    includes a friend he has in this country.

20. I am also of the view that the appellant's case was not  one  requiring
    the general proportionality assessment wholly outside the scope of  the
    United Kingdom immigration legislation because there were no compelling
    circumstances identified in this case  with  the  appellant  should  be
    granted leave to remain  under  Article  8  when  he  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules especially  taking  into  account
    the wider public interest.

21. There is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge in respect of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights.

    Appeal dismissed


Signed by                                  Date this 2nd day of May 2017


A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana




