


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number:  PA059052016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Birmingham                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 29th June 2017                            |On: 3rd July 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                                     Q J
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Counsel instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a  national  of  Afghanistan  born  in  2001.  He  has
    permission[1] to appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Butler) to dismiss his protection appeal. The determination  was
    promulgated on the 4th January 2017.




    Anonymity Order


 2. This case involves a claim for international  protection  by  a  minor.
    Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to  make  an  order  in  the
    following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in August  2015,  concealed
    in the back of a lorry. He told officers that he was from  the  Paghman
    district of Kabul, where he lived with his mother, maternal  uncle  and
    aunt. His father had died when he was a baby.  His uncle was  a  member
    of the Taliban and his mother sent him away because she  became  afraid
    that he was going to take the Appellant away  to  become  part  of  the
    group.  The day that the Appellant left Afghanistan he discovered  that
    his mother had terminal cancer.


 4. The Respondent has doubted the account  on  the  grounds  that  it  was
    vague; the Appellant had for instance been unable to say what role  his
    uncle had in the Taliban,  or  adequately  explain  why  the  risk  had
    suddenly grown.  The Respondent found that  the  Appellant  had  family
    living in Kabul and that he could therefore go back there  to  be  with
    them.

 5. The Appellant was granted a period of Discretionary Leave in accordance
    with the Respondent's published policy. He was accepted to be a  minor,
    and the Respondent's attempts to trace his  family  had  ended  without
    success.  He has DL until the 19th November 2018.

 6. The Appellant appealed the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Appellant gave oral evidence.   The  Tribunal's  conclusions  start  at
    paragraph 31. Having reminded itself of the Appellant's young  age  the
    Tribunal says this [at 35]:

         "It is unfortunately not uncommon for parents in countries such  as
         Afghanistan to pay agents to transport their children to the UK  in
         order for them to have what they consider will be  a  better  life.
         Their accounts often have a familiar ring to them, as is  the  case
         with the Appellant"

 7. The Tribunal then gives the following reasons why it  does  not  accept
    the account given to be credible:


              i) The Appellant's evidence that his  mother  and  aunt  would
                 have been powerless to defy the  wishes  of  his  uncle  is
                 inconsistent with the evidence that they conspired together
                 to remove him from the country;


             ii) The Appellant's belief that his uncle would not have  tried
                 to recruit him until his mother died is "pure speculation";

            iii) The Appellant's claim that he had previously  been  unaware
                 of his uncle's plans was  inconsistent  with  his  evidence
                 that he had once overheard his uncle and mother  discussing
                 his education. His uncle  had  wanted  to  send  him  to  a
                 madrassa rather than mainstream school but had dropped  the
                 subject when this was  resisted  by  his  mother.  Of  this
                 particular  'inconsistency'  the   Tribunal   said:   "this
                 adversely  affects  the  credibility  of  the   Appellant's
                 subsequent evidence".

             iv) The Appellant  had  no  direct  knowledge  of  his  uncle's
                 involvement with the Taliban;

              v) There is no corroboration of the account  in  the  form  of
                 documentary evidence.

 8. The Tribunal recognised that family tracing had been unsuccessful,  but
    noting that the burden of proof lay on the Appellant, found his failure
    to personally contact the Red Cross  or  similar  organisation  weighed
    against him. The case that he was an unaccompanied minor was  not  made
    out and the appeal was dismissed on the grounds that he could return to
    his family in Kabul.








    The Challenge


 9. It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is flawed for the following material errors of law:


              i) Making comments implying a  "general  negative  bias"  such
                 that the  Appellant  would  reasonably  conclude  that  the
                 Tribunal embarked on  its  credibility  findings  from  the
                 premise that the Appellant was an economic migrant.


             ii) Failing to give reasons. The determination  finds  evidence
                 to  be  implausible   and   inconsistent   without   giving
                 intelligible reasons why;


            iii) Requiring corroboration where it is trite asylum  law  that
                 refugees should not be required to  prove  their  cases  by
                 producing documentary evidence;

             iv) Making unreasonable findings. The evidence was that  family
                 tracing had failed and that the Appellant had lost  contact
                 with his family in Kabul. There was no evidential basis for
                 the conclusion that he could return to live with them.



    The Response


10. The appeal was opposed by the Respondent.


11. Mr Mills agreed that the comments at  paragraph  35  were  unnecessary,
    unfortunate and should not have been made. He agreed that an  appellant
    reading that paragraph might well think that the  judge  had  made  his
    mind up before he had considered the evidence, but Mr  Mills  submitted
    that this Appellant could be reassured, by  reading  the  rest  of  the
    determination, that the Tribunal had  conducted  a  balanced  and  fair
    assessment of the case.

12. The Respondent submitted that  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were open to it on the evidence, and that adequate reasons had
    been given. It was not unlawful for the Tribunal to describe  something
    as 'implausible' where such reasons were given.

13. As to the 'family  tracing'  point  Mr  Mills  urged  the  Tribunal  to
    exercise caution in drawing conclusions  from  the  grant  of  DL.  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department had not been able  to  trace
    the Appellant's family, but that was  because  she  did  not  have  the
    facilities in Afghanistan to  be  able  to  effectively  conduct  these
    enquiries: see paragraph 63 of the 'reasons for refusal' letter. It did
    not amount to a definitive finding that the Appellant was out of  touch
    with his family. The finding that he was in contact had to be  read  in
    line with the overall negative credibility finding.



    Discussion and Findings

14. The parties before me were in agreement that paragraph 35 of the First-
    tier Tribunal's determination should not  have  been  included  in  the
    decision.  Is it, as Mr Mills suggests, a paragraph that can simply  be
    disregarded, or is it as Mr Howard submits, a piece of reasoning  which
    reveals a "general negative bias" on the part of the Tribunal?   I have
    no hesitation in accepting it to be the latter. The only inference that
    can be drawn from that paragraph is that the Tribunal  has  formed  the
    view that "it is not uncommon" to find that  the  Afghan  children  who
    make their way to this country are  economic  migrants,  and  that  the
    Appellant, with his "familiar" account, is  one  of  their  number.  Mr
    Mills agreed that any appellant would read the paragraph that way,  and
    could reasonably conclude that the Tribunal had  already  made  up  its
    mind.   I am not satisfied that upon reading the rest of  the  decision
    the Appellant's concerns about this matter would  be  assuaged.      It
    was no part of the Tribunal's task to compare this account to others it
    had heard. Nor was there any evidential basis for the  suggestion  that
    it is common for parents in Afghanistan to hand over their children  to
    agents simply so that they have  a  chance  of  a  "better  life".  The
    corollary of that assumption  was  that  these  children  do  not  have
    protection needs, a curious notion considering that  Afghanistan  is  a
    country which has been in the grip of civil war and  violent  extremism
    for the best part of four decades.  It  continues  to  be  one  of  the
    biggest refugee-producing countries in the world.    It  is  of  course
    possible that this, or any appellant, is not in fact a refugee, but the
    starting point for that enquiry should have been the evidence.


15. I am satisfied that paragraph 35 of the determination has given rise to
    a perception that the Appellant has had an unfair hearing and for  that
    reason alone this is a matter that must be remitted to be heard  afresh
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

16. I should add that there is at  least  one  other  clear  error  in  the
    determination.  At  paragraph  39  the  Tribunal  weighs  against   the
    Appellant the fact that he has been unable to provide any corroboration
    of his account. It is a well-established principle of asylum  law  that
    refugees should not be expected to produce documentary corroboration of
    their claims. The  origins  of  this  principle  are  to  be  found  in
    paragraph 196 of the UNHCR Handbook[2]:

         196. It is a general legal principle that the burden of proof lies
         on the person submitting a claim. Often, however, an applicant may
         not be able to support his statements by documentary or other
         proof, and cases in which an applicant can provide evidence of all
         his statements will be the exception rather than the rule. In most
         cases a person fleeing from persecution will have arrived with the
         barest necessities and very frequently even without personal
         documents....


    In this case it is not clear what corroboration  the  Tribunal  wanted.
    Presumably it was not looking for call-up papers from the  Taliban.   I
    am not satisfied that any of the possible evidence that  the  Appellant
    could have got would fall into the class of material  discussed  in  TK
    (Burundi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ
    40: it would not have been straightforward for the Appellant to  obtain
    any documentary corroboration.   The evidence that this child, who  has
    traversed 4000 miles in the back of lorries,  walking  through  forests
    and scrambling over mountains, had lost a  phone  number  is  dismissed
    without  reasons  as  "convenient".    Confusingly  the  Tribunal  also
    appears to weigh against him  the  fact  that  he  has  not  sought  to
    maintain contact with the very uncle whom he claims to fear.


17. It follows that I need not address the remaining grounds in any detail,
    save to say that there did not seem to me  to  be  anything  inherently
    implausible in this  account.  The  Tribunal  appeared  to  regard  the
    Appellant's mother's decision to send him away to be at odds  with  the
    evidence about the position of women in Afghanistan  generally.  All  I
    say about that is that the Tribunal has arguably here  failed  to  take
    into account that families, and individuals, are  rarely  a  monolithic
    representation  of  the  society  from  which  they   come.   Just   as
    'conservative' fathers may wish their  daughters  to  be  educated,  so
    might a Taliban brother  have  the  decency  to  respect  his  sister's
    wishes. The case put is that the Appellant's  mother  feared  that  her
    brother would cease to do  so  after  she  had  died.  I  find  nothing
    incredible in that.




      Decisions


18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


19. The matter is remitted to be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.


20. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                30th June 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused on the papers by Designated First-tier Tribunal
Woodcraft but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on the 14th December
2016
[2] HANDBOOK ON PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING REFUGEE STATUS
under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees


