
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05953/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th July 2019                     |On 16th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     x z
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R D Taylor, promulgated on 19th June 2018, following a hearing at
    Manchester on 6th June 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of China, and was born on  22nd  May
    2002.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  24th
    April  2018  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for   humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he had flown from China on
    22nd July 2017 arriving at Heathrow Airport on an educational visit  as
    part of an organised party.  After a couple of weeks, he met his father
    who had been in the UK for two or three years.   His  father  took  him
    away from the organised group.  He told  him  to  contact  the  police.
    After  that  the  Appellant  was  referred  to  social  services.   The
    Appellant then claimed asylum.  The basis of the  claim  was  that  the
    Appellant had been the subject of physical  abuse  by  his  uncle,  who
    lived nearby at a computer shop.  He worked  upstairs.   The  Appellant
    would undertake tasks for him.  If the Appellant did not do as  he  was
    told, or if he was slow in working, he would be  physically  abused  by
    his uncle.  His mother  was  aware  of  this.   However,  she  did  not
    intervene because  she  took  the  view  that  this  was  culturally  a
    necessary part of the Appellant's  upbringing  that  he  be  physically
    disciplined.   It  was  only  after  arriving  in  the  UK,  when   the
    Appellant's father found out, that he took a firm view of this, and got
    the Appellant to  contact  the  police  as  well  as  social  services.
    Thereafter, a decision was made that the  Appellant  would  not  return
    back to China because there would be no protection  available  for  him
    from the state authorities or from the family where he had already been
    abused before.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge began by observing that it was accepted by the  Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant had indeed been the victim of physical  abuse.
    He was 16 years of age.  However, the situation now  was  different  in
    that the Appellant had been in the UK for a year and that,

         "There must inevitably have been  discussions  between  the  family
         members as to why he has not returned to China and as to the  basis
         on which he is claiming to be able to stay in the  UK  relating  to
         the physical abuse  by  the  uncle.   The  grandparents  were  also
         inevitably keen for the Appellant to return".  (Paragraph 15).

 5. That being so, the judge did not accept that given what had happened in
    the past twelve months and the seriousness that was being  attached  to
    the uncle's treatment of the Appellant, that either the mother  or  the
    grandparents "would now simply treat the uncle's being as just ordinary
    discipline".  Moreover, "domestic violence has been a  neglected  issue
    in China in the past" but  that  there  was  an  Amnesty  International
    Report which makes it clear that it is now being taken  more  seriously
    (paragraph 15).

 6. In any event, the Appellant himself had stated (at question 55  of  the
    SEF) that the authorities would be able to help with his problem if  he
    did manage to get in touch with them.  The judge recognised that,

         "Of course the subject here is a minor is not at all  determinative
         of the actual position but it is not inconsistent with the evidence
         just quoted.  There is no evidence that there has been any previous
         attempt to revoke  the  protection  of  the  authorities  from  the
         treatment by the uncle.  This appears to be because the Appellant's
         mother has not fully understood the nature of the treatment  handed
         out by the uncle, regarding it as ordinary discipline".  (Paragraph
         16).

 7. Given that the fundamental premise of the Appellant's mistreatment  had
    been now changed, what was being said was that the Appellant would  now
    get protection in China.  The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law
    because  there  had  been  speculation  that  there  would  have   been
    discussion between the family members in the UK with the family members
    in China as to why the Appellant had not returned, given  that  he  had
    come for a short period of education in this  country.   Second,  there
    was no evidential basis on which to find that the  police  would  offer
    sufficiency of protection if the mother did not support  the  Appellant
    in his efforts.  Also the judge had failed to consider  adequately  the
    question of reception arrangements because there  was  no  evidence  to
    show that he would be reunited with his family.

 9. On 30th November 2018, the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal.
     It was stated that,

         "It is arguable  that  the  judge  has  made  speculative  findings
         regarding the position of the Appellant's mother, and  whether  she
         would take action in the future,  given  the  Appellant's  evidence
         that she did not think that the uncle beating the Appellant  was  a
         problem.  It  is  arguable  that  he  has  erred  in  finding  that
         'seriousness' has now been attached to the uncle's treatment of the
         Appellant in the light of the evidence or that the mother would now
         prevail on the uncle".  (Paragraph 2).

10. In granting permission, it was also stated that, "It is  arguable  that
    there has been inadequate consideration of the reception  arrangements,
    and the return of the Appellant to a household where, it was previously
    accepted that he had been abused" (paragraph 3).

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 5th July 2019, Miss Patel relied  upon  the
    grounds of application.  She submitted that the  judge  had  speculated
    about what may happen in the future (at  paragraphs  15  to  16)  in  a
    manner that was not open to the Tribunal to do.  Secondly, there was  a
    question about the availability of adequate reception arrangements,  in
    circumstances where the Appellant had been the  victim  of  abuse  (see
    paragraphs 9 to 13 of the grounds), and it could not simply be  assumed
    that he would meet with adequate reception arrangements.   The  reality
    was that he was being returned to the same household.  He  would  still
    be at risk.

12. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the judge had  accepted,  as  the
    Secretary of State had accepted, that the Appellant had been the victim
    of abuse in the past.  However, what  had  changed  now  was  that  the
    Appellant had been in the UK for a year and the judge was  entitled  to
    infer from the circumstances (whereby the Appellant's initial entry was
    only on a short term basis and the expectancy back home certainly  from
    the grandparents  was  that  he  would  return)  that  there  would  be
    discussions between the family members if he had  not  returned.   This
    was a case where both the mother and the father were now  objecting  to
    the Appellant's mistreatment.  Accordingly, the judge was  entitled  to
    conclude that there would now be "sufficiency of protection" in that  a
    complaint could be made to  the  police  and  the  Appellant  could  be
    provided with the adequate protection that he needed.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

14. First, this is a case where it is accepted that the Appellant has  been
    the victim of domestic violence.

15. Second, it is significant that the Appellant even at this stage remains
    a minor.

16. Third, it is significant that the mother tolerated the violence  meeted
    to the Appellant by his uncle because she did  not  think  this  was  a
    problem "regarding it as ordinary discipline" (paragraph  16).   It  is
    not,  however,  the  mother  who  has  objected  to   the   Appellant's
    mistreatment in the UK.  It  is  the  father  who  has  done  so.   The
    question still remains as to what the mother's role  would  be  if  the
    Appellant were to be returned back to  the  same  household  where  the
    uncle would be present, and  where  the  grandparents  (with  whom  the
    mother lived) would also be around.  This is a question which, even  if
    there had been discussions between the two sides of the family  in  the
    UK and in China, actually requires clear evidence on.  It is not enough
    to assume.  It may well be that the mother  is  not  strong  enough  or
    willing enough to have the matter reported to the  police  there.   The
    Appellant is a minor.  He himself may not be able to do  so  if  he  is
    returned back to the same household environment.  The situation  needed
    a proper probing and evidential enquiry.  The fact that  the  Appellant
    is a child affects his ability to relocate away from the  danger  posed
    by the uncle.   The  objective  evidence  was  clear  that  the  police
    protection is limited (see pages 46 to 48) and complaints to the police
    can result in arrest of the complaint.  In  short,  it  is  simply  not
    clear whether the mother has treated this abuse of the  Appellant  with
    sufficient seriousness that she would support the Appellant  in  having
    the uncle reported to the police.

17. Fourth, there is the  question  of  the  reception  arrangements  being
    provided.  It is true that Save the Children operates in China, but  it
    is not clear how the organisation will  help  the  Appellant  in  being
    reunited with his family, and whether this would  be  facilitated,  and
    what the role of the mother would be in this regard.  The fact that the
    Appellant had not previously complained to the  police  is  a  relevant
    factor in deciding whether a complaint to the police would now be made.
     The fact that such a complaint has  been  made  in  the  UK  does  not
    necessarily mean that it would be made  in  China  as  well.   The  two
    scenarios are entirely  different.   Quite  simply,  there  has  to  be
    evidence on these matters.  Without such evidence, a finding made risks
    being  made  on  an  erroneous  basis   with   potentially   disastrous
    consequences for this Appellant child.  That being so, I make a finding
    of an error of law  and  remit  this  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than the judge below.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal amounts to  an  error  of  law.
    The decision is set aside.  I remake the  decision  as  follows.   This
    appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge  R  D  Taylor  pursuant  to  Practice  Statement
    7.2(b).

19. An anonymity direction is made.

20. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th August 2019


